Renaissance natural philosophy defies easy definition, since
descriptions of it may oversimplify, either by reducing it to its
connections with medieval science or, alternatively, forcing it into a
teleology that culminates in the Scientific Revolution of the
seventeenth century. Hence, there have been two opposing tendencies in
scholarship: one which conflates the natural philosophy of the
fifteenth and sixteenth centuries with the variety practiced in the
Middle Ages, even going so far as to interpret the Renaissance as a
period of conservatism in this regard; another which emphasizes the
role of Renaissance natural philosophy as a “precursor” of
modern science, even at the cost of ignoring or removing its
connections to disciplines today considered pseudo-scientific, such as
physiognomy, astrology, and magic. Recent contributions, however, have
helped to outline the characteristics of Renaissance natural
philosophy in their own terms. Medieval natural philosophy was usually
based in the corpus aristotelicum and practiced in
universities.  Yet this did not mean that its approach was purely
static or regressive; on the contrary, thinkers like Jean Buridan,
Biagio Pelacani, and Nicole Oresme took Aristotelian physics and
mechanics in new directions in medieval Europe. Nevertheless, the
nature of medieval universities was such that teaching was heavily
controlled by authorities, and both metaphysics and theology exercised
a strong influence, limiting the number of directions in which
scientific theorization could advance. Paradoxically, it was the
return of another, rival school of
thought—Platonism—that ultimately allowed for more freedom
within the Aristotelian tradition. Though Plato’s philosophy had
never completely disappeared during the course of the Middle Ages, the consolidation of a
Neoplatonic school in the fifteenth century led to the clear
distinctions between the spheres which properly belonged to the two
great thinkers of the ancient world. While Plato was regarded as a
theologian and master of the metaphysical realities, Aristotle was
seen as an investigator of the sublunar world subject to generation
and corruption. The recovery of this ancient dichotomy had the effect
of undermining the longstanding ties between Aristotelianism and
Scholasticism, and opened up new spaces for philosophy unimpaired by
metaphysical limitations. At the same time, also Platonism and other brands of ancient
philosophy—Stoicism, Skepticism, and
Epicureanism—stimulated reflection on the natural world in different
ways, also in terms of method. The application of these ideas to various fields of inquiry gave
Renaissance natural thought a distinctive identity, forged in
continuous dialectic with Aristotelianism.  Aristotelianism therefore
represented the driving force behind Renaissance philosophy of nature,
both because of its plurality of approaches and internal debates, and
also because it served as the polemical target of those who challenged
the traditional paradigm of university teaching. Finally, other
factors of a non-speculative character also had an impact on natural
philosophy: technological innovations such as printing, the telescope
and the microscope, geographical discoveries, and developments within
the universities themselves, such as the institution of botanical gardens.
The Aristotelian natural corpus covered a wide range of
subjects in a number of separate texts: while the Physics was
a sort of general work—which appeared to some fifteenth- and
sixteenth-century authors more metaphysical, even overlapping with
the Metaphysics—the other treatises represented
different sections of natural philosophy on particulars. The success
and influence of Aristotelian natural philosophy was due to its
centrality to university teaching, where it was favored because it
covered every topic, like an encyclopedia. Few attempts were made to
reconsider which texts represented the core of the study of natural
philosophy in the universities; one remarkable exception was Pierre de
la Ramée (1515–1572), who put a distinctive emphasis on
particular sciences at the expense of study of
the Physics. Physics, along with On the Heavens,
Meteorology, and On Generation and Corruption, was the
main reference for natural philosophy in the
traditional curricula of the Faculty of
Arts. Universities—especially in Italy—appointed many
lecturers in natural philosophy, who usually received high
salaries. In the second half of the sixteenth century, separate
chairs, of botany, mathematics, and even chemistry (in Mantua and
Germany), were established. Aristotelian texts were traditionally
studied according to the commentaries by Averroes (which provided the
internal partition of the texts into sections).
Between the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, the works of other,
more ancient commentators on Aristotle were also adopted: those of
Alexander of Aphrodisias and Simplicius were particularly popular, the
first because of its radical mortalism, the second for its Neoplatonic
and conciliatory tendencies. The rediscovery of the ancient
commentators was accompanied by an increasing reliance on the Greek
texts in universities, despite the enduring predominance of medieval
Latin material. New commentaries also appeared alongside the ancient
ones: practically all of the most prominent professors composed their
own commentaries to the Aristotelian natural texts, in particular
between the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. Usually these
commentaries followed the texts according to the Averroistic
divisions, but sometimes they were organized
in quaestiones.
Furthermore, the advent of printing made a large selection of
textbooks more widely available: some of them were very short
introductions for younger students, others were compendia,
others paraphrases (like those by Jacques Lefèvre
d’Etaples (1455–1536), printed for the first time in 1492), and
still others dialogues (again, Lefèvre d’Etaples created
some of the most significant examples). Other popular works used for
teaching were abridged versions of the Aristotelian treatises reduced
to conclusiones, like the popular Textus abbreviatus
philosophiae naturalis by the French theologian Thomas Bricot (d.
1516). There were also many different textbooks, which generally
followed canonical organizations: either they explained the
Aristotelian works according to their order in the corpus, or
they highlighted subjects like principles, causes, movement, infinity,
place, void, and time. The famous Commentarii Conimbricenses,
which from 1594 on became the standard text in the
Jesuit curriculum, contains a whole course on natural
philosophy organized as a commentary of the Aristotelian
corpus. Particularly after the second half of the sixteenth century,
vernacular treatments of Aristotelian natural philosophy also began to
circulate, such as the translations by Antonio Brucioli
(1498–1566), the paraphrases by Alessandro Piccolomini
(1508–1579), the summaries by Jean de Champaignac (fl. 1595) and
Scipion Dupleix (1569–1661), and the commentaries by Cesare
Crivellati (1553–1640), the latter explicitly addressed to
university students.
Natural philosophy interacted with many other disciplines. The
close relationship between natural philosophy and medicine had already
been stressed by Aristotle himself at the beginning of On Sense
and Sensible (436a19–436b2). Medicine often competed with
natural philosophy within the universities: philosophy was a
curricular requirement for those who wanted to study medicine in the
Italian universities and many of the greatest Renaissance natural
philosophers were also physicians (e.g., Alessandro Achillini
(1463–1512) and Simone Porzio (1496–1554); there were also
professional physicians who wrote on natural philosophy, such as
Daniel Furlanus (d. 1600)). Ubi desinit philosophus
(or physicus), incipit medicus (“where the
philosopher ends, the physician begins”): so went a proverb
which implied an ambiguous boundary between the two disciplines: on
the one hand, it reflected the need to move beyond the theory
represented by philosophy and into the actual practice of medicine; on
the other, it affirmed the idea that natural philosophy was necessary
in order to prepare for medical studies. From this perspective,
natural philosophy represented either a mere preparatory stage on the
way to the more perfect and concrete knowledge of medicine, or,
alternatively, medicine was subordinate to natural philosophy (others,
like the philosopher Jacopo Zabarella (1533–1589), preferred to
distinguish natural philosophy from medicine because these two
disciplines did not share subject and method).
The Renaissance debate over the superiority of Aristotle or Galen
was part of this rivalry: Aristotle was regarded by physicians as an
important authority because of his philosophical system, but Galen had
offered in his works more precise observations of the human body.
Nonetheless, since many points of their disagreement (e.g., the
localization of the brain functions) were merely founded on
speculation, some doctors preferred to demonstrate the harmony between
Aristotle and Galen in order to overcome this impasse.
Another discipline often compared to natural philosophy was
astrology. The Jesuit Benito Pereira (1536–1610) stated that
natural philosophy is different from astrology because, among other
reasons, the former studies things a priori, the latter a
posteriori. Pereira also claimed that natural philosophy was not
capable of delineating its own sphere of inquiry, something which was
possible for other disciplines such as logic and metaphysics.
University courses on the Physics traditionally began with a
lecture on ethical themes. This arrangement was inspired by
Averroes’ proem to the text, which argued for the moral
perfection of the speculative man. The connection between ethics and
natural philosophy also appeared in discussions of subjects like the
immortality of the soul or the human will, and consequently ethical
discussions could occupy large sections both in reportationes
of lessons and commentaries.
Outside of universities and schools, there were also other places
where natural philosophy was cultivated, particularly in academies and
learned societies. Even in literary societies such as
the Accademia Fiorentina (1541), patronized by Duke Cosimo
de’Medici and his descendants, scientific matters (e.g., alchemy
or spontaneous generation) were occasionally debated, often in the
context of commentaries on the poems of Dante and
Petrarch. The Accademia dei Lincei, founded in 1603, on the
other hand, was exclusively interested in the sciences: as their
statute dictated, the Lincei had no interest in any
controversy which was not scientific or mathematical, and they avoided
involvement in political matters. The Accademia dei Lincei,
like the Accademia del Cimento after it (1657), was founded
and patronized by members of the aristocracy, but never became as
well-grounded as other learned societies, such as the Royal Society
(1661) or the Académie Royale (1666), which were
directly sponsored by the state (the Académie Royale
even received financial support from the treasury). Both of these
latter institutions developed out of more informal associations and
they encouraged collaboration among their members; they also
explicitly endorsed the open and public exchange of ideas, as opposed
to the secretive practices of groups like the Lincei. Their
members gave public demonstrations of their work, and the secrecy
which had characterized scientific pursuit for centuries was
eventually abandoned in favor of a new empirical approach.
Nonetheless, even when they did not sponsor academies, Renaissance
lords and patrons often had a particular interest in scientific works
and treatises, especially those devoted to subjects of military value
(such as the works on metalworking by Vannoccio Biringuccio and George
Agricola, or Niccolò Tartaglia’s treatise on ballistics,
in the mid-sixteenth century), or booklets dedicated to parva
naturalia which were intended as forms of intellectual
entertainment and usually contained descriptions of miranda
naturae or astrological predictions. Exceptional natural events
such as earthquakes—a famous one occurred in Pozzuoli in
1537—led to the publication of a number of short treatises which
interpreted the calamity as either a natural phenomenon or as a sign
sent by the celestial influences: these works were particularly sought
after by powerful men who wanted to be reassured about the
significance of natural events and their possible
consequences. Several Renaissance rulers cultivated an interest in
sciences like alchemy, and patronized or participated first-hand in
investigations of the natural world: disciplines like zoology, which
depended on the collection of material, information, and drawings,
relied particularly heavily on the sponsorship of the wealthy and
powerful. The zoological and botanical works and catalogues which,
though composed by university professors, started from the 1540s to
circulate around Europe, were often addressed to or sponsored by
rulers who had the means to employ artists and other specialists
needed to complete these costly volumes. Drawings were not simply
ornaments to a text, but a necessity for accurate classification of
plants and animals.
The same desire for accuracy that motivated the production of
scientific images also led to more rigorous editions and translations
of classic scientific texts, whose impact was magnified by the
printing press. Between 1495 and 1498 Aldus Manutius printed the
“Greek Aristotle” in Venice, an edition prepared by a team
which included the humanist-physicians Niccolò Leoniceno and
Thomas Linacre under the guidance of another physician, Francesco
Cavalli.  Consequently, Manutius’s edition, which incorporated
significant improvements of the Aristotelian texts such as those
proposed years before by Theodor Gaza for the Historia
Animalium, favored the scientific works by Aristotle and did not
include, for example, either Rhetoric
or Poetics. Yet the scientific text that received the most
attention from philologists was Pliny’s Natural
History. Between the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries
Pliny’s work was emended by philologists such as Ermolao
Barbaro, Angelo Poliziano, and Niccolò Leoniceno—and also
translated several times in the vernaculars—in increasingly
sophisticated versions. Both the editions and the translations were
intended to allow for a correct understanding of the text, which was
often used by doctors and apothecaries. The same thing happened with
Dioscorides’ Materia medica, a text that unlike the
encyclopedic Natural History was plainly addressed to a
medical audience, and which was then repeatedly emended and translated
by professional physicians and natural philosophers. Yet, also authors
like Virgil, Horace and Ovid were common presences in discussions
about botany, and even a philological evaluation of the text of
the Bible provided material to natural philosophers.
The foundation of botanical gardens in Pisa, Padua, and Florence (1544–1545),
and then in Bologna, Leiden, Oxford, Montpellier, and Germany testify
to the fact that empirical knowledge was increasingly considered a
necessity even in the universities, despite the fact that even at the
end of the sixteenth century chairs in botany, such as the one
occupied by Andrea Cesalpino (1519–1603) in Pisa, came with
lower salaries than the ones given to their “speculative
colleagues” who taught natural philosophy or medicine. The
aforementioned catalogues of animals and plants, like those published
by Pierre Belon (1517–1564), Guillaume Rondelet
(1507–1566), and Ulisse Aldrovandi (1522–1605), were thus
a combination of received authority and empirical observation, based
on 1) a philological and critical knowledge of the classical texts,
not a passive reading of them; and 2) direct observations and
conversations not only with erudite peers and colleagues, but also
with the so-called “invisible
technicians”—fishermen, sailors, and peasants who had
first-hand knowledge of the relevant subjects and provided scientists
with important pieces of information.  Not by chance, in a
little-explored field like the study of minerals, the most significant
contributions came from self-described “men without
letters” (meaning not Latinate), such as Leonardo da Vinci
(1452–1519) and the potter Bernard Palissy (1510–1589),
who identified fossils as the result of organic processes rather than
abstract virtues.
 These empirical approaches were also stimulated by the discovery
of new continents, which contained plants and animals never known or
never described by classical authorities like Aristotle and Pliny. The
new knowledge brought by travelers and explorers helped debunk
erroneous doctrines advocated by Aristotle, such as the
uninhabitability of the torrid zone from Meteorology 362b
6–9: a major exponent of Renaissance Aristotelianism, Pietro
Pomponazzi (1462–1525), publicly mocked the Philosopher during
his classes when discussing this passage, and supported his position
by referring to the direct, recent observations of the navigator
Antonio Pigafetta.
The shift from an exclusively text-based approach to the study of
nature founded on the study of a limited number of authors, to a new
one based on an enlarged encyclopedia and, above all, direct
observation, reached its full expression at the time of Galileo
Galilei; but it was already perceptible in the writings of Lorenzo
Valla (circa 1406–1457)—who appealed to common sense
against the absurdity of some of the Aristotelian tenets—and in
those of Leonardo da Vinci, who invoked a virtuous interaction between
science and practice. When Tommaso Campanella (1568–1639) stated
that he learned more from the anatomy of an ant or an herb than from
any book ever written, he was simply expressing in a beautiful and
poetic form a shared methodological creed.
The principal tenets of the Aristotelian natural philosophy were:
the doctrine of form and matter, the four causes, the rigid
separation of the world into opposed spheres, and the finite nature of
the universe. During the Renaissance, these precepts were both
defended and revised by Aristotelian professors, or challenged by
others who sought to dismantle traditional philosophy. While these new
philosophers could rely on new evidence, methods, and observations to
define the nature of the universe, in other cases the rejection of
Aristotelian doctrines and their substitution with new paradigms was
mainly based on speculative arguments. 
According to Aristotle, if the sublunar world was characterized by
mutability, the supralunar world was—on the
contrary—absolutely immutable. The fundamental principles of
Aristotelian physics were in fact matter, form, and privation, and the
natural sublunar world was therefore the location where according to
these principles generation and corruption took place. Independent
philosophers offered alternatives to these principles and to the
Aristotelian hylemorphic apparatus. In order to describe nature within
its own limits, Bernardino Telesio (1509–1588)—a staunch
opponent of Aristotelianism—defended a different set of
principles which had already been proposed by authors such Girolamo
Cardano (1501–1576) and Girolamo Fracastoro (circa
1476–1553), and which he argued was based on data gathered from
experience rather than on arbitrary constructions. These alternative
principles were passive matter and active force, the latter
distinguished into heat and cold. It was the interplay—or
rather, the battle—between these opposite forces that brought
about the natural world.  Since every natural being depends on the
interaction between cold and heat, it must know what is necessary for
its survival: therefore everything, including the forces themselves,
possesses sensation, which was not related to the faculties of the
soul, as in Aristotelian psychology. This connection
between sensus and self-preservation was also advocated by
Tommaso Campanella, who emphasized its importance for natural
magic. Telesio’s polemical refusal of Aristotle and his call for
physical inquiry made within natural limits was appreciated and
praised even by those who recognized the contradictions in his
theories. Francesco Patrizi (1529–1597), who attacked Aristotle
from a Platonic perspective in his Nova de Universis
Philosophia (1591), rebuked Telesio for the latter’s claim
to have relied exclusively on the senses and rejected reason: he
pointed out that, in reality, Telesio did rely on metaphysical
arguments, though he claimed to deny them (for his part, Patrizi
believed that natural philosophy requires metaphysical tools to fill
in its gaps). The same recognition of too much reliance on metaphysics
drove Francis Bacon (1561–1626) to reject Telesio’s views
in favor of experimental empiricism and of a full endorsement of the
testimony of sensory perception.
Most Aristotelian interpreters believed matter to be prope
nihil, pure potentiality, while others believed that it possessed
a certain degree of reality and actuality. The discussion on the
nature of matter was further complicated by the suggestions offered by
other traditions of thought, Platonism above all. According to
Marsilio Ficino (1433–1499) in his Platonic Theology,
prime matter had an existence which is not dependent upon
form. Closely following the Timaeus, he claimed that matter
can therefore be intelligible, though in a weaker way. Giordano Bruno
(1548–1600) proposed an even more radical departure from
traditional views of the passivity of matter. In the De la causa,
principio et uno, Bruno affirms that matter is an active
principle, not passive. Matter contains within itself every form, both
corporeal and incorporeal, and can be described as a kind of infinite
life. Bruno’s conception of matter also served as the basis for
his cosmological views (see below), and in particular for his claim
that the universe is infinite. A few years later, Tommaso Campanella
returned to a more traditional position. In the Del senso delle
cose e della magia (printed in 1620) he argued for the synonymity between matter
and body, and against the identification of matter with the
Aristotelian prope nihil, though he did emphasize its
passivity: matter receives forms from external agents and does not
produce them from within itself.
 Closely related to these problems was Aristotle’s doctrine
of prime matter, which had controversial implications: as matter was
eternal, so was the world, and therefore the Christian dogma of the
creation of the world was untenable. Scholastic philosophers had long
struggled with this subject during the Middle Ages, and the most
interesting developments during the Renaissance were driven by the
confrontation between Aristotelianism and Platonism. Plato, in
the Timaeus, had clearly spoken of a God-creator, and once
again his doctrines were adopted by authors anxious to establish a new
philosophical foundation for Christianity. Bessarion (d. 1472), for
example, admitted that according to Plato matter was eternal, but that
he distinguished it clearly from the creator, who possesses a superior
eternity. In similar fashion, Marsilio Ficino expressly described
prime matter as created and therefore not subject to generation and
corruption. Aristotelians were not always afraid, however, to argue
for the eternity of the prime matter: Francesco Vimercato
(1512–1569), in his posthumous De rerum principiis, is
the most remarkable example. As late as the beginning of the
seventeenth century, the debate continued: Cesare Crivellati composed
a dialogue (1617) between Plato and Aristotle in which the master
rebukes his unfaithful student for teaching such an impious
doctrine. On the other hand, there were also authors who attempted to
establish an accord between Plato and Aristotle on this sensitive
issue: a good example is the De naturae philosophia seu de
Platonis et Aristotelis consensione (1554) by Sebastian Fox
Morcillo (1526–1560), in which the Spanish philosopher compares
the doctrines of the Timaeus and the Physics, and
emphasizes the limits of both in front of the perfection of
religion.
Other thinkers instead had a pragmatic approach to prime matter:
alchemists like the Swiss physician Paracelsus (1493–1541)
sought to find a principle to which every substance could be
reduced. Though openly challenging traditional university teaching,
Paracelsus did not reject canonical motifs. For example, he relied on
the four elements (air, fire, water, earth), but he also proposed a
new triad: sulfur, mercury, and salt. Yet, even this proposal was not
as iconoclastic as it appears, since it was partially founded on the
Aristotelian doctrine of the formation of metals contained in
the Meteorology (341b 6ff.). Nonetheless, by emphasizing the
processes of association and dissociation of substances, Paracelsus
offered an important contribution to the transformation of alchemy
into chemistry. Gradually chemistry separated from physics, understood
as the science of bodies subject to movement, and positioned itself as
the science of bodies associated and dissociated. Johann Baptist Van
Helmont (1579–1644), who opposed the Paracelsian principles,
developed a corpuscular doctrine of matter, a variant of atomistic
theory. Atomism in the Renaissance is typically related to the Neoplatonic concept
of semina and to the Epicurean philosophy, and was usually advocated by
radical anti-Aristotelian thinkers like Giordano Bruno. And while it
is true that Aristotle rejected atomism and the existence of the void,
there were ways to argue for a Peripatetic version of atomism.
 Some medieval philosophers admitted the
existence of minima naturalia, the limits beyond which form
is not conserved. The doctrine of the minima was intended to
resolve a problem raised by Aristotle in On Generation and
Corruption (327a 30–328b 24), namely, that of the necessity
of finding a philosophical justification for combination, an
intermediate phenomenon between generation and corruption. Over the
course of the Renaissance the doctrine of minima naturalia
was further elaborated by authors like Agostino Nifo (circa
1469–circa 1539) and Julius Caesar Scaliger
(1484–1558). Scaliger granted a consistency to
the minima, making them not mere limits, but real physical
components which cannot be further divided. Furthermore, he rejected
traditional atomism, because it did not achieved the continuity of the
corpuscles which constitute a body. Despite their opposition to Peripateticism, the
corpuscularism of Van Helmont and Daniel Sennert (1572–1637) was
rooted in this tradition. Sennert, in particular, was unable to reject
the Aristotelian concept of form, and aimed instead to establish a
concord between Aristotelianism and atomism. Even in a work
programmatically entitled Philosophia Naturalis adversus
Aristotelem (1621), Sebastian Basson—who defended
corpuscularism—denied the existence of the void and rejected a
mechanization of the natural world. It was Galileo Galilei who made a
bold departure from the qualitative background of Aristotelian matter,
defending a mechanistic form of atomism in which atoms did not have
dimensions. Despite the attempts of Pierre Gassendi (1592–1655) to conciliate it
with Christianity, atomism bothered traditionalists
also for its theological implications, both
large (the teleological vision of the world) and small
(transubstantiation). Even Descartes came under attack for this
reason. Debate over the existence of the void was also lively
throughout the seventeenth century, largely because of the
experimental work of Evangelista Torricelli (1608–1647),
Valeriano Magni (1586–1661), Otto Von Guericke
(1602–1686), and Robert Boyle (1627–1691), who opposed the traditional views
of the so-called “plenists”.
 
The rigid peripatetic division of the universe into two different
parts—one immutable and made of crystalline spheres, situated
between the fixed stars and the moon, the other mutable, under the
moon—was also related in the Aristotelian paradigm to the
concept of the natural sublunar world formed by the four elements:
fire, air, water, and earth. Every element behaves differently,
according to its so-called “natural movement”. Light
elements, such as fire and air, always tend to go upward, while heavy
elements, such as water and earth, move downward following a
rectilinear movement. Every element aims, in fact, to reach its own
natural place, unless an external force causes a movement opposite to
its nature—a “violent movement” (e.g., a stone
thrown into the air). In both cases, Aristotelian theory considers
movement as a quality common to all natural things because of the
elements which compose them. By contrast, the heavens, since perfect
and composed by a single element (aether), are immutable and travel in
constant circular motion around an immovable center represented by
Earth. An important corollary to the theory of natural places was the
finite character of the world, because it implied the existence of a
unique center of the world (the Earth), while evidently it would not
be possible for an infinite universe to have a center.
 These longstanding paradigms were destined to be challenged from
the sixteenth century onward, both from a speculative and an empirical
perspective. Observation of stellae novae and comets condemned the crystalline spheres and raised doubts regarding the doctrine of the immutability of heavens.
According to the traditional Aristotelian account, comets were
phenomena in the sublunar atmosphere. The great astronomer Johannes
Regiomontanus (1436–1476) did not challenge this vision of the
cosmos when he calculated the distance of the 1472 comet by
considering the angle of parallax, but about a century later, the
Jesuit Christopher Clavius (1538–1612), observing
a nova (1572), and Tycho Brahe (1546–1601), observing a comet (1577),
both demonstrated that the suddenly bright star and the comet must lie
beyond the moon, and that therefore the doctrine of the spheres was false. The demonstrated fluidity of heavens also compromised, more crucially, the doctrine of their immutability. Two factors made possible such an
achievement: the availability of better measuring instruments, and a
stronger emphasis on mathematics. This emphasis on mathematics was
probably the most important contribution of Platonism to the
development of natural philosophy, and in particular astronomy, during
the Renaissance. Though it is true that Neoplatonic philosophers had
proposed alternatives to the Peripatetic theories on the heavens
(e.g., Marsilio Ficino argued that the heavens were made
of spiritus and rejected the division of the universe into
spheres), it was their insistence on the importance of geometry and
mathematics that opened the way to the quantitative vision of the
world which gradually replaced the qualitative paradigm connected to
the Aristotelian tradition.
The decision of Nicolaus Copernicus (1473–1543) to propose a
heliocentric system, remove the Earth from the center of the universe,
and establish a relationship between the distances of the different
planets from the sun and the amplitude of their orbits was based on
mathematical reasoning and the weaknesses of Aristotelian-Ptolemaic
system in this regard. Johannes Kepler (1571–1630) defended the
Copernican theory by re-utilizing geometrical arguments from
Plato’s Timaeus, and he also developed other theories
(such as the elliptical form of the planetary orbits) founded on the
geometrical structure that he attributed to the universe. Despite the
fact that aspects of his method, and in particular
the regressus, were essentially Aristotelian, Galileo Galilei
(1564–1642) has been often described as a Platonist, insofar as
Platonism endorsed a mathematical approach. Galileo denied the reality
of the physical elements of the Aristotelian world and the theory of
their natural movements, and replaced them with corporeal matter,
whose properties and motions could be described in mathematical
terms. Furthermore, by relying on new instruments such as the
telescope, Galileo was also able to make new observations which
revealed the imperfections of the supralunar world.  Galileo and the
Copernican theory met with the resistance of the Church, but also of
the universities, whose professoriate was not eager to renounce one of
the central pillars of its teaching. On the other hand, the Tychonic
system elaborated by Brahe, which attempted to conciliate the
traditional Aristotelian-Ptolemaic cosmology with Copernicus,
encountered support even among Jesuit scientists.
However, neither mathematics nor fresh observations were capable of
resolving the problem of the nature of the universe: was it finite or
infinite? Is there only one world or do multiple worlds exist?
According to the Aristotelians the universe must be finite, because it
is impossible to have an infinite body in act, and Copernicus and his
followers also endorsed the finitude of the heavens. Theology,
however, offered arguments against the finitude of the universe:
Nicholas of Cusa (1401–1464) connected the infinity of God to
the infinity of heavens, and Palingenio Stellato (or Pierangelo
Manzolli, 1500/3–1543 ca.), in his Zodiacus Vitae,
compiled themes from different traditions (e.g., the Aristotelian
spheres and the Platonic ideas), describing a universe made of
infinite light in order to celebrate the glory of God. Francisco
Suarez (1548–1617), and a few years later
the Conimbricenses, also defended the existence of an
infinite space, even if it was only an imaginary one, combining
Peripatetic doctrines with theological ones (above all the
omnipresence of God, which cannot be limited by a finite
space). Giordano Bruno used the relationship between God and His
creation to argue for the infinity of the world. Bruno’s
position was in complete opposition to the Aristotelian cosmology: the
spheres are broken, there is no hierarchy between the different parts
of the world and no center, and therefore the natural movements are
rejected. Bruno developed his theory of infinity not only by relying
on metaphysical arguments but also on a radical revision of the
Aristotelian definition of space, which he understood as a continuous
quantity. Bruno’s proposal provoked reactions all over Europe:
Kepler rejected it several times in different
ways. Nevertheless, Kepler agreed with Bruno’s belief in the
plurality of worlds—a problem which raised theological issues
because of the question of salvation. Tommaso Campanella—an
author who denied the infinity of the universe—resolved it by
arguing that the inhabitants of the other worlds were not men, and
therefore did not need to be saved by God.
In the Middle Ages authors like Pietro of Abano, Nicolas Oresme,
and John Buridan argued that any phenomenon, in particular those which
were usually believed to be supernatural or miraculous, could be
explained according to natural principles as the result of hidden
causes. A number of Renaissance thinkers also adopted this approach,
including Pietro Pomponazzi. In his De incantationibus,
Pomponazzi stated that men tend to consider phenomena wondrous when
they are not able to identify their causes as the work of demons or
miracles.  Pomponazzi attributed apparently miraculous events to the
power of imagination, to psychological states or to the influence of
the stars, since according to the Peripatetic paradigm the immutable
first mover cannot have direct contact with the mutable sublunar
world, and therefore moves through secondary causes. Nonetheless,
despite his claim to speak purely secundum Aristotelem,
Pomponazzi relied on a wider range of readings, including Marsilio
Ficino. And in making these claims, Pomponazzi encroaches on very
sensitive questions of religious faith. In his view, Christian
miracles can be understood in the context of a sort of philosophy of
history, founded on the horoscope of religions: when a religion
begins, miracles occur, which are caused by starry influences, and
when a religion declines, miracles disappear, because starry
influences are weaker. This paradigm involved a rigid organization of
the universe, which left little or no space for free will. Pomponazzi
took this doctrine to its logical extreme in his De fato, a
work in which he claimed to endorse Stoicism, while in reality
exposing the determinism embedded in the Aristotelian doctrine of
causes. Other Aristotelians who sought to avoid this determinism
usually relied on the moderate position of Alexander of Aphrodisias,
who Pomponazzi attacked in the first part of his treatise. While
Pomponazzi reached these conclusions drawing on multiple sources,
other authors, such as Gerardus Bucoldianus, Simone Porzio, and
Ludovico Boccadiferro preferred to rely solely on Aristotle in order
to explain wondrous events like cataclysms or the appearance of
monstrous creatures, like those described by Ulisse Aldrovandi (1522–1605), who
interpreted them as deviations from the course of nature, or Fortunio
Liceti (1577–1657), who preferred to link the appearance of
monsters to ingenious experiments of nature.
Nevertheless, this approach, which reduced the supernatural to the
natural, was not always coupled with Aristotelianism. On the contrary,
it was often directed against Peripatetic doctrines, particularly when
it relied on experimental and empirical observations. The
search for the occult causes of things, which was often related to magical
beliefs and practices, also stimulated new
empirical and experimental approaches: Giovanbattista della Porta
(1535–1615) was among those who offered natural explanations for
exceptional events while discarding the Aristotelian paradigm in favor
of direct experience, in works such as the Magiae naturalis sive
de miraculis rerum naturalium. Della Porta insisted on the
sympathy and the antipathy of things, which are influenced by
celestial virtues, when dealing with topics like optics and
magnetism. And the De magnete of the anti-Aristotelian
William Gilbert (1544–1603) mixed experimentation (aimed at the
demonstration of the rotation and the magnetism of earth) with the
belief in the existence of a soul belonging to the earth. The occult
properties of things were also explored by other disciplines, such as
medicine. Jean Fernel (1497–1558) and Girolamo Fracastoro argued
that occult properties could be used to explain diseases and
contagions.
The knowledge of the secrets of nature was in fact central to magic, a field
which had an ambiguous relationship to natural philosophy. If a
natural philosopher wanted to describe and understand nature, a
practitioner of magic wanted to investigate it and its occult
properties in order to master it. The Neoplatonic correspondences
between macrocosmus—the
world—and microcosmus—man—allow magic to
exercise its power on a reality which was seen in vitalistic and
transcendental terms: the book of nature for practitioners of magic was
not the same one as that of the Aristotelians or of Galileo, but it is
written with signs and allusions. Magical doctrines had a wide
circulation throughout the Middle Ages, but were enriched in the
fifteenth century by the rediscovery of the Corpus
Hermeticum. The Corpus was a collection of
heterogeneous texts, dealing both with practical magic and the
mystical teachings attributed to Hermes Trismegistus, an Egyptian sage
who purportedly lived at the time of Moses and was first in the
lineage of a tradition of wisdom (the so-called sapientia
perennis). The alleged antiquity of the Corpus
represented the strongest evidence of its authority and reliability,
and thinkers like Marsilio Ficino in his De vita, and then
Cornelius Agrippa (1486–1535) in his De occulta philosophia, proposed
doctrines based on it. Their readers were encouraged to carve
talismans and images, and surround themselves with precise colors or
herbs connected to planetary influences in order to exploit the
conjunction of the whole, a living being of which man is both part and
lord. Magical treatises included recipes and empirical descriptions,
and in his De augmentis Scientiarum even Francis Bacon
described magic as an operative knowledge of hidden forms and the
harmony of things, which displays the wonderful works of nature. The
connection between micro and macrocosmus also
underlay medical practice—as in the case of Ficino himself and
later Paracelsus—and disciplines like physiognomy, which was
considered part of the Aristotelian natural encyclopedia. Della
Porta’s De physiognomia humana (1586), which was mainly a
collection of past authorities that included ethical problems and was
accompanied by illustrations, became the standard text on the topic
until Lavater.  There were also expressly hermetic approaches to
the subject, including the one by Robert Fludd (1574–1637).
Many of the doctrines of natural philosophy contrasted with the
teachings of religion, and there were a number of possible solutions
to this problem. Some authors appealed to the radical difference
between the realms of faith and philosophy, relying on the Averroistic
doctrine of the “double truth”. This was the case, for
example, of Pietro Pomponazzi. Yet other authors, such as Bessarion or
Simone Porzio, who came from very different backgrounds, went on the
offensive, rejecting any confusion between philosophy and faith at the
latter’s expense (even though Bessarion, like Ficino, argued for
a greater compatibility between Platonism and Christianity). There
were also others, like the Jesuit Pedro da Fonseca (1528–1599),
who considered Plato’s natural philosophy too dangerously
similar to Christianity and therefore preferred the Aristotelian
paradigm. On the other hand, some thinkers tried instead to genuinely
reconcile philosophy and faith, particularly during the periods of
doctrinal conflict and religious warfare that followed the
Reformation. This was particularly true in Protestant countries, where
even at the end of the sixteenth century the problem of the double
truth was a matter of intense debate. Reformed scholars displayed a
clear bias against Aristotle, the philosopher who they held
responsible for sustaining the scholastic edifice of Catholic
theology, and in Wittenberg they even mounted a short-lived attempt to
replace him with Pliny: but the disordered approach of the Natural
History made it unsuitable for superseding the Aristotelian
encyclopedia for teaching. Philipp Melanchthon (1497–1560)
reconciled the distinction between religion and science of nature by
arguing that nature was creation of God and everything in it had to be
seen as the work of providence. Some philosophers, such as John Amos
Comenius (1592–1670), supported the alliance between natural
science and religion by arguing for a philosophy based on the biblical
teachings, even though this position was often intended to combat the
excess of natural philosophers rather than to offer an alternative
system. On the other hand, both in Protestant and Catholic contexts,
scientists like Rheticus (1514–1574) and Galileo denied that the
Bible had any scientific value. Scholars like John Case
(d. 1600), who considered Aristotelianism compatible with Christian
dogmas such as creation and divine providence, were particularly fond
of searching for ways to syncretize theology with natural
philosophy. Attempts to reconcile the Philosopher with the Christian
religion, even at the cost of relying on forced or fanciful readings,
were still being made in the seventeenth century.
Nor were these problems confined to Christian learned contexts:
they were the subject of a number of similar reflections within the
Jewish tradition as well. Jewish thinkers often considered natural
science a mere system of hypotheses, which was capable of grasping
only the superficial appearance of things, and was subordinate to the
absolute truth offered by the Torah. This position was defended by
authors such as Judah Loew ben Bezalel (also known as Maharal,
1520–1609), who posited a radical distinction between the
natural world and the teachings of Torah, as well as Azariah Figo
(1579–1547). In particular, Loew claimed that while it was
possible to illuminate and explain the natural order of the physical
world, this was not true of the relationship between God and his
creation. This attitude was probably in part due to Jews’ sense
of exclusion and marginalization from the institutions where natural
philosophy was taught and practiced (an important exception to this
rule was Italy, where personalities like Elijah del Medigo (circa
1458–1493) took advantage of the separation between science and
theology in the universities). Nonetheless, all of these Jewish
authors—both the Italian “free-thinkers” and those
who defended the superiority of the Torah—still relied on
Aristotle as the main authority for natural philosophy, and there were
multiple attempts by philosophers like Ioseph ben Shem Tov (circa
1400–circa 1480) and Abraham Farissol (1451–circa 1525) to
integrate the Stagirite within the Hebraic philosophical tradition. A
minority of Jewish authors, including Moses Isserles
(1520–1572), considered natural philosophy a useful tool for
demonstrating the glory of God.