The principal metaphysical questions concerning natural kinds are
threefold. First, are the kinds that we think of as
‘natural’ kinds genuinely natural?  Or are our
classification processes more anthropocentric than that? Secondly,
what are natural kinds? Are natural kinds any sort of entity at all?
Are they basic ontological entities or are they derived from or
reducible to other entities (e.g., universals)?  Thirdly, do natural
kinds have essences? As regards the first question, the general
problem is to determine which of the kinds to which science makes
appeal, if any, correspond to real natural kinds—those existing
in nature, so to speak—and which of these kinds are merely
conventional—those whose boundaries are fixed by us rather than
nature.  Then, if natural kinds are genuinely natural, what are they?
Are there entities that are the natural kinds, and if so what can we
say about the nature of such entities? Are they irreducible,
basic, sui generis entities (alongside, for example,
particulars and universals) (Ellis 2001; Lowe 1998)? Or can they be
reduced, say to universals (Armstrong 1978, 1997; Hawley and Bird
2011) or to clusters of properties (Boyd 1991, Millikan 1999)? The
third question asks whether there are properties that might be
essential for kind membership. Natural kind essentialists hold that
natural kinds have essences (Ellis 2001, 2002; Devitt 2008), where the
essence of a natural kind is a property or set of properties whose
possession is a necessary and sufficient condition for a particular's
being a member of the kind. That fact is a so-called essential fact
concerning the kind; it is a fact that, in Fine's terms, stems from
the identity or nature of the kind (Fine 1994).
A common view concerning our so-called natural kind classifications is
that there are genuinely natural ways of classifying things.
Intuitively, to group all instances of the metal zinc together is to
engage in a natural classification, whereas to group together Trajan's
column, the number two, and Julius Caesar is to classify things in an
arbitrary manner. The classifications ‘cars manufactured in
Germany’, ‘culinary vegetables’,
‘altars’ are not arbitrary, but neither are they natural,
since they reflect human interests. This view we call
naturalism. It is often called realism because of
the close affinity to scientific realism; indeed naturalism may be
regarded as a consequence or component of standard scientific
realism. Scientific realists hold that successful scientific theories
represent theory-independent phenomena. Thus the theoretical posits of
science reflect natural divisions in nature; for example, the periodic
system for classifying the chemical elements reflects natural
divisions between the elements. However, since ‘realism’
is also associated with ontological doctrines (e.g., realism about
universals, modal realism etc.) it would be preferable to use weak
realism (or, as above, naturalism) to label the
ontologically uncommitted view that our classifications are often
natural.  (We will note below that not all natural classifications are
classifications into natural kinds.)
Naturalism need not maintain that all the classifications we in fact
take to be natural are indeed natural. Sometimes scientists and others
err in the natural kinds they take to exist. There is no kind that is
phlogiston or phlogisticated air. Many might suppose jade to be a
natural kind of mineral, but it is not because there are two distinct
minerals called ‘jade’. (See LaPorte 2004, 94–100 and Hacking 2007b
for detailed discussions of jade.) Similarly, biologists now believe that
reptiles do not form a natural kind. Naturalism is the view that
there are in fact natural divisions among things, so that when we
attempt to make a natural classification, there is a fact of the
matter as to whether that classification is indeed genuinely
natural.
Assuming that one is a naturalist about (some of) our classifications,
what makes a classification into one of natural kinds? The following
are often suggested criteria or characteristics of a natural kind
classification (some of which are more contentious than others):
Naturalism about natural kind classifications contrasts with
conventionalism (also called constructivism or
constructionism), the view natural kinds don't exist
independently of the scientists and others who talk about them. John
Stuart Mill puts articulates the contrast thus: “In so far as a
natural classification is grounded on real kinds, its groups are
certainly not conventional; it is perfectly true that they do not
depend upon an arbitrary choice of the naturalist” (Mill 1884,
bk. IV, ch. II). While the sciences do, it appears, employ
classifications according to kinds, the conventionalist will maintain
that the purposes of scientists are just one species of interest among
many: others will include the interests of automobile enthusiasts, of
cooks, and of religious people or sociologists of
religion. Conventionalists (constructivists, constructionists) deny
that any of our classifications, including those of science, are
naturally privileged forms of classification. The classifications of
botanists do not carve nature at its joints any more than the
classifications of cooks.
We may distinguish between weak conventionalism and strong
conventionalism. Weak conventionalism asserts that our actual
classifications are not, or are very unlikely to be, natural. The
principal ground for weak conventionalism is scepticism about the
ability of science to uncover the natural principles of
classification. We may attribute this reason for conventionalism to
Locke. (Locke, 1690: III). It appears (although this is a matter of
debate) that Locke thought that if there were real essences of
species, these would be found in the shared imperceptible
micro-structural properties of things, and that there may be such
genuinely natural species but that science was ill-equipped to do
better than speculate about them. (Locke also held, employing
criterion 6 above, that there would be ‘gaps’ or
‘chasms’ between genuine species but that observation
showed only smooth gradations between the kinds we actually employ,
which therefore must be conventional.)
 Strong conventionalism, however, goes on to deny even that
conventionalism is forced upon us simply by ignorance. It denies that
there are any such natural divisions, known or unknown. Strong
conventionalists claim that the differences and similarities that we
attribute to things exist in virtue of, for example, the social
function of the relevant concepts rather than in natural facts.  For
example, difference in gender is not a biological difference but a
difference in social role. The conventionalist treats natural kinds in
the same way. The chemical elements, biological species, quarks,
neutrinos and bosons are equally constructed by the activity of
scientists. The key claim is that natural kinds are constructed rather
than discovered. As Woolgar claims “there is no object beyond
discourse” (1988, 73).
Hacking (1999) argues against the strong version of conventionalism
(which he terms ‘universal constructivism’). The point of social
constructivism is to reveal that some of our classificatory categories
and practices though they may appear inevitable are actually
contingent and relative to the practice of classification in the
context of social institutions and norms. However, according to
Hacking, some constructed categories reflect real divisions and so
we need not be constructivists in the strong sense. There is still
room to distinguish between constructed kinds that reflect real
categories and those that do not.
For example, Hacking (1999, Ch. 5) distinguishes between
‘child abuse’ and ‘satanic ritual abuse’.  Satanic
ritual abuse is a socially constructed idea, but not a social kind. In
the 1990s, there was an exhaustive investigation into satanic ritual
abuse in Great Britain after a number of reported cases. However, an
independent commission claimed that none of the charges were
substantiated by evidence. Thus, our constructed categories are
subject to empirical investigation. We must establish a referent class
for our constructed categories. For example and in contrast, a kind
such as child abuse is considered real. The emergence of the category can
be traced to a definite time (1961) at a definite place (Denver) in
the discussions of paediatricians. Moreover, the reference of the
category was abused children. This reference dynamically changed as
the idea became embedded in new legislation, incorporated in practices
involving social workers, police, schoolteachers etc. (See Hacking
1999, Ch. 5.) But, importantly real instances of the category were
found through empirical investigation. 
The chief claim made by all varieties of conventionalism is that facts
about the world are in some sense dependent on human beings, their concepts and
their activities in society. The negation of this view, which we will examine
in
 Section 1.3, is the claim that facts about the
world are independent of human beings, their concepts and their
activities, that is, that there are real independent natural kinds in
the world. The claim that scientific facts about the world
are dependent on human activity has been analysed in
different ways by constructivists. Kukla (2000, Ch. 3) distinguishes
(i) material, (ii) causal, and (iii) constitutive dependence. The
first, and weakest, claim is material dependence, namely that
scientific entities are constructed by the activities of scientists in
the laboratory. Chemical reactions are brought about by scientists in
the laboratory using purified chemicals in a controlled environment
(Knorr-Cetina et al. 1983). The resultant kinds are merely the
constructs of this highly artificial environment, along with the
pragmatic interests of the scientists (i.e., what they are
testing for and the methodology they choose to use). However, it is
clear that scientists still abstract from a complex reality and in
some circumstances the materials used are purifications of some
naturally occurring materials. Indeed, material dependence is a rather
weak kind of conventionalism and could even be made compatible with
some versions of naturalism/realism (cf. Hacking 1983). Therefore, no general
conclusion may be drawn about the natural world and its kinds, from
the fact that scientists study scientific kinds in a highly idealized
and controlled setting. The second element in Kukla's three-fold
distinction is causal dependence, which occurs when the relevant facts
are caused to be true by the fact that they are believed to be true
(e.g. belief that there will be a run on the bank can cause a run on
the bank, Merton 1948).  Hacking's (1995) human, interactive kinds,
such as person with multiple-personality disorder, may be regarded as
instances, where the kind and its members are brought into existence
by the belief that there are such kinds and people do belong to
them. Lastly, the constitutive dependence thesis claims that
convention is constitutive of the physical facts. Plausibly,
conventions exist in virtue of people holding that they do. Woolgar's
constructivism is of the type that treats all scientific facts like
conventions in this respect.  
Dupré (1993) argues for promiscuous realism, the
claim that there are countless ways of taxonomizing the worlds into
kinds. The structure of the world is vastly complex and can be
categorized in many different cross-cutting ways, according to the
different theoretical interests we happen to be pursuing. Nevertheless,
Dupré insists that his view is not conventionalist, but rather that he
is committed to naturalism and realism about natural kinds. He accepts
that there are properties that natural kinds have in common, but denies
that these are intrinsic properties of kinds
 (cf. criterion 1 above).
 He also denies that there is a hierarchical
structure of natural kinds in the world
 (cf. criterion 5 above)
 and that kinds are categorically distinct 
 (cf. criterion 6 above).
Dupré (1993, 28) argues that promiscuous realism about natural
kinds reflects our classificatory practices within the context of both
common sense and particular sciences. The kinds classified by common
sense and scientific practice often cross one another. For example, in
common sense we classify lilies as a certain kind of
flower. However, in biological classification the genus
Lilium comprises over one hundred species, including bulbs such as
garlic and onions. Moreover, species with the name “lily”
in common sense do not in fact belong to the lilium genus
in biological classification (e.g., Calla Lilies and Canna Lilies). 
Therefore, common sense and biological science provide us
with pluralistic ways of taxonomizing lilies. Each is equally
legitimate, according to Dupré, depending on our interests. 
Furthermore, Dupré (1993, 38) argues that cross-classification occurs 
even within the context of a science. Taking the biological classification 
of species as an example, he argues that there are countless ways of 
taxonomizing species, depending on the model of biological systematics 
that is used (see
 Section 2.1 below). 
 There are equally legitimate, objectively grounded ways of classifying 
natural kinds. There is accordingly no unique way of carving nature at
its joints; different systems of classification are equally
acceptable, scientifically and metaphysically. 
Realism about natural kinds is the view that there exist entities 
that are the natural kinds. While naturalism about natural kind 
classifications is a matter of there being natural groupings and
distinctions among things and as such has no ontological commitment,
realism is an ontologically committed view. Since ‘(weak)
realism’ is sometimes used to denote naturalism, we may
distinguish by using the term strong realism for the
stronger, ontological, claim that the natural divisions between kinds
reflect the boundaries between real entities; i.e. the difference 
between silver and gold is not just a difference between two natural groups of 
thing, but is a difference between two distinct entities silver 
and gold.
The traditional realism versus nominalism debate is an ontological
debate over whether in order to account for properties we need to
invoke a class of entity, universals (see Section 1.2 above). There is
an analogous debate as regards natural kinds, whether in order to
account for our natural kind talk and our natural classifications, we
need a special sort of entity in our ontology. The natural kind
nominalist may accept that there are genuinely natural
classifications, but will reject the idea that we should invoke any
object as a consequence. For example, the nominalist might take the
world to be made up of individuals, which can be classified as kinds
in a natural way. But, the nominalist claims, there is no kind of
entity beyond the individual instances of each kind. The (strong)
realist maintains that we cannot explain the distinction between
natural and non-natural classifications without appealing to certain
entities, the natural kinds. The naturalism versus conventionalism
debate discussed in the preceding section asked whether there is a
genuine metaphysical difference between natural classifications and
non-natural classifications; it is not obvious that the naturalist,
who maintains that there is a metaphysical difference, is obliged to
understand that difference in terms of an ontological category of
entities that are natural kinds. The analogue in the debate over
properties is whether there is a metaphysical distinction between
natural properties and non-natural properties, between, in David
Lewis's terminology, sparse and abundant properties (Lewis, 1986).
There is no immediate contradiction in the position of a nominalist
who rejects universals, but who maintains that there is a metaphysical
difference between natural properties and other properties. The
realist in both cases argues that, ultimately, naturalism (about
properties and about classification) requires a commitment to entities
(universals and natural kinds respectively).
Quine is an example of a philosopher who accepts, to some extent,
natural classifications into kinds. He holds (1969) that kinds are
sets, so he does think that there are entities that are kinds, and to
that extent he is a realist. That said, his realism is minimal, since
sets are ubiquitous entities. Any coherent classificatory
principle will determine a set of things thus classified, whether
natural or artificial. Thus the ontology of natural kinds does not of
itself explain there being natural kinds. Quine regards 
the notions of  kind and similarity as 
“substantially one notion” (1969, 119) but denies that it
is straightforward to give a definition of one in terms of the
other. He does consider defining relative similarity thus: a
is more similar to b than to c iff a and 
b share more properties than a and c do. 
But this will work only if properties are less abundant than sets 
are (since any two things are jointly members of any number of sets). 
And Quine regards such a notion of property as no clearer than the 
notion of kind. 
Quine opens his discussion of natural kinds by asking “what
tends to confirm an induction?” (cf.
 criterion 2)
 (1969, 114). With Goodman's new riddle of induction and Hempel's
paradox of confirmation in mind, Quine answers that it is the
similarity or sameness of kinds between instances that permits an
induction: two green emeralds are more similar than two grue emeralds
when one of them is green and the other blue. It is the “dubious
scientific standing of a general notion of similarity, or of
kind” (1969, 116) that prompts the discussion alluded to
above. An intuitive notion of similarity is used in our ordinary
inductions. And the force of Darwinian processes gives us some reason
to think that we have evolved an innate similarity space that
corresponds to some natural similarities. At the same time, natural
science, which developed from these primitive inductions, supported by
similarities, is able to reveal deeper similarities that may
contradict superficial similarities. For example, our strong sense of
similarity concerns things of the same colour, but science tells us
that there is no deep similarity among things of the same
colour. Quine thinks that in due course science will obviate the need
for a general notion of similarity or kind: in each area of science
more specific notions will take the place of the generic notion; this
is a sign of the maturity of a branch of science. For example, in
zoology we may replace talk of the similarity between two animals by
discussion of the historical proximity of their closest common
ancestor.
Quine's conception of natural kinds is liberal. Not all sets are
natural kinds, but any set whose members share a natural property are
a natural kind. So the set of white objects is at least a candidate
natural kind and Quine asserts that positively charged objects form a
natural kind. One might wonder whether an up quark, an uranium
nucleus, a hydronium ion, a charged water droplet, and a balloon that
has been rubbed on someone's jumper all belong to one kind. The
literature on natural kinds (cf. Mill 1884) has tended to adopt a more
restricted conception of kinds, although articulating that conception
is not straightforward. This question is related to the link that
Quine draws between kinds and what it is that confirms induction. If
one adopts the narrower conception of kinds, then one will hold that a
law such as ‘positively charged objects repel one another’
does not concern kinds at all, but nonetheless may be confirmed by
instances of objects that are positively charged repelling one
another. So the real answer to “what tends to confirm an
induction?” is not “natural kinds and their
instances” but is “natural properties and their
instances”. A further reason for taking this view is that
inductions often concern relations (such as the repulsion between two
objects). But we do not suppose that objects that enter into a natural
relation form a natural kind, nor that there is a natural kind of
ordered sequences of objects satisfying a given natural relation.
Following Quine, some realists have expanded upon his intuition that a
natural kind's members share a natural property by counting 
families of such properties that are contingently clustered in
nature (Boyd 1991, 1999a; Millikan 1999). These families of properties 
cluster together over time either because the presence of some properties 
in the family favours the presence of others or because there are underlying 
internal mechanisms and/or extrinsic contextual mechanisms which tend to 
secure the co-occurrence of the properties. A natural kind is any such 
family of co-occurring properties that may be employed in inductive inference 
for the purposes of scientific explanation. Cluster kind realists will 
readily concede that, depending on the case, environmental pressures may 
affect and alter the set of properties associated with a kind over time. 
Therefore, in such cases, none of the properties themselves 
need be individually necessary for kind membership.
Boyd considers biological species to be paradigmatic natural kind 
clusters (1999), where the clustering is due to a 
homeostatic mechanism. Homeostatic property clusters occur
when mechanisms exist that cause the properties to cluster by ensuring
that deviations from the cluster have a low chance of persisting; the
presence of some of the properties in the cluster favours the presence
of the others. A homeostatic mechanism thereby achieves
self-regulation, maintaining a stable range of properties. In the case
of species, the homeostatic mechanisms may be intrinsic (e.g. gene
exchange within a population or developmental factors) or extrinsic
(e.g. a species's evolutionary niche provides common selective
factors). Since individuals inherit their basic characteristics from
their parents, and very few people are taller than 2.5m, we can expect
the next generation to contain few people of that height. Height can,
however, be affected by environmental factors; a mutation can cause
offpring to have genes different from their parents that might cause
greater than usual height, and malfunctioning of the pituitary gland
can cause an excess of growth hormone.  So there can be individual
cases of excessive height.  But they will remain rare because such
gigantism and acromegaly are accompanied by serious complicating
disorders and often result in premature death. Consequently, these
individuals are less likely to reproduce than others. Even greater
extremes of height (e.g. 4m) are just not possible, since the same
developmental factors would prevent the individual from being viable
at an earlier stage in life. 
Colouration across a species is often uniform when it is a camouflage
against predation. The more specific the ecological niche occupied,
the more uniform will colouration and other features be. Deviations
will lead to decreased fitness and will be selected against. Obligate
mutualistic symbiosis often provides very specialized ecological
niches; consequently certain key properties must be present in order
for an individual to survive.  Certain beard worms, such as Riftia
pachyptila, live at ocean floor thermal vents and have no
digestive tract; instead they supply hydrogen sulphide and methane to
bacteria in their trophosomes, which oxidise the hydrogen sulphide and
methane on behalf of the worm. As a result the worm cannot lack any
property essential for the survival of the bacteria to which it is
host.  Such homeostatic mechanisms do not preclude deviations from the
standard combinations of properties—mutations do occur, for
example. Homeostasis just means that usually such mutations will not
persist. The rare benevolent, or even merely neutral, mutations may
persist and flourish, in which case there will be variation and
change.  Environments may change, perhaps locally, also leading to
variation and change (e.g. the famous peppered moth). Consequently, it
will not always be the case that property P in a homeostatic property
cluster F is a necessary condition of an individual belonging to the
relevant kind. 
In such cases, the boundaries of the natural kind are vague. 
Cluster kinds nevertheless do form a kind
 (criterion 4 above).
 Members will have at least some properties in common
 (criterion 1). 
 Since the emergence of cluster kinds is not entirely random and a 
causal-historical account can be provided in virtue of stable homeostatic mechanisms, 
cluster kinds are sufficiently robust to support induction
 (criterion 2) 
 and perhaps even laws of nature in some cases
 (criterion 3).
 Conversely,
because the boundaries between natural kinds are vague, a cluster kind realist
will reject the claim that natural kinds are categorically distinct 
 (criterion 6).
 She may be neutral on whether they always form hierarchies
 (criterion 5).
 That said, not all clusters need exhibit the flexibility and
vagueness of these biological, homeostatic cases. In other cases 
the clustering may be directly due to the laws of nature. Thus the laws
of physics rule out fractional nuclear charge, with the consequence
that the chemical elements are kinds that have clearly defined
boundaries and nuclear charge is a necessary and sufficient condition
of kind membership.
Natural kind realism may be understood as an analogue of realism about
universals. A further question is whether these are simply analogues
or in fact related positions.  Perhaps natural kinds just are (a
species of) universals or are reducible to universals. Within realism,
that reductionist view can be contrasted with natural kind
fundamentalism, which holds that not only are there natural
kinds (as entities), but also that natural kinds find a basic and
sui generis place in our ontology. We illustrate three
positions within naturalism about natural kinds: (i) naturalism
without (strong) realism; reductionist realism; fundamentalist
realism.  
According to David Armstrong (1997, 67–8) “The kinds mark
true joints in nature. But it is not clear that we require an
independent and irreducible category of universal to accommodate the
kinds”. Armstrong's view is naturalistic, since there are
genuine natural divisions; but he is also resistant to realism. If
there were natural kinds they would be universals. But the properties
shared by all and only the members of a kind will typically be very
complex. For example, he considers whether there is some description
of human DNA. There may be, but it would be too complex to qualify as
a genuine universal. And there is no reason to suppose that this
complex universal would do any causal or nomic work. So there is not
simply an identity between natural kinds and a subcategory of
universals, the natural kind universals (e.g., the universal of
being gold, or of being a human)—according to
Armstrong's argument there are no natural kind universals. He does
concede that the case is stronger for basic kind universals, such as
electronhood, where a few properties (the electron's mass, charge, and
spin) are individually necessary and jointly sufficient for kind
membership.  
Hawley and Bird (2011) argue that natural kinds are complex
universals.  A complex universal is a universal whose parts are
universals (just as a complex particular is a particular whose parts
are particulars). In the case of the electron the fundamental
universals (the electron's mass, charge, and spin) do combine to form
a complex universal.  Since an universal is wholly located
where the universal is located, every entity that instantiates
electronhood also instantiates its component universals, the
electron's mass, charge, and spin. Not every collection of universals
constitutes a natural kind, just as not every collection of
particulars constitutes a natural (complex) particular.  The facts
that explain the clustering of properties explain why these universals
compose a complex one. Not every complex universal is, like
electronhood, precise.  Some are vague, and this fact can accommodate
the indeterminacy of kind constitution implied by Boyd's view of the
clusters in the case of biological kinds.  
Like Hawley and Bird, E. J. Lowe takes natural kinds to be entities
(1998, 2006a, and 2006b Other Internet Resources). Thus Lowe is a
natural kind realist.  Furthermore, he takes natural
kinds—substantial universals in his
terminology—to constitute an irreducible ontological category
(one category in his four-category ontology).  Hence he is a natural
kind fundamentalist. Lowe argues that recognizing the ontologically
fundamental distinction between substantial universals (natural kinds)
and non-substantial universals (properties) accounts for the laws of
nature in a manner that, while avoiding the problems of a regularity
account, may nonetheless do without Armstrong's second order relation
of necessitation, itself a relational universal (Armstrong 1983,
75–110). Consider the law that planets travel in ellipses.
According to Lowe's account, this should be understood as a matter of
the kind planet being characterized by the
property travels in an ellipse. (One might query whether all
laws can be given this form and so whether the fact that some general
truth is a law should be explained this way. For what makes planets
travel in ellipses is the fact that they have mass and hence little to
do with their being planets. For example, Kepler's law is an
application of Newton's laws, but the latter concerns quantities
(mass, distance), which should be understood as universals not
kinds.)
 As in Lowe's ontology, natural kinds play a fundamental role in
the ontology of Brian Ellis (2001, 2002). For Ellis the term
‘natural kind’ covers three hierarchical categories:
natural kinds of objects (substantive kinds), natural kinds of
processes and events (dynamic kinds), and natural kinds of properties
and relations (property kinds). The chemical elements and compounds
are substantive kinds; the different chemical reactions are dynamic
kinds; a tetrahedral molecular structure is a (structural) property
kind (whose species include the particular tetrahedral structures of
methane, carbon tetrachloride, silicon tetrafluoride and so forth).
Ellis is uncommitted on whether the dynamic kinds are independent of
the other two types of kinds; but these are independent of one
another. Each kind is a universal, and the three categories of kind
therefore form three categories of universal. Thus the substantive
kinds—the familiar kinds of thing and stuff—are
universals, but these are not reducible to property universals. Ellis
notes that laws of nature have a hierarchical structure: Kepler's laws
of planetary motion are an application of Newton's laws.  He argues
(2001, 90) that the only satisfactory account of this is fact that
natural kinds also exist in hierarchies. 
Do natural kinds have essences? When discussing kinds and essences we
need to distinguish two quite different claims. The first claim is
that the kind a particular belongs to is essential to that particular:
if a belongs to kind K, then it is an essential
property of a that it belongs to K. The second claim
is that the kinds themselves have essential properties: for each kind
K there is some property Φ of the kind such that it is
essential to K that Φ(K). What is the logical
relation between these two claims? The first claim may be strictly
consistent with the denial of the second, but it may be difficult to
motivate the first without having reason to accept the second.  Would
one think that some object's nature requires it to belong to kind K
without thinking that there is some distinctive (essential) property
characteristic of all Ks?
 The second claim, essentialism about kinds, does not obviously
imply the first, individual essentialism. To see this, consider the
following two cases that would seem to show that the latter does not
imply the former. The first case is chemical/physical. A nucleus of
neptunium-239 may undergo beta decay, in which one of its neutrons
emits an electron leaving a proton. As a consequence the nucleus now
has one more proton and so is a nucleus of neptunium no longer but is
now a nucleus of plutonium. This description is consistent with the
claim that it is essential to neptunium that nuclei of neptunium atoms
have 93 protons whereas it is essential to plutonium that its nuclei
have 94 protons.  But one may also claim, as the description
implicitly suggests, that one and the same nucleus persists through
this transformation.  If that is so, then a particular has retained
its identity while undergoing a change of kind. That kind essentialism
does not entail essentialism of kind membership is also demonstrated
by a second, biological, example. According to Mayr's biological
species concept, a species is a reproductively isolated breeding
population. Thus a new species can be created by the advent of
reproductive isolation, which will typically split existing
populations (Matthen 2009). And so the existing organisms in at least one (and
arguably both) of the newly isolated (sub-)populations will belong to
a new species. And if species are natural kinds, this is an example of
particulars changing their kinds. But this account of species is
consistent with the view that species have essences (LaPorte 1997,
2004, 11–12). (As a matter of fact, most essentialists accept
that an object's kind is essential to it. The point being advanced
here is that this claim does not follow immediately from the claim
that kinds have essences.)
 It has been widely held that essentialism, and natural kind
essentialism in particular, is a consequence of the semantic arguments
concerning reference put forward by Kripke (1980) and Putnam
(1975a). These arguments support semantic externalism, the view that
the reference of a speaker's term can depend on facts external to the
speaker herself (e.g. facts concerning prior uses of the term).
However, Salmon (1979, 1982) has argued persuasively that only trivial
essentialism can be inferred from such arguments; stronger
essentialist theses are derived only on the basis of unstated
essentialist premises. For example, consider the following argument,
reconstructed by Donnellan and discussed in Salmon (1982,
161–75): 
(Salmon 1982, 166)
P3, however, is not free of non-trivial essentialist import.
According to Salmon, deriving essentialism via the theory of reference
is question-begging. Nonetheless, the fact that essentialist
conclusions seem so plausible may be taken as evidence that there
exist strong essentialist intuitions, and the arguments from Kripke
and Putnam can be framed in non-semantic terms and thereby motivate
essentialism directly—indeed many of Kripke's arguments
are not framed in semantic terms at all.
Several of Kripke's exemplary cases concern theoretical identities;
these are typically identities of the form C = T,
expressed using a common name for a kind, ‘C’,
and a technical identification of the kind, ‘T’,
typically thereby telling us what that kind is. Examples:
light is a stream of photons; water is H2O; lightning is an
electrical discharge; gold is the element with atomic number 79. This
might give the impression that Kripkean essentialism is just a matter
of the necessity of identity. However, in several of his discussions
Kripke does provide separate, independent arguments on the one hand
for the (necessary) necessity of being T for being C
and on the other hand for the (necessary) sufficiency of being
T for being C. In general, where K is a
kind and P is some property, arguments for
□∀x(Kx→Px) can be
decoupled from arguments for
□∀x(Px→Kx).
For example, in his discussion of gold, Kripke argues that something
that is superficially like gold in appearance but lacks the property
of having atomic number 79, would not be gold.  This establishes that,
of necessity, having atomic number 79 is necessary for being gold, but
does not show that possession of this property is sufficient for being
gold.  Similarly, argues Kripke, if we were to discover a population
of animals with the appearance of tigers but which turn out to be
reptiles, we would deny that such creatures are tigers.  Being
mammalian is necessarily a necessary condition of being a tiger, but
of course not a sufficient condition
Putnam's (1975a) Twin Earth thought experiment, in a non-semantic
guise, leads to a similar conclusion. We imagine there is a planet,
‘Twin Earth’, exactly like Earth in all readily observable
respects.  Every person and thing on Earth has a twin equivalent on
Twin Earth.  However, there is no H2O on Twin
Earth. Instead, there is a liquid that shares the manifest properties
of water (e.g., its being colourless, tasteless, odourless, good for
drinking, etc.). This liquid is composed not of H2O
molecules but of very different molecules to which we assign the
made-up formula ‘XYZ’.  Despite its superficially
water-like properties, intuitively XYZ is not water.  What prevents
XYZ form being water is the fact that XYZ is microstructurally
different from H2O. If intuition is reliable in this
respect, then (i) possessing water’s superficial properties is
not sufficient to make something a sample of water, and (ii) being
composed of molecules of H2O is necessary for something's
being a sample of water. (For more on Putnam's Twin Earth thought
experiment, see Section 3.2.3.) 
It is natural to use the expression ‘the essence of
…’, which implies sufficiency as well as necessity:
possession of the essence of K suffices for membership of
K, as well as being necessary for it.  According to the
foregoing, not all the arguments of Kripke and Putnam establish what
the essence of some kind is, rather they establish only what
we may call a partial essence, conditions that are necessary
but not sufficient. This is clear in some other of Kripke's
arguments. Thus it is only a partial essence that someone originates
with the gamete (sperm and egg) from which they in fact originate,
since they might have a monozygotic (identical) twin who has the same
origin. A further question is whether there is a full essence
(the essence) for everything that has a partial essence.
The fact that such arguments show only that F is an
essential property of K means that they are invulnerable to
complaints that not everything with F is K. For
example it is sometimes complained that water cannot be essentially
H2O for the following reasons (a) water is a liquid,
whereas a substance comprised of H2O can exist as a solid
or a gas; (b) a single H2O molecule is not a sample of
water because it does not have the properties we can ascribe to
samples of water (such as a temperature); (c) water is not simply
H2O but is a polymer-like substance held together by
hydrogen bonds. These observations are consistent with the claim of
Putnam's argument that necessarily all water is composed of
H2O molecules.
The arguments so far considered show that the superficial properties
associated with a kind are, in those cases, not sufficient for kind
membership, and so some further property (often a microstructural
property) is a necessary condition.  Kripke also provides arguments
that show that many of the superficial properties typically associated
with a kind are not even necessary.  Kripke examines Kant's claim that
it is a priori that gold is a yellow metal (Kripke 1980,
118). Let us imagine that the yellow appearance of what we have always
taken to be samples of gold is just an optical illusion. Intuitively,
we would conclude that we had previously erred in thinking that gold
is yellow—we would not conclude that there is no
gold. Likewise, one might ask whether animal species are characterized
(necessarily) by superficially available qualities, for example,
whether a tiger is, by definition, a large carnivorous quadrupedal
feline, tawny yellow in colour with blackish transverse stripes and a
white belly (Kripke 1980, 119–121). Again, we may consider that
these features of the individual animals we have held to be tigers are
in fact illusory; that those individuals and others of the same
species are, for example, three–legged but that an optical
illusion made us think otherwise. This suggests that satisfying a set
of readily observable ‘superficial’ properties is not
necessary for membership of the tiger kind.
The foregoing arguments from Kripke lead to the conclusion that the
relevant kinds are not characterized of necessity by the readily
observable properties of their instances. They do not show what does
characterize those kinds. Kripke takes the view that, in most cases,
it is certain microstructural properties that determine the
nature of these natural kinds, as evident in his endorsement of the
identities: ‘water is H2O’; ‘gold is the
element with atomic number 79’, ‘light is a stream of
photons’. Such essential properties of kinds are features,
therefore, that may be unknown even to competent users of a relevant
kind concept.  Consequently, these are essences that, when known at
all, are known a posteriori.
While the arguments just considered suggest a microstructural essence
for the chemical and physical kinds considered, they do not have the
consequence that every natural kind must have a microstructural
essence. Kripke regards material individuals as having historical
essences. In the light of cladism in biology, one may regard biological
taxa as having historical essences also, and this is consistent with
the general picture given to us by Kripke and Putnam,
even if they themselves once thought that biological kinds had
microstructural essences (McGinn 1976; Kornblith 1993, 111; LaPorte 2004, 64).
Cladism is the most commonly accepted system of biological
classification that groups organisms according to their shared
phylogenetic ancestry. Cladism has replaced the Linnean hierarchical
system of biological classification where organisms were grouped
according to their shared morphological characteristics  (see
 Section 2.1 below). 
Kripke does not distinguish ‘essential property’ from
‘necessary property’.  Fine (1994) notes that the claim
that P is a necessary property of X is not the same as the
claim that P is an essential property of X: the latter implies the
former but the former does not imply the latter.  The arguments for
essentialism discussed above do not note this distinction and move
quickly from claims about necessity to claims about essence: having
shown that necessarily anything that is gold is made up of an element
with atomic number 79, Kripke concludes that having atomic number 79
is an essential property of the kind gold. Fine's point may not be an
insuperable obstacle to establishing essentialism via the arguments of
Kripke and Putnam. For it may be held, as Fine holds, that essences
concern the nature or identity of things.  One may then argue that the
arguments of Kripke, Putnam, and others do appeal to intuitions
concerning the nature and/or identity of natural kinds, and so the
inferences to essentialism from claims about necessity are legitimate
in these cases.
The Kripke–Putnam arguments for essentialism are, in effect, direct
appeals to intuition. For Ellis and Lowe, the dialectical basis for
essentialism is that essentialism is a core part of what they each
take to be the optimal metaphysical system. Ellis (2001, 145–50)
regards his essentialist metaphysics as supported by his argument that it
yields a stronger argument for scientific realism. In particular, for
Ellis the essences of natural kinds explain the laws of nature: laws
are grounded in the world's natural kind structure, which includes not
only natural kinds of thing but also natural kinds of process and
event. Above it was mentioned that for Lowe (2006, 144) laws concern
natural kinds; by contrast, for Ellis laws are grounded in essential
facts about kinds. As a consequence, the laws of nature are
metaphysically necessary. This has the advantage of explaining what
natural necessity is (it is just metaphysical necessity), but at the
cost of denying the intuitive contingency of laws. Lowe, on the other
hand, holds that laws can be grounded in the contingent possession of
properties by kinds, and so need not be metaphysically necessary.
In conclusion we note that some anti-essentialists argue that there is
no non-question begging way of motivating the appeal to
essences. Mellor argues that the existence of essences in essentialist
accounts of natural kinds is simply a gratuitous assumption. (Mellor
1977, 309). Others use examples from the empirical sciences such as
biology to argue that essentialism is too limited to capture the kinds
we find in the special sciences (Dupré 1981, 1993).  In
particular, essentialist accounts of kinds seem to construe them as
immutable or static, whereas examples from the natural sciences
include mutable and dynamic kinds, as we see in section 2.1 below.
Our interest in natural kinds is generated by the fact that the
particular sciences make frequent use of what, on the face of it, seem
to be natural kinds.  So an important question is whether the kinds of
the special sciences (e.g. psychology, economics, biology, chemistry
and so on) do in fact satisfy the conditions laid out by
metaphysicians for natural-kindhood (Fodor 1974; Dupré 1981,
1993; Millikan 1999; Ellis 2001). And to the extent that they do not,
does that show that these kinds are not genuine natural kinds after
all, but are something different?  Or does it show that the
metaphysicians need to revise their theories of natural kindhood?  The
metaphysical issues raised by the special sciences vary.  For example,
philosophers of biology ask whether species would be better understood
as being individuals rather than natural kinds.  The
so-called species problem (Ghiselin 1974, 1987, 1997; Hull
1976, 1978; Kitts and Kitts 1979, LaPorte 1994) asks which are the
appropriate criteria to use in order to decide which particular
species an organism belongs to. This is particularly challenging
because species evolve over time, which makes it difficult to determine
when we should recognize a new species and distinguish it from a distinct,
older ancestor species or from distinct sister species. Furthermore,
the criteria advanced by most of the various species concepts on offer
involve relational rather than intrinsic properties of organisms. So
either species are not natural kinds or the view that kindhood is
fixed by the intrinsic properties of things must be revised. In the
philosophy of chemistry, a key question is whether chemical kinds
provide as much support for microstructuralism as the stock examples
discussed by metaphysicians suggest (Hendry 2006; LaPorte 2004;
Needham, 2000, 2002; Van Brakel, 2000). Microstructuralism is the view
that chemical kinds can be individuated solely in terms of their
chemical microstructure. Chemical elements would appear to support
microstructuralism since atomic number is sufficient to individuate
any element. However, the extension of this view to more complex
chemical structures (such as molecules) is much discussed in the
literature.  In the philosophy of mind, the ontological status of
psychological kinds has been questioned in the light of modern
advances in neuroscience (Churchland 1981; Fodor 1974). In particular,
action is causally overdetermined by mental and neurophysiological
kinds. If neuroscience can provide a sufficient account of action,
then the role of our common-sense folk psychological concepts, such as
belief and desire is called into question. Maybe there are no
psychological natural kinds corresponding to those concepts.  Natural
kind realists reject the conventionalist view that in all cases the
boundaries of ‘natural’ kinds are drawn by human interests.  But is
it plausible to draw a distinction between genuinely natural and
conventional kinds when it comes to the social sciences?  In
particular, is it important that, via a feedback effect, human
perceptions of what kinds there are can have an effect on the
composition and even existence of those kinds (Hacking 1995)? 
One central issue in the philosophy of biology concerns the nature of
biological species, which have traditionally been held to be
paradigmatic natural kinds. The traditional Linnean binomial system of
classification groups organisms into species and genera in virtue of
their overall physical similarities (their morphology). However, only
the taxa species and genus were held to reflect 
ontological divisions in nature. The higher taxa (e.g., family, 
order, class, phylum, kingdom) are merely
conventional divisions, which are of heuristic use in biology. 
Biologists offer many different species concepts, which disagree on
how species are individuated; indeed the different species concepts
will disagree about the extensions of species and about the number of
species. For example, according to the interbreeding species concept
(e.g. Mayr 1969), species are groups of interbreeding natural
populations, that are reproductively isolated from other groups. 
Alternatively, according to the phylogenetic approach to species 
(e.g. Cracraft 1983), species are classified according to common 
ancestral descent. These two approaches carve species differently. 
Some phylogenetic species fail to be interbreeding species. For example, 
organisms that reproduce asexually may nevertheless have a common descent. 
They will be grouped together as species by the phylogenetic
approach, but not by the interbreeding approach. (Cf. Ereshefsky 1998
for a discussion.) Philosophers question whether the multiple divisions used by
biologists reflect an ontological pluralism in the world or, alternatively, whether 
there is a privileged conception of species that captures ontological
reality. Furthermore, some philosophers argue that species are not to
be considered as natural kinds at all, insisting instead that species
are individuals. 
Despite its long history and intuitive appeal, the conception of
species as natural kinds is difficult to sustain while also
maintaining a traditional view of what a natural kind requires: a set
of intrinsic natural properties that are individually necessary and
jointly sufficient for a particular to be a member of the kind.
The fact that lineages evolve more or less gradually over time and
that this process leads to new species and other taxa, has two
consequences: first, that species are spatio-temporally restricted in
the sense that the species to which a particular organism belongs
depends on its being related to a specific lineage; and secondly, that
the characteristic properties of a species may change over time.
The first consequence of evolution implies that, contra the
traditional view, intrinsically identical organisms may not be members
of the same species: a cat-like organism independently evolved on a
distant planet would not be a cat.  (Cf. Dummett 1973: 144 ‘even
if creatures exactly like men arose from dragons’ teeth, they
would not be men, because not children of Adam’.)
The second consequence implies that intrinsic similarity is not
necessary for membership of the same species. There exists a high
degree of variation in intraspecific morphology and genetic
makeup. While members of kinds need not be intrinsically identical
(e.g., there may be isotopic variation between samples of a chemical
element), there will nonetheless be certain distinctive intrinsic
natural properties common to all members of the kind (e.g., nuclear
charge in the case of atoms of the same element). That, it is claimed,
is absent for species. Thus there is no genetic material or sequence
of genes that all and only members of the species Drosophila
melanogaster possess, and likewise for all other species. Nor can
we turn to larger-scale phenotypic properties (which may nonetheless
be hidden), since evolutionary change may eliminate such features
without a new species arising (Sober 1980). Furthermore, gradual
change, even through speciation, means that species will not be
categorically distinct (criterion 6), which
for Ellis (2001) is an additional reason to conclude that species are
not natural kinds.
These problems for the thesis that species are natural kinds may lead
one to conclude that classification by species does not correspond to
any real division of things in nature any more than the higher taxa
do. Darwin himself expressed this kind of conventionalism, in taking
species to differ only in degree from varieties on the one hand and
genera and higher taxa on the other hand:
(Mishler 1999 contains a modern version of this view.) The rejection
of species as natural kinds need not lead to the rejection of realism
about species altogether. Indeed, one can commit to species realism in
a specific way: Ghiselin (1974, 1987, 1995, 1997), Hull (1976, 1978,
1980, 1987), and many other philosophers and biologists accept the
claim that species are individuals, not kinds. This claim
would appear to explain why, it is said, there are no serious
candidates for biological laws, at least concerning members of particular species
(Beatty 1997). Individual organisms are
parts of species, not members of the species-kind. 
Speciation creates a new individual (or possibly two new individuals and 
the cessation of the preceding species-individual) but not a new kind. 
Organisms that are parts of the same species may share common features, 
but that is not what makes them parts of that species. Rather the explanation 
is the reverse: because the organisms are parts of the same species 
they are parts of the same lineage and so they will probably 
(but not inevitably) share features in common.
Does individualism about species imply that species are not natural
kinds? One might suspect as much, but perhaps the two views are
compatible. LaPorte (2004), for example, believes that one can
consistently hold both views. Where one theorist will see a
species-as-kind and an organism-as-member of that kind, another
theorist will see a species-as-individual and an organism-as-part of
that kind. And so even allowing that individualism is correct, we can
construct a kind: if S is a species-individual and x
is an organism, then x is a member of the
species-kind S* iff x is a part
of S.  For example, an individual organism (a radish plant)
is a part of the species-individual Raphanus Sativus if and
only if it is a member of the species-kind Raphanus Sativus
(LaPorte 2004, 16). LaPorte's view does entail giving up on certain
features that natural kinds are often thought to have; one cannot
still hold that kind membership is necessarily intrinsic, since
‘being a part of y’ is not an intrinsic property
and parts of the same entity do not necessarily have any intrinsic
properties in common. For that reason, it is also less plausible that
kinds must play a role in laws of nature.
If one retains the view that species are natural kinds one must
confront the fact that a plethora of species concepts are available and
as seen earlier, these species concepts do not always delineate the
same species. For example, Mayr's (1969) 
biological species concept (BSC) regards a species as a
group of “interbreeding natural populations that are
reproductively isolated from other such populations” (1969,
26). The phylogenetic species concept (PSC) holds that a
species is “the smallest diagnosable cluster of individual
organisms within which there is a parental pattern of ancestry and
descent” (Cracraft 1983, 170).  These definitions are not
perfectly coextensive. (For a detailed discussion of species concepts
see the entry on species.) 
This diversity may be thought to support conventionalism about
natural kinds
 (Section 1.1.2).
But supporters of naturalism about our classifications 
 (Section 1.1)
 will deny that the dispute in systematics reflects an indeterminacy in
the natural world. A monist will hold that one of the
existing systems is a superior account of the natural world. A
commitment to one of the different systems over another will result in
a different ontological account of species. The most prevalent system
of classification in contemporary systematics is cladistics, which
classifies organisms phylogenetically, in virtue of shared derived
features or an organism's place in the genealogical tree.
An alternative view to monism, motivated by the variety of
species concepts, is pluralism, which holds that the different
accounts of species in systematics reflect equally legitimate ways 
of carving up nature subject to our pragmatic and theoretical interests. 
However, these systems do carve nature in genuinely natural ways. The 
species and higher taxa that they delineate reflect real features of 
the world from the point of view of different theoretical interests. 
Pluralism (Kitcher 1984; Dupré 1993; Ereshefsky 1992) is the weakest 
form of realism about kinds in the philosophy of biology.
Kripke (1971, 1972) and Putnam (1975a) use animal kinds as examples of
natural kinds for which a posteriori essences can be
found. There is some implication that these essences are
microstructural, intrinsic properties, which will be, of necessity,
individually necessary and jointly sufficient for an entity to be a
member of a kind. However, if species are individuals, then it is not
true that species may be individuated on the basis of the intrinsic
properties of their members. The various species concepts tend to
offer relational criteria of species membership (see above).
According to the BSC, for example, membership of a species depends on
relational properties, such as membership of a certain population and
interbreeding. Alternatively, the PSC refers to shared descent.
However, Kripke (1980) himself argues that a person's parentage is
essential to them. If that is so, then if individual S is
descended from
N, then S is necessarily descended
from N. McGinn (1976) suggests that this extends to species
also.  LaPorte (2004) argues that essentialism holds with respect to
facts relating individuals, species, and other taxa to the higher taxa
(genus and above) within which they are nested. These taxa are clades,
that is to say kinds defined by shared descent from a common ancestral
group: an individual or group that is a member or part of clade is
necessarily a member or part of that clade. Thus biological kinds
(species, genera, etc.) do have essential properties, and these are
historical rather than intrinsic properties. 
So one option for biological essentialism is to drop the
traditional view that the natural properties that are essential for
membership of a natural kind are intrinsic:
natural, extrinsic (relational) properties can play this role
(Okasha 2002). The categorical distinctness criterion must be dropped
also.
On account of the problems for natural kinds in biology as well as
the development of modern chemistry, chemical kinds have replaced
biological kinds as the paradigms of natural kinds. The chemical
elements and chemical compounds appear to be bona fide
natural kinds. We refer to chemical kinds in laws, explanations, and
inductions: that a certain item is iron explains its behaviour and
that behaviour is predictable; that iron objects are magnetizable is a
law of nature (criteria
 2
 and 3
 above). Moreover, we can induce that all iron is magnetizable, from the
observation of particular instances of iron objects that are magnetic. And chemical
kinds appear to obey the categorical distinctness requirement: iron is
clearly distinct from its neighbours in the periodic table (manganese
and cobalt); no elements are intermediate kinds 
 (criterion 6
 above). Furthermore, microstructural essentialism seems to be a prima
facie plausible option for chemical kinds: it is essential
to iron that something made of pure iron is constituted by atoms that
have precisely 26 protons in their nuclei.
Microstructuralism in the philosophy of chemistry is the thesis that
chemical kinds can be individuated solely in terms of their
microstructural properties (Hendry 2006). As exemplified above by the
case of iron, the chemical elements provide paradigmatic kinds that may
be individuated microstructurally, since the atomic number—the number
of protons in the nucleus—suffices to identify the element. It is true
that macro-level chemical and physical properties can also serve to
individuate chemical elements, and in the nineteenth century chemists
were able to individuate elements without knowing what we do about
nuclear structure. However, it is held that atomic number has
explanatory priority: the number of protons in the nucleus, and hence
the nuclear charge, explains the structure of electrons surrounding
the nucleus, which, in turn, explains the chemical behaviour of the
element.
The microstructuralist can extend this approach from elements to
compounds. Compounds are identified principally by their constituent
elements. Thus carbon dioxide is that compound of carbon and oxygen
with the molar proportion 1:2. In more detail, molecules of carbon
dioxide consist of two oxygen atoms and a single carbon atom. The
practice of identifying a chemical compound only by its composing
elements was the norm in chemistry, until the discovery of isomerism
by Friedrich Woehler in 1827. Isomers are distinct compounds that
nonetheless share the same constituent elements in the same
proportion. Thus fulminic acid and cyanic acid may both be expressed
in terms of constituents in the empirical formula CHNO, but their
distinct chemical and physical properties identify them as different
substances. The explanation of isomerism (and many other facts in
organic chemistry), provided first by August Kekulé and
Archibald Scott Couper, is the fact that certain compounds exist in
molecular form and these molecules have internal structure. Thus
molecules of isomers have the same atoms in different spatial
arrangements, e.g., CHNO may be arranged as H–O–C≡N
(cyanic acid) or as H–C=N–O (fulminic acid). Isomerism
means that specifying the chemical composition alone is not sufficient
for classification. The microstructure of a compound concerns not just
the elemental atoms in its molecules, but also their spatial
arrangement.
Needham (2000) and van Brakel (2000) have argued that compounds such
as water are dynamic structures whose natures cannot be given in
static accounts of their composing elements. Molecules of
H2O are polar, with the consequence that the
electropositive hydrogen atoms in one H2O molecule will
bond with the electronegative oxygen atoms in another H2O
molecule, such bonds being hydrogen bonds with the result
that in liquid water H2O molecules will form polymer-like
chains known as oligomers.  The hydrogen bonds and the
consequent chains are responsible for the fact that water is liquid at
room temperature (whereas compounds with similarly sized molecules,
such as hydrogen sulphide, methane, and carbon dioxide, are all
gaseous at room temperature). These oligomers are constantly forming,
breaking, and reforming. The rate of such changes and the mean length
of such oligomers are dependent on the thermodynamic context (in the
extreme case, an ice crystal may be considered as a single such
oligomer, the crystal structure being dependent on the fixed, strong
hydrogen bonds). Thus, say Needham and van Brakel, we cannot consider
water to be just a compound composed of a collection of H2O
molecules. Furthermore, anything that is to be water must be a
macroscopic entity, since only macroscopic bodies can bear
thermodynamic properties, such as melting point, which we use to
identify water. Hence, a single H2O molecule is not
water.
These considerations need not undermine the microstructuralist claim.
Many chemical kinds may exist in any of the solid, liquid, and gaseous
states while remaining the same substance, including water. But,
water vapour will not possess the oligomers present in liquid water
and ice. So their presence, however characteristic of water in the
liquid and solid phases, cannot be a necessary feature of all bodies
of water. Above we saw that atomic number is regarded as the essential
feature of an element because it explains the other characteristics an
element has. Likewise, the structure of the H2O molecule 
explains why it is a strongly polar molecule, which in turn explains
why it tends to form oligomers. As regards thermodynamic properties,
Hendry (2006) points out that we say that water is contained in a
person's body, without thinking that this water has any thermodynamic
properties. More generally, thermodynamic properties can be
ascribed only to entities in equilibrium, but not all bodies of water
are in thermodynamic equilibrium or even nearly so. We may very well
use such thermodynamic properties in identifying something as water,
but that does not mean that it is in virtue of such properties that
something is water.
Hendry (2006) points to a potentially more difficult problem,
which is that any liquid sample of water, however pure, contains not
only H2O molecules but also H3O+
and OH− ions. These ions cannot be regarded as impurities, 
since they are also an inevitable consequence of the polar structure 
of the H2O molecule. Hendry's solution is to regard 
H2O molecules as the constituents of water in rather
the same sense that eggs and flour are the constituents of a
cake—they go into making the cake but need not retain exactly
the form they started with. Water is made from bodies of
H2O molecules, but not all those retain precisely that
structure.
The taxa in the classical Linnean system of biological classification
are nested in a hierarchy, as required by
 criterion 5 
 in Section 1.1. But, in certain respects, chemical classification fails to 
meet this requirement. The phenomenon of allotropy is exhibited when 
an element exists in two or more distinct forms. The element carbon has
several, including the allotropes diamond and graphite. Tin
has two allotropes at room tempreature, white tin (which is metallic) and grey tin (which
is non-metallic). Some instances of tin will fall into one category and
other instances will fall into the other category. Consequently,
classification by element and classification by metal or non-metal
cannot be combined hierarchically.
Such cross-cutting classifications are frequently found in organic
chemistry, where compounds can be classified according to their
so-called functional groups. Functional groups are specific
combinations of atoms within a molecule that will cause the molecule
to engage in certain reactions and to have other physical and chemical
properties that are characteristic of that group. For example,
alcohols are organic compounds containing a hydroxyl group −OH
bound to a carbon atom of an alkyl group or derivative of an alkyl
group. Alcohols undergo characteristic reactions such as
esterification. Since other hydrogen atoms in an alcohol molecule may
be substituted by another functional group, the resulting molecule
will have properties characteristic of both functional groups and may
be classified accordingly. Benzyl alcohol,
C6H5CH2OH (or BnOH), is obtained from
methane, CH4, by replacing one hydrogen atom by an
alcohol-forming hydroxyl group, −OH, and another by the phenyl
group −C6H5 (Ph) (the phenyl group plus
the CH2 from the methane is the benzyl group, i.e.
Bn is PhCH2). Thus benzyl alcohol may be classified either
as an alcohol, or as an aromatic benzene derivative, since it
participates in the characteristic reactions of the latter, such as
electrophilic aromatic substitution or hydrogenation of the benzene
ring. If the hierarchy requirement on a system of natural kinds is
correct, then not all these cross-cutting classifications pick out
natural kinds. The claim that the hierarchy requirement is too
stringent for scientific kinds has been defended by Khalidi (1998) and
Tobin (2010b). 
One may have to deny that metals form a natural kind, and that
classification by functional group is a classification into natural
kinds. (Not all classifications need to be into kinds in order for them
to be useful.) Note that in both cases, there is room for vagueness.
Some elements, such as germanium and antimony, are classed
as metalloids, with characteristics between metals and non-metals. The
impact of a functional group diminishes with the size of the molecules
of which it is a part and in the presence of competing functional
groups, and so in certain cases, classification according to functional
group will be vague. Such vagueness falls foul of the categorical
distinctness requirement
 (criterion 6 
 above).
Do the different sorts of mental state form natural kinds? We
certainly think that our minds make a difference to what happens in
the physical world and we think that we act because
we have certain beliefs, desires, hopes, fears etc. The distinctive
explanatory roles performed by these different states in folk
psychology certainly suggest that these beliefs, desires, hopes and
fears constitute distinct mental natural kinds. Note that in
considering natural kinds in chemistry, biology, and physics we have
thought of kinds principally as kinds of thing (kinds of stuff,
organism, particle, etc.) whereas we are now considering the
possibility of certain kinds of state. (Ellis (2001, 2002) 
is clear that he does not limit natural kinds to kinds of thing, but 
includes kinds of state and process also.) A Cartesian dualist holds
that mental states are distinct from any physical state of the
subject, as they are states of an immaterial thinking substance. The
problem for dualism however is in finding the ground of the difference
between fearing, believing, hoping etc. i.e. what difference is there
to the immaterial substance when a subject is in different mental
states? In principle this problem could be avoided by the dualist if
mental kinds are regarded as immaterial substances (Shoemaker 2003). 
There are many ways to understand mental natural kinds, and theories
have been proposed by eliminativists, identity theorists,
functionalists and many others. We will treat each of these in turn. 
Physicalists hold that the differences in mental kinds relate somehow to 
differences in states of the subject's brain, or, more generally, 
the subject's body. At one extreme, the (type) identity theory of mind
holds that types of mental state are identical with types of brain
state. If so, we may expect the kinds of psychology to be identical with
the kinds of neuroscience. 
The identity theory faces the problem of multiple
realizability—the idea that it is possible for physically
diverse creatures to be in the same kind of mental state. It is
possible, for example, that Martian neurophysiology might be entirely
different from that of humans while Martians nonetheless have the same
kinds of mental state as humans have; if a Martian's body is injured,
it writhes, groans, and avoids the causes of such injuries—the
Martian is in pain (Lewis 1980). Indeed it is possible that cognitive
scientists might design a machine that is capable of higher-level
thought (implemented on, for example, a silicon architecture). It is
even possible that the same mental kinds be realized by distinct
neurophysiological systems in one and the same organism over
time. Consequently, it is at least an open empirical possibility that
mental kinds may correspond to a widely disjunctive and heterogeneous
set of neurophysiological kinds, and hence that there is no one-to-one
correlation between them. 
Eliminativism argues that the prima facie failure to
straightforwardly reduce mental kinds to neurophysiological kinds
ought to lead to the elimination of mental kinds altogether
(Churchland 1981, 1988). This is to claim that there are no mental
natural kinds. On this view, the mental kinds in folk psychology are
comparable to the kinds delineated by discredited folk theories from
the past e.g., the humours in medieval medicine. The underlying
principle of medieval medicine was the balancing of so-called four
humours. According to the theory, illness was caused by an imbalance
of these four humours.  From the point of view of modern medicine this
theory is radically false and so the only option is to eliminate the
humours as putative natural kinds. Analogously, mental kinds ought to
be eliminated in favour of those kinds uncovered by recent research in
neuroscience. Eliminativists agree that human beings have invented a
very successful methodology for describing their mental lives. This
methodology is folk psychology, a common sense theory of how mental
states are causally related to human action.  However, folk
psychology, they argue, is merely a heuristic device invented by human
beings in order to make the explanation of behaviour easier.  The
posits of the theory are not real natural kinds. Once a better
explanation of human behaviour in terms of neurophysiological kinds is
available, then mental kinds will be eliminated. 
Functionalists argue that the irreducibilty of mental kinds is
nevertheless compatible with a token-token identity theory (Fodor
1974, 1997). Mental kinds are not type-identical with neurophysiological
kinds (i.e. there is not one type of neurophysiological
correlate for each type of mental state, so we cannot make general
identity statements such as “pain = C-fibres
firing”). A Martian and I, both in a state of fear at a
time t, may be in different physiological
states. Nevertheless, my token instance of the kind fear at time
t will be identical with the token physical state in my brain
at that time. Likewise, the token instance of the Martian's fear at
time t1 is identical with his token physical state. 
It has been argued by Kim (1992, 1993) that multiply realized mental
kinds of the latter kind can in principle be locally reduced to their
realizing states. Mental kinds are analogous to mineral kinds such as
jade, which can be locally reduced to
nephrite or jadeite depending on the sample. Importantly, a sample 
that does not consist of either nephrite or jadeite is simply not jade. 
Nevertheless, there is an important disanalogy between mental kinds and 
locally reduced kinds like jade. If you want a sample of jade, then it 
must be composed of either jadeite or nephrite. In other words, if 
J (jade) is realized by the disjunction P (Jadeite) or 
Q (Nephrite), then it is metaphysically necessary that the 
properties a thing has qua J are either properties it
has qua P or properties it has qua Q. 
So, something with all the other qualitative properties of
jade in another possible world, but which lacked the essential 
properties (i.e., jadeite or nephrite) would simply not be 
an instance of jade.
In contrast, for the functionalist (Fodor 1997) mental kinds are
defined by their functional roles, rather than by the essential
properties of the neurophysiological kinds that realize them. It does
not matter which physical kind does the realizing, be it silicon
chips, neurons, C-fibres or whatever. Rather, what matters is
that the psychological state (e.g., pain) plays a certain functional
role. The whole point of multiple realizability is that it is easy to
imagine some possible world where a token mental kind is realized by
silicon chips, C-fibres firing, or whatever. So, a mental
kind is not essentially realized by a certain neurophysiological kind;
rather it plays the same functional role independently of what
underlying kind is realizing it. This appears to
violate criterion 1) for natural kinds (in
Section 1.1.1); namely, that members of a natural kind should have
some natural properties in common.
The functional role of mental kinds is explained by some
functionalists in terms of the modularity of the mind (Fodor
1983). This is the claim that the mind has different innate modules
which play a certain functional role. These modules are
domain-specific, operating only on certain kinds of inputs. So, for
example, there will be distinct modules for mental tasks like
mind-reading, speaker recognition and facial recognition. The
functional role associated with mental kinds might for example be
given an evolutionary account in terms of adapted modules (Cosmides
and Tooby 1992). On this view, mental kinds in folk psychology are
successful for the purposes of the explanation of human behaviour
because they refer to the functional modules of the mind. Such views
may motivate emergentism. One interpretation of the
emergentist account of mind is that there are emergent mental kinds
that have no straightforward correlation with the kinds identified by
neuroscience. Nor are mental kinds and neurophysiological kinds either
identical to or subkinds of one another; consequently emergentism is in
conflict with the (contested) taxonomic hierarchy criterion
(criterion 5).  (See the entry on
 emergent properties.)
The type-identity theory, if true, might seem to motivate essentialism
about psychological kinds, by analogy with other theoretical
identities (cf.
 Section 1.3.1
 and
 Section 3.3).
 Kripke (1980), however, 
denies that his arguments concerning other theoretical identities
apply here. Let us say that (slow) pain for us humans is correlated
with the firing of C-fibres. If this were a genuine 
theoretical identity, then in all possible worlds, when someone
undergoes C-fibre firing, then they are in a state of pain.
But it seems plausible that there could be worlds where C-fibre 
stimulation is not accompanied by any painful sensation. If there are 
such worlds, then the theoretical identity implies that such a world 
is one where people can be in pain without having any painful sensation; 
indeed the pain might yield a pleasant sensation. Kripke regards this 
as counterintuitive. The concept of pain is necessarily tied to the 
phenomenal nature of the pain sensation, whereas the concept of gold 
is not tied to the colour yellow. Consequently, there is no identity 
between pain and C-fibre firing (nor any other physical state); 
likewise there is no physical essence to pain. A posteriori natural 
kind essentialism fails in this case. 
Recently, there has been some discussion of whether mental concepts
are themselves natural kinds. The claim that concepts form a natural
kind has been accepted by philosophers of psychology and cognitive
psychologists alike (Margolis, 1994, 1995; Fodor, 1998, 2008). Recent
literature has argued against that assumption (Griffiths 1997; Machery
2005, 2009; Piccinini and Scott 2006). Griffiths 1997 has argued that
individual and familiar concepts such as emotion do not correspond to
genuine natural kinds, and should therefore be eliminated from
scientific vocabulary. Machery's (2009, Ch. 3) heterogeneity
hypothesis claims furthermore that the class of concepts do not
delineate a homogeneous class; the kind ‘concept’. Rather, they divide
into several distinct kinds that actually have little in common. Thus,
it is a mistake to assume that there are many general properties of
concepts, and that a theory of concepts should attempt to describe
these. In general, then the notion of concept is not part of an
adequate taxonomy of our mental representation.
The question as to whether there are social kinds has a long
history. In the sociology of science, functionalists such as Durkheim
(1897) have argued that there is empirical support for the autonomy of
social facts. For example, statistical analysis shows that suicide
rates differed radically depending on social factors, (e.g. religious
background, gender, marital status etc.) This analysis led to the
possibility of social science being taken in a quantitative
direction. Even if every individual commits suicide as a result of
psychological factors, the statistical facts about the
“reasons” for suicide and how they change with place and
over time are distinctly social. One question then is whether one
should be naturalist about such social facts. If so, how could
naturalism be reconciled with the claim that social facts are dynamic
and changing in so far as they concern human beings in social
interactions?
Because social kinds are distinctly anthropocentric, some theorists
claim that the only plausible view we can hold is some form of
constructivism about them. Hacking (1995, 1999) argues that in social
contexts the object of classification itself changes in being
classified. The fact that the people being classified are conscious
makes for dynamic interactions between the classification and the
classified.  The latter may resist or embrace certain classifications
(‘child abuser’, ‘hip’) and modify their
behaviour accordingly.  This leads to an change in the extensions of
the relevant kind concepts. Furthermore, as the extensions change, the
criteria for membership may change also. Many of our classifications
in social science are evaluative. A social situation looks deviant
from the norm and people make an evaluative judgment about
this. Sometimes this means that people passively accept what experts
say about them, and see themselves in that light. But feedback can
direct itself in many ways. Alternatively, some people seek to
reclassify themselves. Thus, classification in social science is
interactive. Hacking argues that this is in marked contrast to the
indifferent kinds that are found in natural science.  An electron is
indifferent to being classified as an electron.
Pace Hacking, Khalidi (2010) argues that in fact the
contrast between natural and social kinds is not so stark: even many
chemical kinds would not have been instantiated in the world were it
not for the fact that a scientist conceived of it and acted on that
conception. So in both cases the existence of a classification scheme
can cause changes to the extension of the kinds in question. The
difference between natural kinds and social kinds is a difference of
the degree of control we have over the object of classification. In
the chemical domain, for example, the nature of the phenomena
themselves imposes greater restrictions on the kinds that we can
create.  (See also Cooper 2004.)
Much recent interest in natural kinds has been stimulated by debates
concerning the semantics of natural kind terms, originating especially
with the work of Saul Kripke (1972) and Hilary Putnam (1973,
1975a). Typical natural kind expressions fall into one of two
categories: predicates (is water, is gold, is a
tiger, and
is an oak) and singular terms (water,
gold, the tiger, and the oak).  In this
section we survey some of the debates concerning the meaning of such
terms, what—if anything—they refer to, and how they do
so. Many discussions focus on the predicate kind terms, often
considering them alongside other general terms, taking the principal
issue to be the relationship between a natural kind term and its
extension. Such an approach will appeal to conventionalists, but it may appeal also
to those naturalists who are nominalists about natural kinds or
otherwise hostile or indifferent to (strong) realism about natural
kinds. However, we shall see that there may be reason to take the
singular kind terms as primary. (One difference between Putnam and
Kripke is that while Putnam tends to focus on the natural kind
predicates, Kripke's arguments are centered primarily on the singular
natural kind terms.) Kripke and Putnam attacked a pair of related
views about natural kind terms: descriptivist semantics (the meaning
of such a term is a description satisfied by all and only members of
the kind) and internalism (the meaning of such a term, the relevant
description, is fully grasped by competent users of the term so that
what fixes the extension of the term supervenes on what is internal to
the user).  Putnam's rejection of descriptivism is a component of his
argument that ‘meaning ain't in the head’ whereas for
Kripke the goal is to show that natural kind terms are much like
proper names, for which, he argues, a descriptivist semantics
fails. Members of the extension of a natural kind share properties in
common.  If descriptivism were true, then one would reasonably believe
that those properties would be the properties mentioned in the
description with the possible addition of further properties nomically
correlated with those.  But if descriptivism is false, it would appear
that the characteristic properties of a kind will not typically be
knowable a priori, but must be uncovered by scientific investigation.
If so, then those properties, being necessary conditions of kind
membership but discoverable only a posteriori, look very much
like real essences.  At first sight it seems then that the
semantic arguments of Kripke and Putnam have metaphysical
consequences.  This is highly controversial (Salmon 1979, 1982). Do
the arguments of Putnam and Kripke really support an essentialist
metaphysics? Or do they illegitimately assume it? Or do they, more
innocently, show that we as users of natural kind terms implicitly
assume such a metaphysics?
The modern tradition of natural kinds begins with J. S. Mill (1884)
who talked of ‘Kinds’ (the term ‘natural kind’
is traced by Hacking (1991a) back to Mill's contemporary, the logician
John Venn (1886)). According to Mill, typical singular (individual)
names such as ‘Scott’ denote their referents but
lack any connotation, that is to say the names do not imply
any attribute.  Some singular names do have connotation as well as
denotation, for example ‘the author of Waverley’.  A
general name, such as ‘white’, denotes all the things they
hold of (its extension) while also connoting the attribute they all
share in common. Natural kind terms are a special case of general
terms in this respect
The idea that something such as a connotation determines the extension
of a term is elaborated in Frege's notion of sense
and, later, that of intension. Frege and later philosophers have
applied this view to singular proper names, and views of this sort
fall under the general heading of ‘descriptivism’.
Russell is also often referred to in this regard, but it should be
remembered that Russell's view is that grammatically proper names 
are abbreviations of quantified expressions and so do not have any
referring role at all (and so a fortiori they do not have a 
referring role that is meditated by a connotation/sense/intension).
Some neo-Fregeans nevertheless deny that Fregean senses should be
cashed out as descriptions (e.g., McDowell 1977; Evans
1982). 
Mill's descriptivism implies that for each natural kind term there is
an associated set of properties such that for some item to be a member
of that natural kind, it should possess those properties—these
are properties that describe objects belonging to the kind in
question. Implicit in Mill and explicit in Frege is the claim that
these descriptions are constitutive of the meaning of the term in the
following way: someone who understands the term adequately will be
in a position to grasp a priori that something falls under
the kind term if and only if it satisfies that description. For this
reason the relevant properties will normally be readily observable
properties of things; they will not be properties associated with the
kind only by a posteriori investigation. For example, as mentioned
above, Kant held the view that it is a priori that something
falls under the kind term gold only if it is a yellow
metal. Because the extension-fixing meaning of a term is thus
graspable a priori this view is internalist about
extension fixing. The extensions of kind terms of any two subjects
with the same internal mental states will have (in the same context)
the same extensions.
Putnam (1973, 1975a) and Kripke (1972) reject the descriptivist view of
natural kind terms. Putnam's principal aim is to undermine internalism
about reference and extension (“meanings just ain’t in the
head”). Kripke's aim is first to restate a Millian view of 
proper names (they denote without connoting) and then to extend that view 
to natural kind terms. (‘Millian’ will be used to characterize 
any account of the semantics of a term that claims that it denotes without
connoting, even when applied, pace Mill, to kind terms.)
According to Kripke, Mill was right about proper names but wrong about
kinds; Millianism—Mill's denotation-without-connotation
view—is right for both sorts of term. Salmon (1982) categorizes
Kripke's arguments against descriptivism for singular terms under the
headings ‘the modal arguments’, ‘the epistemological
arguments’, and ‘the semantic arguments’—this 
categorization is useful also for the corresponding arguments against 
descriptivism for general terms.
The modal arguments against descriptivism take the following form.
Let C be some natural kind and D be some complex set
of readily observable properties that would, on a descriptivist view,
be most naturally regarded as providing the content of the description
that constitutes the meaning of ‘C’.  Now
consider:
Since D is constitutive of the meaning of
‘C’, (K) should be analytic and so necessary.
The descriptive view would thus be refuted either by (i)
metaphysically possible instances of the kind C that do not
possess the property complex D or by (ii) metaphysically
possible items that do possess the property complex D without
being instances of C.
Some proposed cases of (i) require the laws of nature to be contingent.  Although
the laws of nature are widely held to be contingent, some philosophers hold that
the laws are necessary, on the basis of essentialist arguments that
are much of a piece with Kripke's essentialist arguments, even if
strictly independent of them. The anti-descriptivist arguments regard
the observable properties of instances of a kind C as nomic
consequences of the essence of C. If the laws of nature are
metaphysically necessary then D will be a necessary property
of instances of C also.  Thus, instances of (i) will not be
available. If the laws are necessary, then the melting point of gold
will be necessary just as the atomic number of gold is. However, not
all observable properties are consequences of the laws alone. Some are
consequences of the laws plus contingent environmental factors.  Thus
the perceived colour of an object may change with environmental
differences. Thus if looking yellow is a component
of D, then a possible world in which gold does not look
yellow (because of unusual atmospheric effects)—surely a genuine
possibility—would be a counterinstance of type (i). On the other
hand, it might be argued, that the proper component of D
would be being yellow, in which case we will have the makings
of an epistemological argument against descriptivism (see below).
Other cases of (i) might be thought to be generated, irrespective of
the necessity of the laws, by noting that a kind might be manifested
in two or more superficially distinct species. Thus allotropes are
distinct types of a single chemical kind that may differ considerably
in superficial properties (for example, graphite and diamond, both
types of the element carbon). Similarly, a caterpillar and a butterfly
can be members of the same species. For known cases, D would
have to be disjunctive. While that may not itself be problematic, it
raises the epistemic possibility that the same phenomenon may be
(nomically and metaphysically) possible for many kinds that we think
exist in only one form.
Cases of (ii) may be more readily available, since the necessity of
laws may rule out a particular kind having different possible sets of
manifest properties, but does not rule out two distinct possible kinds
having the same manifest properties. Indeed, the case of jadeite and
nephrite is often referred to as an example of the latter. Along the
same lines, we may imagine that something like fool's gold, iron
pyrites, is just like gold in observable properties, differing only in chemical
constitution. We may imagine that there were creatures to all
appearances like cats, but which are internally robots; or just like
tigers but had reptilian innards. These are all metaphysically
possible, so the arguments go; hence, possession of the relevant
properties cannot suffice for membership of the corresponding
kind.
The modal argument does not refute descriptivism applied to every
description—after all, Kripke and Putnam do both think that the 
description “is constituted by H2O” holds 
necessarily of anything that is water. Rather, the modal argument is 
intended to exclude as possible descriptions those that could be 
constitutive of a sense or connotation that is grasped by any 
competent user of the term. Such a sense, if it exists, would 
employ descriptions that refer to the observable features of the 
members of a kind, not those features uncovered by science.
The epistemological arguments against descriptivism have a similar
structure to the modal arguments. Consider again the proposition (K).
Someone who uses the term ‘C’ competently should be
thereby able to come to know that (K) is true, in virtue of grasping
the meaning of ‘C’. Thus (K) should be a
priori. So counterexamples to descriptivism would be cases (i)
where although one knows that some thing is of the kind C one
cannot thereby come to know that it possesses the property
complex D, or (ii) where although one knows that some thing
possesses the property complex D, one cannot thereby come to
know that it is of the kind C.
To generate epistemological type (i) cases, Kripke asks us to imagine
that gold might be blue but only appears yellow thanks to an optical
illusion, or that tigers do not normally have four legs, but only
appear that way, again thanks to an illusion. However, if the
descriptions associated with ‘gold’ were to include
‘is yellow’ and the descriptions associated with
‘tiger’ include ‘is four-legged’ then we would
know a priori that these possibilities do not obtain. But
that seems to be a mistake. Although we may reasonably be confident
that gold really is yellow and not blue, and not just appearing that
way, this confidence is not a priori but is instead a
consequence of a posteriori experience of the conditions
under which we have observed samples of gold. It is a matter of
discovery whether we are subject to this kind of illusion, or whether
something that is in fact white or grey could be gold; for example it
is only a posteriori that we know that gold does not have
white and grey allotropes, as tin does. (What is called ‘white
gold’ is in fact an alloy of gold; but given a description of
its appearance, it is not a priori that it is not gold. This
is a contrapositive version of an epistemological type (i) case.)
Likewise, turning to epistemological type (ii) cases, if descriptivism
were correct, we could rule out a priori the possibility that
something has all the superficial properties of gold, but is not
gold. But again we do not have such a priori knowledge (again
we note that jadeite is superficially similar to nephrite but not the
same kind).
Putnam's Division of Linguistic Labor may be thought of as furnishing
an epistemological argument. Putnam's idea is that the referent of a
term used by some individual may be fixed not by their own knowledge
or beliefs, but rather by the knowledge of certain experts to whom
that individual defers. Since aluminium and molybdenum are different
kinds, then according to descriptivism there should be some a
priori knowable features that will distinguish between them for
anyone who is capable of using ‘aluminium’ to refer to the
one kind and ‘molybdenum’ to the other kind.  Likewise
there should be some mental difference between a speaker in the actual
world who uses ‘aluminium’ to refer to aluminium and a
speaker in another world, where the instances of aluminium and
molybdenum are swapped (pans and cans are made of molybdenum there),
who uses ‘aluminium’ to refer to molybdenum. But, says,
Putnam, no such difference need exist: ordinary speakers have these
differentiated referring capacities without any difference in
knowledge of the referents. That is because those referential
capacities are parasitic on those of the experts who do have the
required discriminating knowledge (Putnam, 1975b, 228). Their
knowledge fixes the referents of their use of ‘aluminium’
and ‘molybdenum’.  Our deference to them as those people
who could tell us which things are aluminium and which are molybdenum,
means that our referents of ‘aluminium’ and
‘molybdenum’ are the same as theirs.
The modal and epistemological arguments concern the modal and
epistemic properties of propositions of the form of (K). If
descriptivism were correct then there should be for each
kind, C, a proposition of that form employing a
manifest property complex D, such that the proposition 
is analytic and hence both necessary and a priori. 
The modal and epistemological arguments deny this.
Note that the modal and epistemological arguments are most naturally
presented in the material mode, concerning the objects themselves and
their relations. (K) is in the material mode and we ask about its
modal status, by talking about certain stuff and asking whether it is
or would be gold if it had such-and-such properties, and so
forth. Likewise, mutatis mutandis, for the epistemological
arguments.  The semantic arguments differ in that they are presented
in the formal mode, concerning the linguistic expressions in
question. This is because we are asking what a term's reference or
extension would be in certain counterfactual circumstances. To use an
example concerning a proper (singular) name, we start by imagining
that it turns out that Johannes Kepler had not been the first to
postulate the laws of planetary motion, whereas it was an unknown
student of Kepler's who did this first. Many people have no beliefs
about Kepler other that that he was the first person to postulate
those laws. If our story were true, would the name
‘Kepler’, as used by such people, refer to the student or
to the teacher? Our intuition, so anti-descriptivists maintain, is
that the name would still refer to the teacher, the man we (falsely)
believed to be responsible for the discovery of the laws of planetary
motion. Yet, if the descriptivist account were correct for proper
names, then with respect to the people under consideration, their use
of ‘Kepler’ would either refer to the student, or would
fail to refer at all.
Both Putnam and Kripke take arguments of this sort to generalize to
natural kind terms. The best known of the semantic arguments as
applied to natural kind terms is Putnam's Twin Earth thought
experiment (see
 Section 1.3.1).
 Putnam asks us to imagine that elsewhere in the universe there is a
planet exactly like Earth in virtually all respects, which we may call
‘Twin Earth’. However, where on Earth we find
H2O, on Twin Earth we find XYZ, a substance with a
fundamentally different chemical structure from H2O, but
which shares all its manifest properties (boiling and freezing points,
taste, odour, ability to support life, being the predominant
constituent of precipitation, seas, lakes etc.)  with
H2O. Every inhabitant of Earth has a twin equivalent on
Twin Earth. Twin Earthlings (at least those in the parts bearing a
geographical similarity to Earth's United States, Australia,
Jamaica, Pitcairn etc.) speak a language rather like English and use
the term ‘water’ in circumstances precisely analogous to
our uses of ‘water’ on Earth, e.g., they say that their
lakes and reservoirs are full of ‘water’.
The semantic Twin Earth argument now proceeds by asking what the
extension of ‘water’ is, as used by some Earthling, and
likewise what the extension of ‘water’ is, as used by some
Twin Earthling. Putnam's appeal to our linguistic intuitions is
supposed to yield the verdict that the extension of the Earthling's
use of ‘water’ includes all and only H2O
whereas the Twin Earthling's use of ‘water’ includes all
and only XYZ. In support of this we may consider that this is the
judgment we must come to if we Earthlings are not to deny what Earth
chemists tell us, viz. that water is H2O, nor,
symmetrically, deny the Twin Earth chemists’ assertion,
‘water is XYZ’. Nor will it do to gainsay our
chemists’ judgment that water is H2O, given the
assumption of the existence of XYZ. For that is tantamount to the
suggestion that (actual) Berzelius (the discoverer of the correct
chemical formula for water) was not entitled to assert that water is
H2O until he had ruled out the possibility of some
substance other than H2O sharing water's manifest
qualities.
The thought experiment is now almost in a position to claim the
foregoing as a counterexample to descriptivism, for XYZ will satisfy
any set of manifest properties that could be constitutive of the
meaning of ‘water’ as used on Earth. Yet the extension of
that term excludes XYZ. However, the reference to chemists’
knowledge made above reminds us that there is a difference between not
only the physical constitution of Earth and Twin Earth, but also a
difference between the psychological states of their inhabitants. For
(some of) those on Earth believe ‘water is H2O’
whereas their Twin Earth counterparts believe ‘water is
XYZ’.  Perhaps, at least for those speakers, those beliefs are
also constitutive of the meanings of the two terms ‘water’
(Earth) and ‘water’ (Twin Earth). In order to exclude this
response, Putnam asks us to consider the same comparison made in 1750,
before any beliefs of this form were held. We now assume that there
has been no major change in the (cross-temporal) extension of
‘water’ (Earth) since 1750. (That is to say, when David
Hume asked for a glass of what he called ‘water’, he was
requesting the same stuff as we are when we make a request using the
same term.) Since, as argued above, the extensions of
‘water’ (Earth) and ‘water’ (Twin Earth)
differ today, their extensions differed in 1750. But in 1750 the
descriptions associated with the word ‘water’ cannot
differ between Earth and Twin Earth. This is because the molecular
structure of water was unknown in 1750, prior to the chemical
revolution (when phlogiston theory was replaced by Lavoisier's new
oxygen theory). Given that the molecular structure was unknown even to
the experts, the descriptive resources available to Earthians and
their Twin Earthian counterparts were identical. Nonetheless, their
references using ‘water’ differed. Hence, descriptions do
not suffice to fix reference.
The conclusions of the arguments given above include not only the
falsity of descriptivism as a thesis about the reference of natural
kind terms, but also the more general truth of semantic
externalism.  The Earthling in 1750 and their Twin Earth
counterpart are supposed to be intrinsic physical duplicates. (There
is a problem in that one would expect the twin to have XYZ in its
blood stream, etc., not H2O, so the two are not perfect
duplicates; but we can take it that this physical difference should
not affect the argument.) Although they are duplicates, the terms they
use have different extensions; likewise their thoughts have different
truth conditions. Consequently, the reference, extension, and truth
conditions of a person's utterances do not supervene on their physical
state. These things are fixed, at least in part, by external
considerations. We might retain a conception of the psychological such
that the psychological still supervenes on the physical; but then one
would have to deny that ‘thinking about water’
characterizes a psychological state. Or, we must deny that the
psychological state of a subject supervenes upon the physical state of the subject.
If descriptions do not fix extensions, and some external factor fixes
extensions, then by what process are extensions fixed? Kripke does not 
intend to propose a new theory of reference fixing, although the outlines of
such a theory are fairly clearly implied by what he says. His principal aim 
is to make the case for the Millian denotation-without-connotation view of 
singular proper names, and then extend this (contrary to Mill's own 
opinion) to certain general terms also, including natural kind terms.
The Millian view may be called direct reference (Kaplan
1977), since the reference of singular proper name is not mediated by
a connotation/sense/intension. The semantic value of such a name just
is the individual to which it refers. Such terms are thus
rigid designators—they denote the same object with respect to all
possible worlds (Kripke 1980, 48). How does this view extend to natural kind 
terms? The answer is that the view does not transfer if we take the analogue 
of the denotation of a singular term to be the extension of a kind term. This is
because presumably the extension of a kind term differs from world to world, 
since the individual members of a kind, such as individual tigers and lumps 
of gold, are generally contingent entities.
The obvious route to an analogy between kind terms and singular direct
reference is to focus not on natural kind predicates but on singular
natural kind terms (cf. first paragraph of
 Section 3
 above). We should regard terms such as ‘water’, 
‘gold’, ‘Rattus rattus’, etc. 
as denoting abstract individuals and objects (or some other 
kinds of entity that may be the constant recipient of reference
across worlds). Thus the direct reference view applied to such
terms says that the semantic value of those terms just is those
abstract individuals, and the claim that the terms are rigid
designators is the claim that they denote the same abstract
individual, the same natural kind, with respect to all possible
worlds. Rigid designation is a consequence of direct reference (but
not vice versa). (See Martí 2003 for a discussion of the relationship
between Millianism, direct reference, and rigid designation. See also
Sullivan 2005.)
Treating kinds as abstract individuals permits an analogue for natural
kind terms to the natural story concerning the reference of singular
proper names that emerges from Kripke's discussion. In the simplest
case, an individual receives a name in a naming ceremony, and the use
of that name is transferred from speaker to speaker, preserving its
reference through each transfer. Thus the reference of a later use is
determined by tracing back the route of transmission to the original
naming ceremony. In the natural kind case, which is rather more of an
idealization than the case of a concrete particular, the original
naming ceremony picks out a natural kind via an ostension of one of
its samples. This is the so-called ‘causal’ theory of
reference.  Note that ‘causal’ refers to the causal
transmission of the use of the name. (Although an ostensive reference
fixing will be causal, the link between the kind (or its sample) and
the first use of the kind term could be secured by a reference-fixing
description.  In such as case the reference-fixing description does
merely that; it does not supply a meaning (sense or intension).
Thus far Kripke's account of the semantics of natural kind terms
treats them very much on a par with proper names, suggesting that
kinds are much like abstract individuals, being potential recipients
of singular reference—Millianism has been extended from proper
names of individuals to natural kind terms. (Mill's own view of
‘general terms’ was not Millian in this sense, but closer
to a Fregean view.) Putnam gives a more elaborate account of the
reference of natural kind terms, which apparently does not depend on
treating kinds as abstract individuals. According to Putnam, the
extension of a natural kind term is fixed by ostending or otherwise
identifying a sample of the kind and appealing, explicitly or
implicitly, to a ‘same kind relation’. Thus the extension
of ‘water’ includes all and only those things that bears
the same kind relation to some sample, which may be specified loosely,
for instance as ‘the watery stuff around here’ (where
‘watery’ is defined in terms of the manifest
characteristics of water, not in terms of ‘water’). (Note
that Putnam says ‘same liquid relation’, but that would
not provide the extension of a natural kind term, since it would
exclude the gaseous and solid phases of water.) Putnam (1975a) thereby
extends the notion of rigid designation to general terms, since (a)
the same kind relation is a cross-world relation, and (b) it is
anchored to a specific, actual world sample. Consequently all samples
of water in all possible worlds will bear the same kind relation to
one another. That this excludes XYZ depends upon its being the case
that a sample that does not share the ‘important physical
properties’ of our sample cannot be of the same kind.
The view that natural kind terms are rigid designators has
consequences for identity statements involving natural kind terms
(e.g., “brontosaurus is apatosaurus”). The reason is that
any identity statement relating two rigid designators is necessarily
true. Hence identity statements involving natural kind terms express
necessary truths, even if knowable only a posteriori. Kripke
regards theoretical identities such as ‘water =
H2O’, where one of the terms is a description, as
instances of such a posteriori necessary identities. Such a
claim requires an argument to show that ‘H2O’
is a rigid designator, since it is not a directly referring
expression. We may take ‘H’ and ‘O’ to
designate hydrogen and oxygen rigidly. However, if the formula
‘H2O’ just means ‘hydrogen and oxygen
compounded in the ratio 2:1’ one might wonder whether, if the
laws of nature are contingent, there might be worlds where hydrogen
and oxygen are compounded in that ratio in such a way that the
resulting compound does not belong to the same kind as H2O,
and is not water. If that is possible, then
‘H2O’ is not a rigid designator, and
‘water = H2O’ is not necessary.  (As noted
above, Putnam's Twin Earth thought experiment does not establish the
identity of water and H2O—all it establishes is that
being constituted of H2O is a necessary condition of being
water. In which case it is consistent with some instances (actual and
possible) of H2O not being water.) Most discussions accept
that to count H2O as a substance it must be compounded of
hydrogen and oxygen in the way that they are actually compounded. The
rigid designation of simple, directly referring names and kind terms
is often explained in terms of their having an indexical character. In
ideal cases where the name is introduced via an ostension of its
intended referent, the designation is literal. In other cases
indexicality is less apparent, as we see in the case of
‘water’ where there is something like an implicit
ostension of ‘watery stuff around here’ (though
‘water’ could not mean ‘watery stuff around
here’, since then the referent of ‘water’ would then be
different in an XYZ environment).  A similar implicit indexicality is
found in the theoretical specification of kind terms, which explains
their rigid character also.
The Millian view applied to simple natural kind terms faces 
various problems. One of these problems concerns empty terms. 
‘Phlogiston’, ‘caloric’, 
‘ether’, ‘humour’, are all
natural kind terms that fail to refer to anything. Millianism 
implies that there is no semantic difference between these terms 
at all. Surely ‘phlogiston does not exist’ 
and ‘caloric does not exist’ mean different things; 
Lavoisier asserted the first and denied the second with apparent 
consistency. The most common response to this problem is a retreat 
from pure Millianism for such terms. Some descriptive element 
is included in their semantics.
This need not be a full retreat to a Fregean view for two reasons. The
descriptive element may not suffice to pick out the kind (in the
non-empty cases)—the implicit historical ostension of a sample
may be necessary to fix reference. And the description itself may have
non-Fregean features—it may have an indexical component, for
example, a reference to the actual world, that a Fregean would
deny. The retreat from pure Millianism (and a partial vindication of
Mill's own view of general terms, which Kripke
rejected) need not undermine the claim that kind terms are
rigid designators. Rigid designation does not require direct
reference; complex theoretical expressions, such as
‘H2O’, may, as we saw, also be rigid
designators.
Several philosophers have argued that rigid designation for kind and
other general terms faces a serious objection: rigid designation for
kind terms is trivial (Soames 2002; Schwartz 2002; Martí 2004). Rigid
designation requires that the object designated by a rigid designator
be the same in all worlds. That requirement rules out the extension of
a kind term as its designation, since the same kind may have different
extensions in different worlds. On the other hand, regarding the
extension as an abstract individual also faces difficulties. One might
take ‘Mary's favourite colour’ to designate different
colours in different worlds, and thus understood it is not a rigid
designator. But we could take ‘Mary's favourite colour’ to
designate (rigidly) an unusual abstract
individual Mary's-favourite-colour, which has violet things
as its extension in the actual world, but turquoise things in another
possible world and so on. This thought experiment suggests that it is
always possible to regard a general term as a rigid designator. One
option for resisting this move is to deny that in every case there is
some entity for the term to refer to. There is no thing abstract or
concrete that is
Mary's-favourite-colour. Property terms may denote a natural
property, in Lewis's (1986) terms a
sparse property or they do not denote at all. Similarly, 
natural kind terms denote genuinely natural entities that are likewise
 sparse or they fail to denote.
Above we saw that an identity statement conjoining two rigid
designators expresses a necessary truth, one that may be knowable
only a posteriori. That follows simply from the definition of
‘rigid designator’. We have also seen that natural kind
terms are rigid designators. That seems simply to be a fact about the
semantics of natural kind terms. Consequently it looks as if a
non-trivial metaphysical fact—that there are necessary truths
knowable only a posteriori—is a consequence of Kripke's
semantics for natural kind terms. Furthermore, when we consider
theoretical identities, such as ‘water is H2O’
and ‘gold is the element with atomic number 79’ etc., it
appears that we are being given a special kind of necessary truth, a
truth that it necessary because it specifies the essence of a
kind.
The conclusion that we can derive metaphysical facts from semantic
ones has been regarded as highly questionable by many commentators.
How could facts about our use of terms lead to
conclusions about the essences of things and kinds?
Furthermore, the anti-descriptivist semantics involved is closely related 
to semantic externalism, but the latter need not imply essentialism, as Tyler
Burge's social externalism shows (Burge 1979, 1986). Nathan Salmon
(1982) argues that no non-trivial essentialist consequences can be
inferred from a theory of reference.
One might take the view that the apparent derivation of a metaphysical
conclusion from semantic premises is a sleight of hand, with hidden
essentialist premises being smuggled into the argument. If one were to
assume that ‘H2O’ is a rigid designator, one
might be accused of tacitly assuming metaphysical
essentialism. However, one might alternatively take the view that
semantics and metaphysics are more intimately related. For
example, one might hold that the semantics itself makes certain
metaphysical assumptions, in which case the metaphysics would follow
from the semantics, but innocently and for fairly trivial reasons. Note that a
thoroughgoing Fregean descriptivism also has metaphysical
consequences, since it rules out essentialism. According to the view
that the correct semantics implies an essentialist metaphysics, the
semantic claim that ‘water’ is a rigid designator is
itself metaphysically loaded. But this is not to say that Putnam,
Kripke, and other philosophers are smuggling in metaphysical
assumptions. Rather, it is to say that competent users of the term
tacitly make those assumptions. Putnam's Twin Earth thought
experiments make those assumptions explicit. Note that, as the above
discussion has shown, while the thought experiments are normally
expressed in the formal mode—we ask whether XYZ would fall within 
the extension of the term ‘water’ (Earth)—the essentialist 
conclusion can be reached directly by phrasing the same question in the 
material mode: we ask whether XYZ would be water.