An ambition of twentieth-century philosophy was to analyse and refine
the definitions of significant terms—and the concepts
expressed by them—in the hope of casting light on the tricky
problems of, for example, truth, morality, knowledge and existence that
lay beyond the reach of scientific resolution. Central to this goal
was specifying at least in part the conditions to be met for correct
application of terms, or under which certain phenomena could truly be
said to be present. Even now, philosophy’s unique contribution to
interdisciplinary studies of consciousness, the evolution of
intelligence, the meaning of altruism, the nature of moral obligation,
the scope of justice, the concept of pain, the theory of perception
and so on still relies on its capacity to bring high degrees of
conceptual exactness and rigour to arguments in these areas.
 If memory is a capacity for tracking our own past experiences and
witnessings then a necessary condition for Penelope remembering giving
a lecture is that it occurred in the past. Contrariwise, that Penelope
now remembers the lecture is sufficient for inferring that it was
given in the past. In a well-known attempt to use the terminology of
necessary and sufficient conditions to define what it is for one thing
to be cause of another thing, J. L. Mackie proposed that causes are at
a minimum INUS conditions, that is, “Insufficient but Necessary
parts of a condition which is itself Unnecessary but Sufficient”
for their effects (Mackie 1965). What, then, is a necessary (or a
sufficient) condition? This article shows that complete precision in
answering this question is itself elusive. Although the notion of
sufficient condition can be used in defining what a necessary
condition is (and vice versa), there is no straightforward way to give
a precise and comprehensive account of the meaning of the term
“necessary (or sufficient) condition”
itself. Wittgenstein’s warnings against premature theorising and
overgeneralising, and his insight that many everyday terms pick out
families, should mandate caution over expecting a complete and
unambiguous specification of what constitutes a necessary, or a
sufficient, condition.
The front door is locked. In order to open it (in a normal,
non-violent way) and get into the house, I must first use my key. A
necessary condition of opening the door, without violence, then, is to
use the key.  So it seems true that
Can we use the truth-functional understanding of “if” to
propose that the consequent of any conditional (in (i), the consequent
is “I used the key”) specifies a necessary condition for
the truth of the antecedent (in (i), “I opened the door”)?
Many logic and critical thinking texts use just such an approach, and
for convenience we may call it “the standard theory” (see
Blumberg 1976, pp. 133–4, Hintikka and Bachman 1991, p. 328 for
examples of this approach).
 The standard theory makes use of the fact that in classical logic,
the truth-function “p ⊃ q”
(“If p, q”) is false only when p is
true and q is false.  The relation between
“p” and “q” in this case is
often referred to as material implication.  On this account of
“if p, q”, if the conditional
“p ⊃ q” is true, and p holds,
then q also holds; likewise if q fails to be true, then
p must also fail of truth (if the conditional as a whole is to
be true). The standard theory thus claims that when the conditional
“p ⊃ q” is true the truth of the
consequent, “q”, is necessary for the truth of the
antecedent, “p”, and the truth of the antecedent is
in turn sufficient for the truth of the consequent.  This relation
between necessary and sufficient conditions matches the formal
equivalence between a conditional formula and its contrapositive
(“~q ⊃ ~p” is the
contrapositive of “p
⊃ q”). Descending from talk of truth of statements to
speaking about states of affairs, we can equally correctly say, on the
standard theory, that using the key was necessary for opening the
door.
Given the standard theory, necessary and sufficient conditions are
converses of each other, and so there is a kind of mirroring or
reciprocity between the two: B’s being a necessary condition
of A is equivalent to A’s being a sufficient condition
of B (and vice versa).  So it seems that any truth-functional
conditional sentence states both a sufficient and a necessary
condition as well. Suppose that if Nellie is an elephant, then she has
a trunk. Being an elephant is a sufficient condition of her having a
trunk; having a trunk in turn is a necessary condition of Nellie’s
being an elephant. Indeed, the claim about the necessary condition is
simply another way of putting the claim about the sufficient
condition, just as the contrapositive of a formula is logically
equivalent to the original formula.
 
It is also possible to use “only if” to identify a
necessary condition: we can say that Jonah was swallowed by a whale
only if he was swallowed by a mammal, for if a creature is not a
mammal, it is not a whale. The standard theory usually maintains that
“If p, q” and “p only if
q” are equivalent ways of expressing the truth-functional
“p ⊃ q”. Equivalent to (i) above, on
this account, is the sentence “I opened the door only if I used
the key”—a perfectly natural way of indicating that use of
the key was necessary for opening the door.
 The account of necessary and sufficient conditions just outlined is
particularly apposite in dealing with logical conditions.  For
example, from the truth of a conjunction, it can be inferred that each
component is true (if “p and q” is true,
then “p” is true and “q” is
true).  Suppose, then, that it is true that it is both raining and
sunny.  This is a sufficient condition for “it is raining”
to be true.  That it is raining is—contrariwise—a
necessary condition for it being true that it is both raining and
sunny. A similar account seems to work for conceptual and definitional
contexts. So if the concept of memory is analysed as the concept of a
faculty for tracking actual past events, the fact that an event is now
in the past is a necessary condition of my presently recollecting it.
If water is chemically defined as a liquid constituted mainly of
H2O, then if a glass contains water, it contains mainly
H2O.  That the glass contains mostly H2O is a necessary
condition of its containing water.
Despite its initial appeal, objections to the standard theory have
been made by theorists from a number of backgrounds.  In summary, the
objections build on the idea that “if” in English does not
always express a uniform kind of condition.  If different kinds of
conditions are expressed by the word “if”, the objectors
argue, then it would be wise to uncover these before engaging in
attempts to formalize and systematize the concepts of necessary
and sufficient.  In trying to show that there is an ambiguity
infecting “if”-sentences in English, critics have focused
on two doctrines they regard as mistaken: first, that there is a
reciprocity between necessary and sufficient conditions, and, second,
that “if p, q” and “p only if
q” are equivalent.   
Given any two true sentences A
and B, the conditional “If A, then B”
is true. For example, provided it is true that the sun is made of gas
and also true that elephants have four legs, then the truth-functional
conditional “If elephants have four legs, then the sun is made
of gas” is also true. However, the gaseous nature of the sun
would not normally be regarded as either a conceptually, or even
a contingently, necessary condition of the quadripedality of
elephants. Indeed, according to the standard theory, any truth will be
a necessary condition for the truth of every statement whatsoever, and
any falsehood will be a sufficient condition for the truth of any
statement we care to consider.
 These odd results would not arise in some non-classical logics where
it is required that premisses be relevant to the conclusions drawn
from them, and that the antecedents of true conditionals are likewise
relevant to the consequents.  But even in those versions of relevance
logic which avoid some of these odd results, it is difficult to avoid
all of the so-called “paradoxes of implication”.  For
example, a contradiction (a statement of the form “p and not
p”) will be a sufficient condition for the truth of any
statement unless the semantics for the logic in question allow the
inclusion of inconsistent worlds (for more details,
see logic: relevance, and for an
account of relevance in terms of the idea of ‘meaning
containment’ see chapter 1 of Brady 2006).
These oddities might be dismissed as mere anomalies were it not for
the fact that writers have apparently identified a number of other
problems associated with the ideas of reciprocity and equivalence
mentioned at the end of the previous section.  According to the
standard theory, there is a kind of reciprocity between necessary and
sufficient conditions, and “if p,
q” sentences can always be paraphrased by “p
only if q” ones. However, as writers in linguistics have
observed, neither of these claims matches either the most natural
understanding of necessary (and sufficient) conditions, or the
behaviour of “if” (and “only if”) in
English. Consider, for example, the following case (drawn from
McCawley 1993, p. 317):
 While in the case of the door, using the key was necessary for
opening it, no parallel claim seems to work for (ii): in the natural
reading of this statement, my screaming is not necessary for your
touching me. McCawley claims that the “if”-clause in a
standard English statement gives the condition—whether
epistemic, temporal or causal—for the truth of the
“then”-clause. The natural interpretation of (ii) is that
my screaming depends on your touching me. To take my screaming as a
necessary condition for your touching me seems to get the dependencies
back to front.  A similar concern arises if it is maintained that (ii)
entails that you will touch me only if I scream.
 A similar failure of reciprocity or mirroring arises in the case of
the door example ((i) above). While opening the door depended,
temporally and causally, on using the key first, it would be wrong to
think that using the key depended, either temporally or causally, on
opening the door. So what kind of condition does the antecedent state?
To get clear on this, we can consider a baffling pair of conditional
sentences (a modification of Sanford 1989, 175–6):
Notice that these two statements are not equivalent in meaning, even
though textbooks standardly treat “if p, q”
as just another way of saying “p only if q”.
While (iii) states a condition under which I buy Lambert a cello
(presumably he first learns by using a borrowed one, or maybe he hires
one), (iv) states a necessary condition of Lambert learning to play
the instrument in the first place (there may be others too).  Indeed,
if we take them together, the statements leave poor old Lambert with
no prospect of ever getting the cello from me.  If (iv) were just
equivalent to (iii), combining the two statements would not lead to
an impasse like this.
 But how else can we formulate (iii) in terms of “only if”?  A
natural, English equivalent is surprisingly hard to formulate.
Perhaps it would be something like:
 where the auxiliary (“has”/“have”) has been
introduced to try to keep dependencies in order.  Yet (v) is not quite
right, for it can be read as implying that Lambert’s success is
dependent on my having first bought him a cello—something that
is certainly not implied in (iii).  A still better (but not completely
satisfactory) version requires further adjustment of the auxiliary,
say:
 This time, it is not so easy to read (vi) as implying that I bought
Lambert a cello before he learned to play.  These changes in the
auxiliary (sometimes described as changes in “tense”) have led some
writers to argue that conditionals in English involve implicit
quantification across times (see, for example, von Fintel
1998). Assessment of this claim lies beyond the scope of the present
article (see the entry on
  conditionals
 and the detailed discussion in Bennett 2003).
What the case suggests is that different kinds of dependency
are expressed by use of the conditional construction: (iv) is not
equivalent to (iii) because the consequent of (iii) provides what might be called a reason for
thinking that Lambert has learned to play the cello.  By contrast,
the very same condition—that I buy Lambert a cello—appears
to fulfil a different function in (iv) (namely that I first
have to buy him a cello before he learns to play).  In the following
section, the possibility of distinguishing between different kinds of
conditions is discussed.  The existence of such distinctions
is evidence for a systematic ambiguity about the meaning of “if” and in the concepts
of necessary (and sufficient) condition.
The possibility of ambiguity in these concepts raises a further
problem for the standard theory. According to it—as von Wright
pointed out (von Wright 1974, 7)—the notions of necessary
condition and sufficient condition are themselves interdefinable:
A is a sufficient condition of B
=df the absence of A is a necessary
condition of the absence of B
B is a necessary condition of A =df
the absence of B is a sufficient condition of the absence of
A
Ambiguity would threaten this neat interdefinability. In the following
section, we will explore whether there is an issue of concern
here. The possibility of such ambiguity has been explored in work by
Downing (1959, 1975), Wilson (1979), and has also been raised more
recently in Goldstein et al. (2005), ch. 6.  These writers have argued
that in some contexts there is a lack of reciprocity between necessary
and sufficient conditions understood in a certain way, while in other
situations the conditions do relate reciprocally to each other in the
way required by the standard theory.  If these critics are right, and
ambiguity is present, then there is no general conclusion that can
safely be drawn about reciprocity, or lack of it, between necessary
and sufficient conditions. Instead there will be a need to
distinguish the sense of condition that is being invoked in a
particular context. Without specification of meaning and context, it
would also be wrong to make the general claim that sentences like
“if p, q” are generally paraphrasable as
“p only if q”.  By means of a semi-formal argument, Carsten Held has suggested a way of explaining why necessary and sufficient conditions are not converses, making appeal to a version of truthmaker theory (Held 2016).  In what follows, we do not follow this route, but instead explore ways of making sense of the lack of reciprocity between the two kinds of conditions in terms of the difference between inferential, evidential and explanatory uses of conditionals.
Are the following two statements equivalent?  (see Wertheimer 1968,
363–4):
Sanford argues that while (vii) is sensible, (viii) “has things
backward” (Sanford 1989, 176–7). He writes: “the
statement about the battle, if true, is true because of the occurrence
of the battle. The battle does not occur because of the truth of the
statement” (ibid.) What he probably means is that the
occurrence of the battle explains the truth of the statement, rather
than explanation being the other way around. Of course, people
sometimes do undertake actions just to ensure that what they had
formerly said turns out to be true; so there will be cases where the
truth of a statement explains the occurrence of an event. But this
seems an unlikely reading of the sea battle case.
 Now let S be the sentence “There will be a sea battle
tomorrow”. If S is true today, it is correct to infer
that a sea battle will occur tomorrow.  That is, even though the truth
of the sentence does not explain the occurrence of the battle, the
fact that it is true licenses the inference to the occurrence of the
event. Ascending to the purely formal mode (in Carnap’s sense), we can
make the point by explicitly limiting inference relations to ones that
hold among sentences or other items that can bear truth values. It is
perfectly proper to infer from the truth of S today that some
other sentence is true tomorrow, such as “there is a sea battle
today”. Since “there is a sea battle today” is true
tomorrow if and only if there is a sea battle tomorrow, then we can
infer from the fact that S is true today that a sea battle will
occur tomorrow.
From this observation, it would appear that there is a gap between
what is true of inferences, and what is true of explanations. There is
an (inferential) sense in which the truth of S is both a
necessary and sufficient condition for the occurrence of the sea
battle.  However, there is an (explanatory) sense in which the
occurrence of the sea battle is necessary and sufficient for the truth
of S, but not vice versa.  It would appear that in
cases like (vii) and (viii) the inferences run in both
directions, while explanations run only one way.  Whether we read
(vii) as equivalent to (viii) will depend on the sense in which the
notions of necessary and sufficient conditions are being deployed.
 Is it possible to generalize this finding?  Our very first example seems to be a case in point.  The fact I used the key explains why I was able
to open the door without force. That I opened the door without force
gives a ground for inferring that I used the key. Here is a further
example from McCawley:
 John’s winning the race is a sufficient condition for us having a
celebration, and his winning the race is the reason why we will be
celebrating. Our celebration, however, is not likely to be the reason
why he wins the race. In what sense then is the celebration a
necessary condition of John’s winning the race?  Again, there is a
ground for inferring: that we don’t celebrate is a ground for
inferring that John didn’t win the race. English “tense” usage is
sensitive to the asymmetry uncovered here, in the way noted in the
previous section. The natural way of writing the contrapositive of
(ix) is not the literal “If we will not celebrate, then John does not
win the race”, but rather something like:
or
or even
Inferential reciprocity and explanatory non-reciprocity seems to be no
different in the case of conditionals than in the case of logical and
mathematical equations in general. For example, Newton’s classical
identity, f = ma, can be rewritten in equivalent forms
such as a = f/m or
f/a = m. These all state just the same thing, from an
algebraic point of view. Now let us suppose that force is a measure of
what brings a particle to a certain state. Then we would say that
while force causes acceleration, the ratio f/a does not cause,
or explain, mass, even though it does determine it (see the
Epilogue of Pearl 2000 for a non-technical attempt at tackling
the representation of causal intervention by algebraic notations).
 There are at least three different relations to be
distinguished in connection with conditional statements, each of which bears on questions of necessity and sufficiency. First is the
implication relation symbolised by the hook operator,
“⊃” or perhaps some relevant implication operator.
Such an operator captures some inferential relations as already noted.
For example, we saw that from the truth of a conjunction, it can be
inferred that each component is true (from “p and
q”, we can infer that “p” is true and
that “q” is true).  Hook, or a relevant implication
operator, seems to capture one of the relations encountered in the sea
battle case, a relation which can be thought of as holding paradigmatically
between bearers of truth values, but can be loosely thought of in
terms of states of affairs. For this relation, we are able to maintain
the standard theory’s reciprocity thesis with the limitations already noted.
 Two further relations, however, are often implicated in reflections
on necessary and sufficient conditions. To identify these, consider
the different things that can be meant by saying
 One scenario in terms of which (xiii) can be understood is where
Lambert is invariably a lively contributor to any seminar he
attends. Moreover, his contributions are always insightful, hence
guaranteeing an interesting time for all who attend. In this case,
Lambert’s presence explains or was the reason why the seminar was good. A
different scenario depicts Lambert as someone who has an almost
unerring knack for spotting which seminars are going to be good, even
though he himself is not always active in the discussion. Lambert’s
attendance at a seminar, according to this story, provides a reason
for thinking that the seminar is going to be good.  We might say
that according to the first story, the seminar is good because Lambert
is at it. In the second case, Lambert is at it because it is good.
Examples of this kind were first introduced in Wilson (1979) inspired
by the work of Peter Downing (Downing 1959, 1975).  Notice that the
hook (as understood in classical logic) does not capture the reason
for thinking relation, for it permits any truth to be inferred
from any other statement whatever.
 The reason why and reason for thinking that conditions
may help to shed light on the peculiarities encountered earlier.  That I
opened the door is a reason for thinking that I used the key, not a
reason why.  In case (iii) above, that he learns to play the instrument is the reason why I will buy Lambert a cello, and that I buy him a cello
is (in the same case) a reason for thinking that—but not a
reason why—he has learned to play the instrument.  Our
celebrating is a reason for thinking that John has won the race in
case (ix), but not a reason why.
 Although there is sometimes a correlation between reasons why, on the
one hand, and evidentiary relations, on the other, few generalisations
about this can be safely made (although Wilson 1979 puts forward a
number of suggestions about the connections between these
notions). If A is a reason why B has occurred (and so perhaps also is evidence that B has occurred), then the occurrence of B will sometimes be a reason for thinking—but not a guarantee—that A has occurred. If A is no more than a reason for thinking that
B has occurred, then B will sometimes be a reason
why—but not a guarantee that—A has occurred.  Going back to our initial example, my opening the door without violence was
a reason for thinking, that is to say evidence, that I had used the key. That I used the key,
however, was not just a reason for thinking that I had opened the
door, but one of the reasons why I was able to open the door. What is
important is that the “if” clause of a conditional may do any of three things described in the present section.  One of these is well captured by classical truth-functional logic, namely (i) introduce a sentence from which the consequent follows in the way modelled by an operator such as hook.  But there are two other jobs that  “if” may do as well, namely: (ii) state a reason why what is stated in the consequent is the case; (iii) state a reason for thinking that what is stated in the consequent is the case (but not state a reason why it is the case).
In general, if explanation is directional, it may not seem surprising that when A explains B, it is not usually the case that B, or its negation, is in turn an explanation
of A (or its negation).  John’s winning the race explains our celebration, but our failure to celebrate is not (normally) a plausible explanation of his failure to win.  Lambert’s presence may explain why the seminar was such a great success, but a boring seminar is not—in any normal set of circumstances—a reason why Lambert is not at it.  This result undermines the usual understanding that if A is a sufficient condition of B, it will typically be the case that B is a necessary condition
for A, and the falsity of B a sufficient condition for the falsity of A. 
In defence of contraposition, it might be argued that in the case of causal claims there is at least a weak form of
contraposition that is valid. Gomes proposes (Gomes 2009) that where
‘A’ is claimed to be a causally sufficient
condition for ‘B’, or ‘B’ a
causally necessary condition of ‘A’, then some form
of reciprocity between the two kinds of conditions holds, and so
some version of contraposition will be valid.  Going back to example
(ii), suppose we read this as stating a causal condition—that
your touching me would cause me to scream.  Gomes suggests that
‘A’ denotes a sufficient cause of
B, provided that (1) ‘A’
specifies the occurrence of an event that would cause another event
‘B’, and does this by (2) stating a condition the truth of which is sufficient for inferring the truth of
‘B’.  In such a case, we could further maintain
that ‘B’, in turn, denotes a necessary effect of
‘A’, meaning that the truth of B
provides a necessary condition for the truth of A
(Gomes 2009, 377–9). This proposal preserves contraposition by treating causal conditionals as inferential. 
 While it is possible to distinguish these different roles the
“if” clause may play (there may be others too), it is not
always easy to isolate them in every case.  The appeal to
“reasons why” and “reasons for thinking”
enables us to identify what seem to be ambiguities both in the word “if”
and in the terminology of necessary and sufficient conditions.
Unfortunately, the concept of explanation itself is too vague
to be very helpful here, for we can explain a phenomenon by citing a
reason for thinking it is the case, or by citing a reason why it is
the case.  A similar vagueness infest the word “because”, as we see in a moment.   Consider, for example, cases where mathematical,
physical or other laws that are involved
(one locus classicus for this issue is Sellars 1948).  The truth of “that figure is a polygon” is
sufficient for inferring “the sum of that figure’s exterior
angles is 360 degrees”. Likewise, from “the sum of the figure’s exterior angles is not 360 degrees” we can infer “the figure is not a polygon”. Such inferences are not trivial. Rather they depend on geometrical definitions and mathematical principles, and so this is a case of mathematically necessary and sufficient conditions.  But it appears quite plausible that mathematical results also give us at least a
reason for thinking that because a figure is a polygon its exterior angles will sum to 360 degrees.  We may even be able to think of contexts in which the fact a figure is a polygon provides a reason why its exterior angles sum to 360 degrees.  And it might not be unnatural for someone to remark that a certain figures is a polygon because its exterior angles sum to 360 degrees. 
 A similar point holds for the theory of knowledge where it is generally held that if I know that
p, then p is true. The truth of p is a necessary
condition of knowing that p, according to such accounts.
In saying this we do not rule out claims stronger than simply
saying that the truth of p follows from the fact that we know
that p.  That a belief is true—for example—may
be (part of) a reason for thinking it constitutes knowledge. Other
cases involve inferences licensed by physics, biology and the natural
sciences—inferences that will involve causal or nomic
conditions. Again there is need for care in determining whether
reason why or reason for thinking relations are being
stated. The increase of mean kinetic energy of its molecules does not
just imply that the temperature of a gas is rising but also provides a
reason why the temperature is increasing.  However, if temperature is
just one way of measuring mean molecular kinetic energy, then a change
in temperature will be a reason for thinking that mean kinetic energy
of molecules has changed, not a reason why it has changed.
 As mentioned at the start of the article, the specification of
necessary and sufficient conditions has traditionally been part of the
philosopher’s business of analysis of terms, concepts and phenomena.
Philosophical investigations of knowledge, truth, causality,
consciousness, memory, justice, altruism and a host of other matters
do not aim at stating explanatory relations, but rather at identifying
and developing conceptual ones (see Jackson 1998 for a detailed
account of conceptual analysis). But even here, the temptation to look for reasons why
or reasons for thinking that is not far away. It might be said that conceptual analysis is like dictionary definition, hence eschewing evidential and explanatory conditions.  But at least evidential conditions seem to be natural consequences of definition and analysis.  That Nellie is an elephant is not a (or the) reason why she is an animal, any more than that a figure is a square is a reason why it has four sides. But some evidential claims seem to make sense even in such contexts: being an elephant apparently gives a reason for thinking that Nellie is an animal, and a certain figure may be said to have four sides because it is a square, in the evidential sense of “because”.  
To specify the necessary conditions for the truth of the sentence “that figure is a square” is to specify a number of conditions including “that figure has four sides”, “that figure is on a plane”, and “that figure is closed”. If any one of these latter conditions is false, then the sentence “that figure is a square” is also false.  Conversely, the truth of “that figure is a square” is a sufficient condition for the truth of “that figure is closed”.  The inferential relations in this case are modelled to some extent—albeit inadequately, as noted earlier—by an operator such as hook. 
Now consider our previous example—that of memory.  That Penelope
remembers something—according to a standard account of
memory—means (among other things) that the thing remembered was
in the past, and that some previous episode involving Penelope plays
an appropriate causal role her present recall of the thing in
question.  It would be a mistake to infer from the causal role of some
past episode in Penelope’s current remembering, that the definition of
memory itself involves conditions that are explanatory in the
reason why sense.  That Penelope now remembers some event is
not a reason why it is in the past.  Rather,
philosophical treatments of memory seek for conditions that are a
priori constitutive of the truth of such sentences as
“Penelope remembers doing X”.  The uncovering of such conditions does not explain Penelope’s now remembering things, but simply provides insight into whether, and how,
“remember” is to be defined. Reason why and reason for thinking that conditions do not play a role in this part of the philosopher’s enterprise.  
 Finally, it should be noted that not all conditional sentences
primarily aim at giving necessary and/or sufficient conditions. A
common case involves what might be called jocular
conditionals. A friend of Lys mistakenly refers to “Plato’s
Critique of Pure Reason” and Lys remarks, “If Plato
wrote the Critique of Pure Reason, then I’m
Aristotle”. Rather than specifying conditions, Lys is engaging
in a form of reductio argument. Since it is obvious that she is
not Aristotle, her joke invites the listener to infer (by
contraposition) that Plato did not write the Critique of Pure
Reason.
 Given the different roles for “if” just identified, it is
hardly surprising that generalisations about necessary and/or
sufficient conditions are hard to formulate. Suppose, for example,
someone tries to state a sufficient condition for a seminar being good
in a context where the speaker and all the listeners share the view
that Lambert’s presence is a reason why seminars would be good. In
this case, Lambert’s presence might be said to be a sufficient
condition of the seminar being good in the sense that his presence is
a reason why it is good. Now, is there a similar sense in which the
goodness of the seminar is a necessary condition of Lambert’s
presence?  The negative answer to this question is already evident
from the earlier discussion.  If we follow von Wright’s proposal,
mentioned above, we get the following result: that the seminar is not
good is a sufficient condition of Lambert not being present. But this
cannot plausibly be read as a sufficient condition in anything like
the sense of a reason why. At most, the fact of the seminar not being
a good one may be a reason for thinking that Lambert was not at it. So
how can we tell, in general, what kind of condition is being expressed
in an “if” sentence?  As noted in the case of the sea
battle, when rewriting in the formal mode captures the sense of what
is being said, and when the formulations
“if p, q” and “p only
if q” seem idiomatically equivalent, then an inferential
interpretation will be in order, von Wright’s equivalences will hold,
and the material conditional gives a reasonable account of
such cases with the limitations pointed out earlier. 
 As already noted, even the inferential use of “if” is not
always associated primarily with the business of stating necessary and
sufficient conditions.  This observation, together with the cases and
distinctions introduced in the present article, show the need for
caution when we move from natural language conditionals to analysis of
them in terms of necessary and sufficient conditions, and also the
need for caution in modelling the latter conditions by means of
logical operators. It appears that there are
several kinds of conditionals, and several kinds of conditions. So
although we can—and do—sometimes use conditional
statements to express necessary and sufficient conditions, and can
explicate necessary and sufficient conditions by analysis of some of
the roles of “if” in natural language conditionals, this
does not give us as much as we might hope for.  In particular, there
seems to be no general formal scheme for translating between
conditionals as used in natural language and the statement of any one
particular type of condition, or vice versa.