The concept of Négritude emerged as the expression of a revolt
against the historical situation of French colonialism and racism. The
particular form taken by that revolt was the product of the encounter,
in Paris, in the late 1920s, of three black students coming from
different French colonies: Aimé Césaire (1913–2008) from
Martinique, Léon Gontran Damas (1912–1978) from Guiana and
Léopold Sédar Senghor (1906–2001) from Senegal. Being
colonial subjects meant that they all belonged to people considered
uncivilized, naturally in need of education and guidance from Europe,
namely France. In addition, the memory of slavery was very vivid in
Guiana and Martinique. Aimé Césaire and Léon Damas
were already friends before they came to Paris in 1931. They were
classmates in Fort-de-France, Martinique, where they both graduated
from Victor Schoelcher High School. Damas came to Paris to study Law
while Césaire had been accepted at Lycée Louis Le Grand
to study for the highly selective test for admission to the prestigious
École Normale Supérieure on rue d’Ulm. Upon his arrival at
the Lycée on the first day of classes he met Senghor who had
already been a student at Louis le Grand for three years.
Césaire has described his first encounter with Senghor as
friendship at first sight which would last for the rest of their fairly
long lives. He has also added that their personal friendship meant the
encounter between Africa and the African
 Diaspora.[1]
Césaire, Damas and Senghor
had individual lived experiences of their feeling of revolt against a
world of racism and colonial domination. In the case of Césaire
that feeling was expressed in his detestation of Martinique which, as
he confessed in an interview with French author Françoise Vergès, he
was happy to leave after high school: he hated the “colored
petit-bourgeois” of the island because of their
“fundamental tendency to ape Europe” (Césaire 2005,
19). As for Senghor, he has written that in his revolt against his
teachers at College Libermann high school in Dakar, he had discovered
“négritude” before having the concept: he refused to accept
their claim that through their education they were building
Christianity and civilization in his soul where there was nothing but
paganism and barbarism before. Now their encounter as people of African
descent regardless of where they were from would lead to the
transformation of their individual feelings of revolt into a concept
that would also unify all Black people and overcome the separation
created by slavery but also by the prejudices born out of the different
paths taken. Césaire has often evoked the embarrassment felt by
people from the Caribbean at the idea of being associated with Africans
as they shared Europe’s ideas that they were now living in the
lands of the civilized. He quotes as an example a
“snobbish” young Antillean who came to him protesting that
he talked too much about Africa, claiming that they had nothing in
common with that continent and its peoples: “they are savages, we
are different” (Césaire 2005, 28).
Beyond the encounter between Africa and the French Caribbean
Césaire, Senghor and Damas also discovered together the American
movement of Harlem Renaissance. At the “salon”, in Paris,
hosted by sisters from Martinique, Jane, Paulette and Andrée
Nardal, they met many Black American writers, such as Langston Hughes
or Claude McKay. With the writers of the Harlem Renaissance movement
they found an expression of black pride, a consciousness of a culture,
an affirmation of a distinct identity that was in sharp contrast to
French assimilationism. In a word they were ready to proclaim the
négritude of the “new Negro” to quote the title of the
anthology of Harlem writers by Alain Locke which very much impressed
Senghor and his friends (Vaillant 1990, 93–94).
An important precision needs to be made here about the space
created by the Nardal sisters for Negritude. Thus, T. Deanan
Sharpley-Whiting calls attention to the fact that a “masculinist
genealogy constructed by the poets and shored up by literary
historians, critics, and Africanist philosophers continues to elide
and minimize the presence and contributions of black women, namely
their francophone counterparts, to the movement’s evolution”
(Sharpley-Whiting, 2000, 10). And she quotes a letter from Paulette
Nardal, written in 1960, in which she “‘bitterly
complained’ of the erasure of her and Jane Nardal’s roles in the
promulgation of the ideas that would later become the hallmarks of
Césaire, Damas, and Senghor” (Sharpley-Whiting, 2000,
10). It must be recalled, in particular, concerning the
“genealogy” of the movement, that an article by Jane
Nardal, entitled “Internationalisme noir”, published in
1928, predated by more than ten years the first important theoretical
article published by Senghor: “What the Black Man
Contributes” (published in 1939). What Jane Nardal says in her
short article about a “Negro sprit” transcending the
differences inevitably created by the course of history, about the
importance of “turning back toward Africa (…) in remembering a
common origin”, or about the significance, first and foremost
for the Africans themselves, of the discovery by Europeans (first the
“snobs and artists” among them) of “Negro art”
and, more generally, “the centers of African civilizations,
their religious systems, their forms of government, their artistic
wealth” (Nardal, 2002, 105–107), are all notions and themes that
will be developed by Senghor, Césaire, and Damas.
The proclamation of Negritude would be done when the three friends founded the journal
L’Etudiant noir, in 1934–1935 where the word was coined
by Aimé Césaire. It was meant to be (and, above all, to
sound like) a provocation. Nègre,
derived from the Latin “niger”, meaning
“black”, is used in French only in relation to black people
as in “art nègre”. Applied to a black person it had
come to be charged with all the weight of racism to the point that the
insult “sale nègre” (dirty
nègre) would be almost redundant, “sale” being
somehow usually understood in “nègre”. So to coin
and claim the word “Négritude”
(Négrité, using the French suffix
–ité instead of -itude was considered
and dropped) as the expression of the value of “blackness”
was a way for Césaire, Senghor and Damas of defiantly turning
“nègre” against the white supremacists who used it
as a slur. In sum the word was and has continued to be an irritant.
Indeed the “fathers” of the movement themselves would often
confess how irritated they were too by the word. Thus, Césaire
declared at the beginning of a lecture he gave on February 26, 1987, at
the International University of Florida in Miami: “…I
confess that I do not always like the word Négritude even if I am the
one, with the complicity of a few others, who contributed to its
invention and its launching” adding that, still, “it
corresponds to an evident reality and, in any case to a need that
appears to be a deep one” (Césaire 2004, 80). “What
is that reality?” Césaire proceeded then asking. That is
indeed the question: is there a content and a substance of the concept
of Négritude beyond the revolt and the proclamation? In other
words, is Négritude mainly a posture of revolt against oppression the
manifestation of which is primarily the poetry it produced, or is it a
particular philosophy characteristic of a black worldview? One of the
most eloquent expression of Négritude as a posture primarily is to be
found in an Aimé Césaire’s address delivered in
Geneva on June 2nd 1978 on the occasion of the creation by
Robert Cornman of a cantata entitled Retour and inspired
by the Notebooks of a Return to the Native Land. In that
address reproduced in Aimé Césaire, pour regarder le
siècle en face, the poet from Martinique declares:
In fact both answers have been given to that question of posture of
revolt vs. philosophical substance, at different moments and in
different circumstances by Négritude writers. Nevertheless, it can be
said that Césaire and Damas have put more emphasis on the
dimension of poetic revolt while Senghor has insisted more on
articulating Négritude as a philosophical content, as “the sum
total of the values of civilization of the Black World”, thus
implying that it is an ontology, an aesthetics, an epistemology, or a
politics.
Following the example of Alain Locke, Leon Damas in 1947 and
Léopold Sédar Senghor a year later published
Anthologies of poetry to manifest the existence of Négritude
as an aesthetics and as a literary movement.
In the “Introduction” to his Poètes
d’expression française 1900–1945, Damas proclaimed
that “the time of blocking out and inhibition” had now
given place to “another age: that in which the colonized man
becomes aware of his rights and of his duties as a writer, as a
novelist or a story-teller, an essayist or a poet.” And he stated
the literary and political significance of his Anthology in
non ambiguous terms: “Poverty, illiteracy, exploitation of man by
man, social and political racism suffered by the black or the yellow,
forced labor, inequalities, lies, resignation, swindles, prejudices,
complacencies, cowardice, failures, crimes committed in the name of
liberty, of equality, of fraternity, that is the theme of this
indigenous poetry in French” (Damas 1947, 10). It is
important to notice that he meant his anthology to be a
manifesto, not so much for Négritude, than for the Colonized in
general, as he insisted that the sufferings of colonialism were the
burden of “the black and the yellow” and as he featured in
the selection poets from Indochina and Madagascar. Or rather Damas
understood the concept of Négritude (in fact the word does not appear
in the “Introduction” to the anthology) to encompass people
of color in general as they were under the domination of European
colonialism. This is a broader meaning of Négritude that the
“fathers” of the movement always kept in mind. Damas’
view about the substance of the poetry he was presenting, about what
the poets gathered in his book had in common besides living the same
colonial situation, is generally the same as Etienne
Léro’s, whose “Misère d’une
poésie” (“Poverty of a Poetry”) he
quotes
 abundantly.[2]
 In a vitalistic language that characterizes Négritude
Léon Damas opposes, using Léro’s language, the vitality
of this “new poetry” to what he denounced as “white
literary decadence” (to be contrasted with the revolutionary
nature of surrealist philosophy and literature). He quoted in
particular Léro’s denunciation of writers from the Caribbean
“mulatto society, intellectually … corrupt and
literarily nourished with white decadence” to the point that
some of them would make it a matter of pride that a white person could
read their whole book without being able to tell “what their
actual complexion was” (Damas 1947, 13). The
“Introduction” was indeed a manifesto for Négritude
as a vital poetic force that Damas (and Léro) identified as
“the wind rising from Black America” which in turn
expresses “the African love for life, the African joy in love,
the African dream of death” (Damas 1947, 13).
Senghor’s Anthologie de la nouvelle poésie
nègre et malgache de langue française, (An Anthology
of the New Negro and Malagasy Poetry in French), published in 1948,
would eventually overshadow Damas’ anthology and his
“Introduction” to it as a manifesto for the Négritude
movement. Senghor’s own “Introduction” is just five
short paragraphs as it devoted only to the technicalities of selecting
the poets gathered in the book (interestingly, unlike Damas, his choice
is restricted to the “Blacks”, the Malagasies being
according to him “mélaniens” (Senghor 1948,
2)). But what contributed greatly to the fame of the Anthology
and propelled Négritude into the broad intellectual conversation was
the “Preface” written for it by French philosopher and
public intellectual Jean-Paul Sartre (1906–1980). The title of the
“preface”, Black Orpheus, referring to the Greek
myth about the evocative force of poetry but also about its eventual
impotence in front of fate and death, fully expresses what can be
called the kiss of death the existentialist philosopher gave to the
movement.
By writing Black Orpheus as an account of the ultimate
meaning of the black poetry gathered in the Anthology Sartre
transformed Négritude into an illustration of his own philosophical
theses and durably set the terms in which the concept was to be
discussed from then on.
One important point made by Sartre was that Négritude was first and
foremost a black poetic appropriation of the French language. Unlike
other nationalisms, he explained, which reclaimed the tongue of the
people against the imperialist imposition of the language by which they
were governed, black people had to use the language of domination
imposed by French colonialism as cement for their shared Négritude and
as “miraculous
 weapons”[3]
against that same domination. In so doing they
radically transformed it, manifesting through their poetry that there
was nothing natural and unquestionable in the way in which the language
would identify Being with Good, Beautiful, Right and White. The simple
song of a black poet chanting in French the beauty of the naked
blackness of the woman he loved, Sartre wrote, would then appear to the
ears of French people a fundamental violence against their linguistic
and indeed ontological self assurance; in spite of the fact that the
poem was not even meant for them, or rather because of that. In the
poetry of Négritude they would be struck by the discovery of their own
language as unfamiliar and hitherto unheard of, especially when that
poetry makes the best of surrealist writing as it “smashes [the
words] together, breaks their customary associations, and couples them
by force” (Sartre 1976, 26). But then again one knows that such
an unsettling of language and indeed its “auto destruction”
is the “profound aim of French poetry … from
Mallarmé to the Surrealists” (1976, 25). Therefore, Sartre
concludes, Négritude has achieved that goal: the poets of Négritude
have taken to its end what surrealist writers had been calling for.
So while he praised Négritude as the revolutionary poetry of the
time, Sartre maintained the traditional Marxist view about the
proletariat being the sole true revolutionary class and actor of
history. Just as Eurydice was the creation of Orpheus’ power of
evocation, Négritude was a creation of poetry, a “Myth dolorous
and full of hope” and like “a woman who is born to
die” (Sartre 1976, 63). History and its laws had already
condemned Négritude to be just a Poem, indeed a swan song: the future
of liberation was in the hand of the proletariat, the universal class
who was going to bring effective revolution and liberation from all
oppressions. When all is said and done and Négritude has permitted the
blacks to “raise relentlessly the great negro cry until the
foundations of the world shall tremble” (Césaire’s
Les armes miraculeuses quoted by Sartre as the last words of
Black Orpheus), it will have to be shed “to the profit
of the Revolution” (1976, 65) by the only true actor of history
which is the proletariat. In other words the “being-in-the-world
of the Negro” as Sartre defined Négritude using Heideggerian
language is “subjective” while class is
“objective”: the notion of race is concrete and particular,
Sartre writes, while that of class is universal and abstract; in the
terminology of Karl Jaspers the first resorts to
“comprehension” while the latter resorts to
“intellection” (1976, 59).
Again, Sartre’s preface was a real kiss of death as it played
an immense role in popularizing the Négritude movement and contributed
to establishing Senghor’s Anthology as its manifesto,
but at the same time dismissed its historical significance by
emphasizing that its being was ultimately only poetic, without
real
 substance.[4]
 And in fact, ironically, Black Orpheus contained and
announced most of the criticisms that would be directed at
Négritude afterwards. First the criticism which very quickly
came from certain Marxists who accused Négritude of creating
the distraction of “race” where there should be only a
focus on objective social contradictions in the historic phase of the
struggle of the Proletariat to bring authentic liberation to the
oppressed workers in Europe and the dominated peoples in the
 world.[5] 
 To that criticism some would add that by emphasizing the particular
and the concrete of race over the objective and the universal of the
struggle against capitalism and imperialism, the “fathers”
of Négritude, Senghor more specifically (since he led his
country to independence and became its president for twenty years),
seemed to imply that some cultural recognition and reconciliation was
all that was needed: they accused Négritude of being, for that
reason, an ideology for neocolonialism. Sartre’s “preface”
also foreshadowed the accusation of being an unfounded essentialism
promoting the notion that black people shared a common identity,
partaking in some enduring African-ness that defines them beyond
differences in historical trajectories and circumstances, personal or
collective.
The paradox of Sartre’s preface to the Anthology by
Senghor is that in many respects the Négritude movement had, after
Black Orpheus, to define itself against Sartre’s positioning
of its philosophical meaning. It did so (1) by insisting that it was
not a mere particularism defined as the antithesis to a white
supremacist view (with black self affirmation using the figure of
inversion that Sartre characterized as an anti-racist racism (1976,
59)), before some dialectical post-racial synthesis; (2) by
showing that there was something substantial (and not just poetic) in
the reference to African values of civilization by which Senghor had
defined Négritude: that Négritude was indeed an
ontology, an epistemology, an aesthetics and a politics.
When it comes to defining the substance of Négritude, there is
an important difference between the three “fathers” of the
movement. Damas, a poet more than a theorist, spoke of it in the
“introduction” of his anthology as the vital force behind
any new and true—that is liberating—poetry. As to
Césaire, he has often insisted that Négritude was
primarily the reclaiming of a heritage in order to regain
initiative. He declared: 
Unlike Damas and Césaire, Senghor affirmed that
Négritude was also the expression of a philosophy to be read in
the cultural products of Africa; and above all in African
religions. Different as they are from one region to another, from one
culture to another, there is still ethnographical evidence that many
of them share to be founded on an ontology of life forces. “The
whole system”, Senghor declares, in a lecture “On
Négritude” delivered at Lovanium University in Kinshasa,
“is founded on the notion of vital force.  Pre-existing,
anterior to being, it constitutes being. God has given vital force not
only to men, but also to animals, vegetables, even minerals. By which
they are. But it is the purpose of this force to increase”
(1993, 19). Senghor then explains that in the human being the increase
of the force is the process of her becoming a
person “by being freer and freer within an
interdependent community” (1993, 19). He adds that the ultimate
meaning of religion is to assure the continuous increase of the vital
force of the living, in particular through the main ritual of the
sacrifice of an animal. This ontology of life forces has been
summarized by Belgian philosopher Leo Apostel in the following
propositions:
Point 6 in particular constitutes a good summary of the view shared
by many African religions characterized as “animism” while
the other points help understand the particular type of causality that
has been labeled magical thinking. As early as in 1939, at a time when
Leon Damas had already published his first collection of poems,
Pigments (1937) and Césaire had just finished a version
of his Cahier d’un retour au pays natal (“Notebook
of a return to my Native Land” (Césaire 2000a)), Senghor
had published an essay on the philosophy of Négritude entitled
“Ce que l’homme noir apporte” (“What the Black
Man Contributes”). As he explored in that essay the notion of
rhythm as constitutive of what he called “the negro style”,
Senghor was trying to say that the productions of African art were to
be understood first and foremost as the language of an ontology of
vital forces.
So it is not surprising that he was so enthusiastic when, six years
later, he discovered a book by Reverend Father Placide Tempels diving a
clear exposition of Bantu Philosophy as resting upon such an
ontology (Tempels 1945). Tempels was a Belgian Franciscan priest who
went to the Congo as a missionary. He had the view that in order to be
more efficient preaching the Gospel to the Bantu people he had first to
understand the principles underlying their belief system, their
customary law, their cultural habits, and so on. He explained that he
came to realize that one could and should go beyond mere ethnographical
description of those characteristics of the people’s lives and
dig out a set of ontological principles on which they were founded. In
other words that there existed a Bantu philosophy of being
underlying their laws, behaviors, beliefs, politics, etc. The book,
first written in Flemish then published in French in 1945 by
Présence africaine under the title La philosophie
bantoue, became quite an event: it was one of the very first times
that an African people was associated with philosophy, an intellectual
pursuit considered at least since Hegel to be the unique telos
of Western civilization.
Nothing probably is more indicative of the difference between
Léopold Sédar Senghor and his friend Aimé
Césaire than their respective reactions to the widely celebrated
book by Father Tempels. While Senghor embraced it as going along the
same lines he was exploring in his 1939 essay, Césaire’s
reaction was one of rejection. It is not that Césaire did not
accept the substance of Tempels’ theses. In fact the summary he
makes of them is perfectly adequate: “Now then, know that Bantu
thought is essentially ontological”, he writes in his 1955
Discours sur le colonialisme
[8],“that
Bantu ontology is based on the
truly fundamental notions of a life force and a hierarchy of life
forces; and that for the Bantu the ontological order which defines the
world comes from God and, as a divine decree, must be respected”
(Césaire 2000b, 58). In fact what provoked Césaire’s
skepticism and sarcasm vis-à-vis Tempels’ work was its
implications as a tool to justify and perpetuate the colonial order.
“Since Bantu thought is ontological”, he tittered,
“the Bantu only ask for satisfaction of an ontological nature.
Decent wages! Comfortable housing! Food! These Bantu are pure spirits,
I tell you …” (Césaire 2000b, 58) Above
all, there is for Césaire, the way in which the colonial order
is made by Tempels a new part of Bantu ontology and therefore
legitimized and even sanctified in the eyes of the Bantu themselves:
“As for the government, why should it complain?” Since the Rev.
Tempels notes with obvious satisfaction, “from their first
contact with the white man, the Bantu considered us from the only point
of view that was possible to them, the point of view of their Bantu
philosophy” and “integrated us into their hierarchy of
life forces at a very high level” (Césaire 2000b,
58). The final result being then that “the Bantu
god will take responsibility for the Belgian colonialist order, and any
Bantu who dare to raise his hand against it will be guilty of
sacrilege” (Césaire 2000b, 58).
In sum, in the eyes of Senghor, Tempels’ Bantu
philosophy, along with Bergson’s philosophy of
élan vital, provided the language of life
philosophy which he considered characteristic of the cultures of Africa
and those of African
 origin.[9]
For him Négritude is an ontology of life forces
to be described as a vitalism. Césaire who was more skeptical
about a philosophical content of the word dismissed Tempels’
enterprise not on the basis of its substance but because of what he
considered the intention behind the text of Bantu philosophy:
an attempt to reform colonialism in order to perpetuate it.
The aspect on which Senghor insists the most is that of Négritude as
a philosophy of African art. One of the main activities of Senghor when
he first arrived in Paris at the end of the 1920s was to visit
the ethnographical museum at Place Trocadéro in Paris. By then
the vogue of art nègre (black art) had already produced
its effects on modern European art. Pablo Picasso, in particular, in
1906 had made the turn of making African sculptures and masks part of
his artistic pursuit: his Demoiselles d’Avignon, painted
in 1906, manifested that move. The 1930s, the years when
Senghor, Césaire and Damas started writing, is the time when
what was labeled “primitive objects” were now more widely
perceived as art, beyond the circles of the artistic avant-garde. The
Universal Exposition in Paris in 1931 showed that
new
 “sensibility”.[10]
Senghor wanted Négritude to be the philosophy of the geometrical
forms so characteristic of African masks and sculptures across
different regions and cultures. He would often explain that the raison
d’être of art in Africa is not to reproduce or embellish
reality but to establish the connection with what he labeled the
sub-reality that is the universe of vital forces. What modern
art understood from the consideration of art nègre is
that the issue was not anymore to simply reproduce sensible appearances
but to deal with the forces hidden beneath the surface of things. That
is why the African objects at the Trocadéro museum were at once
religious and artistic artifacts.
Plastic forms are life forces, they are rhythms. So objects such as
masks or sculptures are to be read as combinations of rhythms as we can
see in the following aesthetic analysis by Senghor of a feminine
statuette from Baule culture (in today Ivory Coast): “In it, two
themes of sweetness sing an alternating song. The breasts are ripe
fruits. The chin and the knees, the rump and the calves are also
fruits or breasts. The neck, the arms and the thighs are columns
of black
 honey.”[11]
This reading establishes the object as a
composition of two rhythmic series (what is referred to here,
poetically, as two themes of sweetness): the concave forms of the
breasts, chin, knees, rump and calves, on the one hand; on the other
hand, the cylindrical forms that are the neck, the arms and the thighs.
This example indicates what Senghor understands by “rhythm”
and illustrates what he sees as its omnipresence in Black aesthetic
products, as he certainly remembers here the notion expressed, ten
years before by Jane Nardal, of a “rule of rhythm, the sovereign master
of [black] bodies” (Nardal, 2002, 105). In his first essay on
Négritude, “What the Black Man Contributes”,
Senghor wrote:
Seventeen years later he would reiterate the same credo:
In 1966, L.S. Senghor, then the President of Senegal since the
country became independent in 1960, organized in Dakar an international
event that he obviously intended to be a great moment of celebration of
what he had been pursuing his whole life: the World Festival of Black
Arts, meant to be the concrete manifestation of black aesthetics in all
its dimensions. Aimé Césaire, one of the most celebrated
guests of honor at the Festival, was invited to give a “Lecture
on African Art” (“Discours sur
l’art
 africain”).[13]
He first insisted on the question of the role
and significance of art in general in the modern world, quoting the
poet Saint-John Perse: “When mythology falls apart, it is in
poetry that the divine finds refuge … it is from poetic
imagination that the fierce passion of people seeking light gets its
flame” (Thébia-Melsan 2000, 22). What Négritude poets did
even if he does not like the word Négritude at all, declares
Césaire, and in spite of their failings, was just that: to be
light bearers for Africa. Then he proceeded to ask whether African art
of the past will be a catalyst for African art in the present and the
future the way it had been for European art at the beginning of the
twentieth century. That was a way for him of calling the attention on
the questions at the core of his thinking about aesthetics (but also
politics): how to regain initiative? How to avoid the lack of
authenticity of sheer imitation or mimesis: mimesis of Europe
as well as mimesis of one’s own artistic tradition.
As to his philosophy of art as such, Césaire’s views
follow consistently from his surrealist poetics and eventually converge
with his friend Senghor’s. Césaire’s notion of the
primordial role that should be played by the Dionysian in art
versus the Apollonian. These are categories that
Césaire and Senghor adopted from Nietzsche’s philosophy
(Nietzsche’s Birth of Tragedy) to express the opposition
between the primal, obscure force of life considered as an organic
whole (the Dionysian) on the one hand, and on the other hand the
plastic beauty or the form which brings into light the individuality of
the object (the Apollonian): the Dionysian speaks to our emotion while
the Apollonian speaks to our intellectuality. Césaire evokes
such a contrast when he states that: “The poetically beautiful is
not merely beauty of expression or muscular euphoria. A too Apollonian
or gymnastic idea of beauty paradoxically runs the risk of skinning,
stuffing, and hardening it.” This is the seventh and final thesis
of the propositions summarizing his views about Poetry
and
 Knowledge[14]
and it is in perfect resonance with
Senghor’s view of African art as the language of the ontology of
vital forces.
In conclusion, Négritude as aesthetics is predicated on such
oppositions as those between sub-reality (or sur-reality) and
appearance, force and form, emotion and intellect, Dionysian and
Apollonian. Césaire, Damas (as shown in the preface of his
anthology) and Senghor all agreed that art was a vital
response to the mechanistic and de-humanizing philosophy that produced
(and was produced by) modern Europe. And like Nietzsche, they believed
that art was another approach by which a sense of the world as totality
would be restored. These lines from Césaire’s
“Discourse on African Art” delivered in Dakar on April 6,
1966, at the opening of the “World Festival of Negro Arts”
summarize Négritude philosophy of the significance of art, especially
black art: “Through art, the reified world becomes again the
human world, the world of living realities, the world of communication
and participation. From a collection of things, poetry and art remake
the world, a world which is whole, which is total and harmonious. And
that is why poetry is youth. It is the force that gives back to the
world its prime vitality, which gives back to everything its aura of
marvelous by replacing it within the original totality”
(Thébia-Melsan, 2000, 21).
And it can be argued that it is because of that significance of art
that Négritude also presented itself as another type of knowledge or
epistemology and as another politics.
In the same 1939 essay in which he explored what he called the
“rhythmic attitude” by which we enter in profound
connection with the object of art, its reality or its sub-reality,
Senghor wrote the statement which is probably the most controversial of
all his formulations of the philosophy of Négritude: “Emotion is
Negro, as reason is Hellenic” (“L’émotion
est nègre, comme la raison héllène”).
(Senghor 1964, 288) The criticism was that the formula was an
acceptance of the ethnological discourse of the Levy-Bruhlian type
making a distinction between western societies suffused with
rationality and the colonized world of what he labeled “inferior
societies”, under the rule of “primitive mentality”.
While rationality is defined by the use of the logical principles of
identity, contradiction and excluded middle and the empirical notion of
causality, primitive mentality functions according to a law of
“participation” and magical thinking. The law means that a
person can be herself and at the same time be –or rather
participate in the being of—her totem animal ignoring (or rather
indifferent to) the principle of contradiction, and magical thinking,
superposing a supernatural world to reality, allows for example action
from distance in the absence of any causal link between two phenomena.
(Levy-Bruhl 1926) For his critics, Senghor’s formula did ratify
the view of Lucien Levy-Bruhl, while the ethnologist himself eventually
recanted them in his Notebooks of Lucien Levy-Bruhl
posthumously published ten years after his death in 1939. Aimé
Césaire’s famous lines from The Notebook for a Return
to the Native Land echo Senghor’s formula:
Jean-Paul Sartre who quoted these verses in Black Orpheus,
(1976, 43–44) immediately after made this remark: “Upon
reading this poem, one cannot help but think of the famous distinction
which Bergson established between intelligence and intuition”
(1976, 44). That remark makes an important point:
“emotion” and “intuition” as approaches to
reality in Négritude philosophy have more to do with Bergsonian
philosophy than with Levy-Bruhlian ethnology. Donna Jones rightly
speaks of Negritude as an “Afro-Bergsonian epistemology”. (Jones,
2010) Senghor did use the language of the author of Primitive
Mentality, (Levy-Bruhl 1923) for example when he wrote in his
1956 article on “Negro African Aesthetics” that
“European reason is analytical by utilization, Negro reason is
intuitive by participation” (1964, 203). But he also stated
clearly, as early as in 1945, six years after the essay in which the
(in)famous formula was written: “But are the differences not in
the ratio between elements more than in their nature? Underneath the
differences, are there not more essential similarities? Above all,
is reason not
identical among men? I do not believe in
‘prelogical mentality.’ The mind cannot be
prelogical, and it can even less be alogical” (1964, 42). This
affirmation is clearly directed at Levy-Bruhl. So the influence on his
thinking claimed by Senghor is rather Henri Bergson’s. The poet
often refers to the importance of the “1889 Revolution”, in
reference to the year of publication of Bergson’s Essay on
the immediate data of consciousness. Bergson, for Senghor, has
given a philosophical expression to a new paradigm which, unlike
Cartesianism and, even before it, Aristotelianism, makes room for a type
of knowledge which does not divide by analysis the subject from the
object and the object into its constitutive separated parts: different
from the reason-that-separates, says Senghor following Bergson, there
is a reason-that-embraces, which makes us experience “the lived
identity of knowledge and the known, the lived and the thought, the
lived and the real” (1971, 287). That approach of reality is the
other side of our analytical intelligence: according to Bergson, the
push of life in evolution, the élan vital, has produced
consciousness. Now “consciousness, in man, is pre-eminently
intellect. It might have been, it ought, so it seems, to have
been also intuition. Intuition and intellect represent two
opposite directions of the work of consciousness: intuition goes in the
very direction of life, intellect goes in the inverse direction, and
thus finds itself naturally in accordance with the movement of
matter. A complete and perfect humanity would be that in which
these two forms of conscious activity should attain their full
development” (Bergson 1944, 291–292). Clearly Bergson does not see
“intuition” and “intelligence” as dividing
humanity into different types: he calls for their equal development in
a fully accomplished humanity. 
Two conclusions can be drawn from Senghor’s Bergsonism. First, the
epistemology of Négritude, what he calls a Negro way of knowing
does not simply reproduce Levy-Bruhl’s radical cognitive dualism which
ultimately divides humanity into two categories, the European and the
non-European. It is rather a way of emphasizing the role played by
what Bergson has called “intuition” in the production of
African cultural objects, more particularly African art. Because, and
this is the second conclusion, when he speaks of an African
epistemology in fact Senghor is still speaking about art and
aesthetics. He is speaking about art as knowledge, art as a particular
approach to reality, art as the realm par excellence of intuitive
knowledge or emotion. The meaning of “emotion” in
Senghor’s formula corresponds to its definition by Jean-Paul Sartre as
a way of seeing the world as a “non-instrumental
totality”: “in this case, writes Sartre, the categories of
the world will act upon consciousness immediately. They are present to
it without distance” (Sartre 1989, 52,90).
We can now conclude with a reexamination of Senghor’s
infamous formula, which he kept explaining again and again:
“Emotion is Negro as Reason is Hellenic”. To pay
attention to the context in which it was written is to recall that
Senghor, in the late 1930s was absorbing not only ethnological
literature but also writings about “art nègre”. In
particular a book that he refers to in a simple footnote but which was
very influential on his thinking: Primitive Negro Sculpture by
Paul Guillaume and Thomas Munro, published in the US in 1926 and
translated into French in 1929. One of the main points made in
the book was to contrast Greco-Roman statuary expressing the ideal of
the beautiful form as it exists in reality even if it is transfigured
by art and African sculpture as a manifestation of the life force
beneath the appearances of things. When that context is taken into
account, it becomes clear that Senghor’s neatly crafted formula
(it is an alexandrine in French) can be read as an analogy: Hellenic
art is to analytic reason what African art is to emotion. And thus it
becomes less scandalous as the simple expression of the Nietzschean way
in which Senghor’s Négritude has considered art as knowledge and
aesthetics as epistemology. As Abiola Irele has rightly remarked:
“Senghor’s theory of the African method of knowledge and
his aesthetic theory” are not just “intimately related
[but] even coincide” (Irele 1990, 75).
In 1956 Aimé Césaire wrote a resounding public letter to
Maurice Thorez, then the General Secretary of the French Communist
Party, telling him that he was resigning from the party. He had been a
member for more than ten years and had been elected in 1946 as a
communist mayor of Fort-de-France then as a Representative of France
in the French Assembly. The three “fathers” of
Négritude found themselves members of the same French
Parliament: Senghor who had been elected a deputy from Senegal in 1946
was sitting with the Socialists and so was Léon Damas who got
elected to represent Guiana in 1948.
In his Letter to Maurice Thorez, Césaire started by
enumerating his many grievances against a communist party that had
uncritically pledged total allegiance to Russia before he came to
“considerations related to [his] position as a man of
color.”[15]
 As a person of African descent, he
declared, his position expressed the singularity of a “situation
in the world which cannot be confused with any other … of
… problems which cannot be reduced to any other problem
… [and] of [a] history, constructed out of terrible
misfortunes, that belong to no one else” (Césaire, 2010,
147).  That is why “black peoples”, he argued, needed to
have their own organizations, “made for them, made by them, and
adapted to ends that they alone [could] determine”
(Césaire, 2010, 148).  Césaire insisted also that
Stalinist “fraternalism,” with its notions of the
“advanced people” who must help “peoples who are
behind,” says nothing different than “colonialist
paternalism.” (Césaire, 2010, 149)
Ultimately, what Césaire was seeking in formulations such as
“it should be Marxism and communism at the service of black
peoples, not black peoples at the service of the doctrine” was
to define the notion of a people by means of culture rather than
politics. And consequently he was refusing to just dilute the cultural
dimension of the existential response of black peoples to colonial
negation in Marxist universalism: Césaire’s
“letter” was also, eight years later, a political response
to Jean-Paul Sartre’s Black Orpheus. Is my decision an
expression of “provincialism”, Césaire asked at the
end of his letter. “Not at all”, he answered.  “I am
not burying myself in a narrow particularism. But neither do I want to
lose myself in an emaciated universalism.  There are two ways to lose
oneself: walled segregation in the particular or dilution in the
‘universal’” (Césaire, 2010, 152).
Césaire called then for the promotion of an “African
variety of communism” as a way of avoiding both pitfalls. Senghor
also has insisted on an African socialism born of a “Negro
African re-reading of Marx.” This African socialism of Senghor
could be presented briefly in two fundamental points: first the
insistence that it is the early Marx who can truly inspire an African
doctrine of socialism, second the understanding that socialism is a
natural development of African societies and cultures. So in article
titled “Marxism and humanism” and published in 1948 in
Revue socialiste (a Journal sponsored by the French Socialist
Party) Senghor notes that which will later be the point of departure
for Louis Althusser’s reading of Marx: between the early Marx and
the Marx who writes The Capital, there is an
epistemological break. It is to be recalled here that in 1844 in
Paris, Marx wrote a certain number of texts that he just abandoned
afterwards to “the criticism of the mice”. Those texts,
known as The 1844 Manuscripts were later discovered and
published in Leipzig in 1932. They manifest that Marx’s thinking
and language were then fundamentally ethical as he was outraged by
human condition under capitalist regime characterized by reification
and alienation: human beings are alienated because, Marx writes, the
product of their work sucks out their life force and stands in front of
them as strange and hostile artifacts. Alienation is the sentiment of
living in exile and imprisoned in a de-humanized world. The Marx who
writes the Capital will abandon that moral language and
analyze the condition of the working class through technical concepts,
for example that of extortion of surplus value. While Althusser
considered this break the advent of Marxist science as an
“anti-humanist theory” Senghor saw it as self-betrayal by
Marx repudiating his identity as a philosopher and giving to his views
the appearance of dogmatic economic petrifactions. The task of an
African re-reading of Marx is then
The concept of alienation in particular, so central in the writings
of the early Marx are at the heart of Senghor’s reflections on
Marxism and liberation. Liberation for Senghor is liberation from all
forces of alienation, natural and sociopolitical. And in his 1948
article he writes about the early works of Marx: “For us, men of
1947, men living after two world wars, we who have just escaped the
bloodthirsty contempt of dictators and who are threatened by other
dictatorships, what profit is to be had in these works of youth!
They so nicely encapsulate the ethical principles of Marx, who proposes
as the object of our practical activity the total liberation of
man.” In Senghor’s vitalistic philosophy, total liberation
will be reached when the human being reaches the stage when her
artistic end can now flourish, when the evolution from homo
faber to homo sapiens has now given birth to homo
artifex.
Reflecting on what has been achieved by the Négritude movement,
Lucius Outlaw notes that for all the criticisms it has received,
“nonetheless, the Négritude arguments, fundamentally,
involved a profound displacement of the African invented by
Europeans.” And he continues: “It is this African challenge
and displacement, through radical critique and counter-construction,
that have been deconstructive in particularly powerful and influential
ways: involving direct attacks on the assumed embodiment of the paragon
of humanity in whites of Europe, an attack that forces this embodiment
back upon itself, forces it to confront its own historicity, its own
wretched history of atrocities, and the stench of the decay announcing
the impending death of the hegemonic ideal of the Greco-European
Rational Man” (Outlaw 1996, 67).
L. Outlaw acknowledges that that was the main point of
Sartre’s Black Orpheus. It could now be argued that the
question, today, is no longer that of a “deconstructive
challenge” to “the hegemonic ideal of the Greco-European
Rational Man” but that of what Outlaw calls “the
reconstructive aspects of this challenge” (Outlaw 1996, 68). Has
Négritude anything to contribute, today, to that
reconstructive aspect? What does it say about the present and future of
Black arts, since Négritude as ontology, as epistemology, and even as
politics takes us back, according to Césaire and Senghor, to the
philosophy of art considered as a vital knowledge of a reality
conceived as a web of forces?
To such a question, it can be said that Césaire had given an
answer in the conclusion of his 1966 Dakar address. There could
be no prescription of what African art should be. There is no model it
should imitate not even its own past. It has to continuously invent
itself and that self invention is not to be separated from the question
of Africa’s self invention. “African art of tomorrow will
be worth what Africa and the African of tomorrow are worth”,
Césaire declared before ending his lecture with these final
words: “… the future of African art is in our hands. That
is why to the African Heads of States who say: African artists, work to
save African art, here is what we respond: people of Africa and first
of all you, African politicians, because you have more responsibility,
give us good African politics, make us a good Africa, create for us an
Africa where there are still reasons for hope, means for fulfillment,
reasons to be proud, give back to Africa dignity and health, and
African art will be saved” (Thébia Melsan 2000, 25–26).
One way of raising the question of political relevance is to ask: is
there any room for a version of Négritude in what could be
considered as a philosophical foundation of black
solidarity?[16]
In September 1956, at the First Meeting of Black Writers and Artists
held in Paris, at the Sorbonne, Aimé Césaire gave a
lecture on “Culture and Colonization” (Césaire
1956). This was quite a historic reflection, at a time of maturity for
the Négritude movement and just a few months before the shaking
of decolonizations started with the independence of Ghana, on the
relationship between Négritude and Pan-Africanism. “What
is the common denominator”, Césaire started his lecture
by asking, “in this assembly gathering people as diverse as
Africans from Black Africa, North Americans, Caribbeans and
Malagasies?” The first obvious answer, he declared, was that
they all lived in a situation that could be described as colonial,
semi-colonial or para-colonial. In fact, he continued, there are two
aspects in the solidarity of people of African descent gathered then
at the Sorbonne: one that could be characterized as
“horizontal” and one “vertical”. The
horizontal solidarity is political: Pan-Africanism or Black solidarity
between Africans and the African Diaspora is their common response to
the situation of submission to colonialism and racism. The vertical
solidarity or “solidarity throughout time” is the way
people of African descent manifest different faces of an African
civilization. Not to be misunderstood, Césaire hastens
to make the precision, with cultural commonality. African cultures in
Africa and in the African Diaporas are at least as different as Italian
culture would be from Norwegian culture. But they share civilizational
traits in the same way Norwegian and Italian cultures share European
traits. Césaire’s distinction between cultures
(characterized by difference) and civilization (defined by the
existence of commonalities) would mean that the “vertical”
dimension of Pan-Africanism is what could be identified as Négritude.
How do we see Pan-Africanism today?
Our times are dominated by the postcolonial and anti-essentialist
view that differences should not be subsumed under a notion of Black
identity which might have worked as a response to colonial negation but
does not have any substantial meaning (just what Sartre said in 1948,
when he labeled Négritude an “anti-racist racism”, which
Senghor and Césaire forcefully dismissed, insisting that their
antiracist combat should never be confused with racism, even a counter
or a reverse one). As an example, the créolité
movement in the Caribbean claimed creoleness as a continuous process of
hybridization (“Neither Europeans, nor Africans, nor Asians, we
proclaim ourselves Creoles”, the Créolité writers
famously stated at the beginning of the manifesto (Bernabé,
Chamoiseau, and Confiant 1990, 75)) turning its back on
Césaire’s Négritude and his claim of an African heritage
as constitutive of his identity: Négritude is ante-creole,
they wrote. This movement established itself as following from Edouard
Glissant’s philosophy of creolization. This philosophy is based
on a distinction between what Glissant calls “atavistic
cultures” grounded in some “creation myth of the
world” (a group to which sub-Saharan African cultures belong),
and what he calls “composite cultures” “born from
history” (Glissant 2003, 111). Thus, he asks, “my own
genesis, what is it if not the belly of the slave ship?” Not
Africa, then, where the ship was coming from with its hideous freight,
but the journey itself, the unpredictable becoming of the voyage to new
shores, to new continuously proliferating, rhizomatic identities. The
Africanness of African-Americans could be another example. The demand
to be called African-Americans after having been “Negroes”
then “Blacks” has certainly more to do with the internal
identity politics of being Americans in the same way Irish-Americans or
Chinese-Americans are than with any claim of substantial solidarity
with Africans. Pan-Africanism that is engagement and solidarity with
the African continent has always been the concern of a tiny elite among
African Americans (even if it is associated with considerable names
such as Marcus Garvey or W.E.B. Dubois).
Within the African continent, there is today a renewed attempt at
reviving Pan-Africanism under the form of African unity, what is
referred to sometimes as “the United States of Africa”. The
African Union has thus divided the continent into six great regions
that should achieve economic and political integration in a near future
as a significant step towards continental unity. It is significant that
the decision was made to consider the African Diasporas a symbolic
sixth region. Is that a gesture which will remain simply symbolic, a
last tip of the hat from the new pragmatic Pan-Africanism to the
lyricism of Négritude about Black Solidarity (it should be noted that
Pan-Africanism means that the divide between sub-Saharan Africa and the
Maghreb has no significance and that Africans are black as well as of
European or Asian descent)? In 1956, Césaire seemed to have been
conscious that a “horizontal solidarity” as a response to a
shared condition of living under colonial and racist domination was
less problematic than a vertical solidarity throughout time binding
together peoples who have come to develop very different cultures or,
within the same nations, very different subcultures. He still believed
in that shared “Négritude” as a “civilization”
under which those differences would be subsumed. But above all he
believed, against any “incarcerating conception of
identity” (2004, 92) that Négritude, ultimately, amounts to the
continuing fight against racism: “one can renounce the
heritage”, he declared in his Miami address but “has one
the right to renounce the fight” when one understands that what
is at stake today is not Négritude but racism, “seats of
racism” here and there which need to be confronted if we are to
“conquer a new and larger fraternity”? (2004, 90–92)
To dismiss too quickly Négritude as an essentialism of the past,
which might have been necessary as a “deconstructive
challenge” to an oppressive colonial order but has nothing to say
when it comes to the call for cosmopolitanism and creolization, would
miss an important dimension of that multifaceted
 movement.[17] The
essentialist language is pervasive in Négritude literature, no doubt,
but so is the language of hybridity which can be seen as undermining it
the way Penelope used to undo at night what she had woven during the
day. Senghor is as much a thinker of “métissage”
(mixture) than he is a thinker of Négritude. His watchword,
“everyone must be mixed in their own way” is as central to
Négritude as the defense and illustration of the values of civilization
of the black world. There is in fact a de-racialized use of the word
“nègre” by Senghor which is crucial to understand
why painter Pablo Picasso, poets Paul Claudel, Charles Péguy or
Arthur Rimbaud, philosopher Henri Bergson, etc. have been somehow
enrolled by Senghor under the banner of “Négritude”. The
message being, ultimately and maybe not so paradoxically, that one does
not have to be black to be a “nègre”.