Both of the terms that make up the label “neutral monism”
are problematical. Because the questions to which the notion of
neutrality gives rise are unique to neutral monism, they need to be
addressed first. Most versions of neutral monism assume a plurality of
basic, neutral entities (these could be substances, events, tropes,
universals, etc., depending on the specific version of neutral monism
in question). What does it mean for an entity to be neutral? Here are
five proposals:
(1)–(5) are not always clearly distinguished; but even when they
are, two or more of these criteria may be used concurrently. This
invites confusion on the part of the neutral monists, as well as their
critics.
Questions arise about the relationships between (1)–(5). (1) and
(5) are similar in letting the question of an entity’s
neutrality be settled by its intrinsic nature. (2)–(4) answer
this question by looking at the relationships of a given entity to
other things: to the nature of larger groups of entities of which the
given entity is/can be a member: are these groups mental or physical?
Or by looking to the kinds of laws that govern the entity in question:
are the laws mental or physical? If one is inclined to think that
neutrality is a matter of intrinsic nature alone, (2)–(4) will
seem misguided. (2)–(4) still might have a place as epistemic
criteria—as ways of finding out whether a given entity is
neutral. The friends of (1) and (5) can agree that a given
entity’s ability to actually or possibly belong to a certain
group, or to be governed by certain laws, is due solely to its
intrinsic nature. Their disagreement concerns only the question
whether this ability is conferred on that entity by its being both
mental and physical or neither mental or nor physical. In either case
(2)–(4) can only be used to discover which things are the
neutral entities.
The traditional versions of neutral monism—those developed by
Ernst Mach, William James, and Bertrand Russell (see section
 4
 below)—accept (1) and reject (2). But some critics of neutral
monism, notably Bostock (2012: 190, 195–6), interpret neutral
monism as committed to (2). Based on this interpretation of
neutrality, Bostock arrives at the striking conclusion that
“Russell’s version of neutral monism was never properly
‘neutral’ or ‘monistic’” (Bostock 2012:
190).
It can be argued that none of the traditional neutral monists accept
(3). All of them would agree that neutral entities can be a
constituent of both physical and mental non-basic entities. But it is
doubtful whether any of them would agree that the fact that a basic
entity can be a constituent of both physical and mental non-basic
entities is sufficient to make it neutral. For it is conceivable that
a basic entity that fails to be neutral (according to (1), the
Neither View) should figure in the construction of both
physical and mental non-basic entities.
Gregory Landini’s influential discussion of Russell’s
neutral monism (Landini 2011: ch. 6) illustrates the importance of the
distinction between criteria (1) and (3). Landini assumes that (3)
captures Russell’s idea of neutrality. This allows Landini to
conclude that Russell is a physicalist and a neutral monist
(see Landini, 280, 291, 297). According to Landini, Russell is a
neutral monist because every basic entity can be a constituent of both
physical and mental non-basic entities; and Russell is a physicalist
because all basic entities of his system are
 physical.[1]
(4)
 is present in the thought of Mach and James. But it plays a prominent
part in Russell’s thought. His use of (1) in conjunction with
(4), especially in Russell 1921, is confusing, and it has led a number
of his critics (Stace 1946; Bostock 2012) to argue that (at least his
early) neutral monism is best understood as a form of dualism.
The traditional neutral monists reject
 (5),
 but many of their formulations suggest otherwise. It is easy to find
passages saying that a given neutral entity is physical and mental. A
sympathetic reading of these passages suggests that they are best
understood as an abbreviated way of saying that this neutral entity is
a member of two groups of neutral entities, one of which counts as
physical, the other of which counts as mental. The terms
“physical” and “mental” apply to groups of
neutral entities, not to individual neutral entities, as Russell
points out when speaking about the mental: 
“mental” is a character, like “harmonious” or
“discordant”, that cannot belong to a single entity in its
own right, but only to a system of entities. (Russell 1927b: 209) 
But a number of contemporary discussions of neutral monism employ the
Both View.
(1)–(5) use the concepts of the mental and the physical (or of
corresponding laws) to specify the notion of neutrality. Since the
mind/matter distinction can be drawn in different ways, the notion of
the neutral will vary accordingly. And if the mental and the physical
are defined as complements of each other, thereby ruling out the
possibility of entities that are neither mental nor physical, then
there cannot be any neutral entities (at least in the neither
sense of the term).
Another feature shared by (1)–(5) is that they all fail to meet
a condition—discussed by C.D. Broad in his 1925—that an
attribute must meet if it is to carve out a class of entities. If
neutrality is to be a kind-forming attribute, it “must be a
simple attribute, i.e., it must not be analysable into a conjunction
or disjunction of other attributes” (Broad 1925: 23). If one
accepts this kind of homogeneity constraint on neutral entities, all
five criteria of neutrality proposed above fail to pick out a set of
entities that are sufficiently simple or homogeneous to form a
kind.
A related worry is that (1)–(4) don’t say anything about
the nature of neutral entities. (1) says only what they are not;
(2)–(4) specify certain roles that neutral entities can play,
without telling us anything about the nature of the role occupants.
(5) may fare better in this regard; but it raises problems of its own
(see below). Some versions of neutral monism embrace this agnosticism
about the nature of the neutral base. David Chalmers has outlined the
idea of Russellian neutral monism (see section
 5.5
 below) with “fundamental protophenomenal properties serving as
the grounds for both physical and phenomenal properties”
(Chalmers 2015: 264). Nothing is known about the protophenomenal other
than its ability to ground the two kinds of properties we are familiar
with.
Many neutral monists have been more forthcoming, offering examples of
neutral entities with which we are familiar. The three traditional
neutral monists—Ernst Mach, William James, and Bertrand
Russell—all pointed to experience, when attempting to provide
examples of neutral entities. Mach speaks of sensations, James of pure
experience, and Russell of sensations and percepts. Predictably, this
fueled the suspicion that neutral monism is nothing but rebranded
phenomenalism. Others have sought the neutral base in the realm of the
abstract. Kenneth Sayre, for example, turns to the mathematical theory
of information and suggests that the neutral base is to be understood
as the “ontology of informational states” (Sayre 1976: 16)
that this theory presupposes.
Most traditional versions of neutral monism were based on
 (1),
 the idea that the neutral is neither mental nor
material. But occasionally the understanding of neutrality is informed
by criterion (5): the neutral is that which is both mental
and material. This view has been attributed to Thomas Nagel
(Godfrey-Smith 2013: 1–2; Skrbina 2005: 237; but see also
section
 5.4).
 That which is both mental and material is biased towards neither and
hence neutral between them. In this way the both-interpretation
captures an intuitive notion of neutrality. Moreover, (5) may tell us
much more about the nature of the neutral entities than (1)–(4)
do—just how much we learn about the nature of the neutral will
depend on how the relevant concepts of the mental and the physical are
fleshed
 out.[2]
The appeal of the Both Interpretation of the idea of
neutrality is undeniable. But it invites the conflation of neutral
monism with other theories from which is should be distinguished.
First, there is the family of theories that attribute fundamental and
irreducible mental and fundamental and irreducible material
properties, or aspects, or sides to every basic entity (see section
 8.3).
 The Both Interpretation of neutral monism turns it into a
version of the dual-aspect theory—a theory that is often viewed
as a form of dualism. Second, the Both Interpretation of
neutrality makes it difficult to distinguish neutral monism from the
identity theory. According to the identity theory “being a
pain” and “being a c-fiber stimulation” pick out the
very same property (not two distinct and irreducible properties,
aspects, etc.). A natural way to state this idea is to say that a
given property or state is both mental and physical. And this then
invites confusion with neutral monism, stated in terms of
 (5)—the
 Both Interpretation. The Neither Interpretation of
neutrality allows us to understand neutral monism as a distinct type
of theory. Because of its ability to distinguish views that are run
together on the Both Interpretation, the Neither
Interpretation is preferable.
There is, then, considerable disagreement about how to interpret the
notion of neutrality. The notion of monism raises its own problems.
But since these are questions faced by all forms of monism, they are,
perhaps, not quite as pressing as the problems surrounding neutrality.
Much like one can distinguish different versions of neutral monism on
the basis of the notion of neutrality that they employ, it is possible
to distinguish different versions of the doctrine, based on the
various ways in which the notion of monism is understood (see Schaffer
2016). Neutral monism might, for example, be interpreted as a form of
existence monism—the view that only a single concrete thing
exists; but it might also interpreted as a monism about the kinds of
things there are—the view that concrete things, be they simple
or complex, are of the same neutral kind. The evidence suggests that
all past and present versions of neutral monism have been pluralist on
both these counts: they work with a plurality of entities, most
particularly, with a plurality of basic neutral entities; and, given
their focus on the mind-body problem, they recognize at least mental
and physical kinds of entities in addition to the neutral entities.
All entities belonging to such non-neutral kinds must, however, count
as derivative. In the final analysis, all entities must be basic
neutral entities or complexes of basic neutral entities.
The talk about basic entities indicates another pluralist dimension:
the known versions of neutral monism work with a layered picture of
reality. Basic neutral entities form the bottom level of the
hierarchy; the non-basic, non-neutral entities at the higher levels
reduce to, or are in some sense derivative from, those lower level
neutral entities. So we are dealing with an ontology that recognizes a
plurality of levels or layers in reality.
And even within the level of the basic neutral entities we can
distinguish those versions of neutral monism that hold that all basic
entities belong to a single category, from those that distinguish two
or more categories of neutral entities. Russell’s later version
of neutral monism seems to be monistic (in this particular sense): all
neutral entities are events. But it is easy to envision a neutral
monism that countenances neutral substances and neutral properties
among the basic neutral entities.
Most extant versions of neutral monism seem to acknowledge that, in
addition to the basic neutral entities, there exist derivative,
non-basic, and non-neutral entities—mental and physical
entities, for example. This raises the question about the relationship
between these two kinds of entities. Every answer to this question
faces two challenges. On the one hand there is the threat of
elimination of the non-basic entities (see section
 7.1);
 on the other hand there is the threat that the non-basic, non-neutral
entities turn into elements of ultimate reality, thereby putting an
end to neutral monism.
The question of the relationship between basic and non-basic entities
features prominently in Russell’s thought. The method of logical
construction (see section
 4.3.1)
 is his answer to this question. The two other traditional neutral
monists—Mach and James—can arguably be characterized as
reductionists (for an attempt to develop this claim a little further,
see the supplement
 Reducing Mind and Matter to Neutral Entities).
 The contemporary discussion of this question is most vigorously
addressed by various philosophers in the Russellian monist camp (see
section
 5.5).
 There is considerable agreement that the basic neutral entities are
related to the non-basic, non-neutral entities by way of the grounding
relation. But many questions remain about the precise nature of the
relata of the relevant grounding relations (see section
 5.5).
Baruch Spinoza (1632–77) and David Hume (1711–76) are
often identified as the originators of neutral monism. The case for
including Spinoza runs as follows:
Spinoza’s metaphysics of substance has been called neutral
monism; it is a form of monism because it allows
for only one substance, and it is neutral because he describes the one
substance as both a body and a mind (Rosenkrantz and Hoffman 2011:
287)
To classify Spinoza as an existence monist may be permissible. But the
neutrality claim is based on the problematical both view of
view of neutrality. This suggests that it is best to classify Spinoza
as a double aspect theorist (see section
 8.3
 below). Hume’s case is more difficult to assess. It has been
said that the prevalent 20th century interpretation of Hume
has been neutral monist (see Flage 1982: 527). H.H. Price’s case
for this view has been particularly influential (see Price 1932:
105–6). On the other hand, the neutral monist interpretation of
Hume has been vigorously resisted (Flage 1982; Backhaus 1991).
In light of these difficulties it is best to start the genealogy of
neutral monism with the big three: Ernst Mach, William James,
and Bertrand Russell. Of the three, only Russell uses the label
“neutral monism”. But there is widespread agreement that
Mach, James, and Russell are the three most important philosophers in this
tradition. A striking feature of traditional neutral monism—a
reflection of the empiricist leanings of its protagonists—is the
close tie between the neutral entities and experience. This connection
has given rise to one of the most enduring criticisms of neutral
monism (see section
 7.2).
 It is therefore important to note that this salient feature of
traditional neutral monism need be no part of it (see section
 5.1).
Ernst Mach (1838–1916) occupies a central position in the
history of neutral monism. He influenced William James and Bertrand
Russell and, through them, all of the writers on neutral monism in the
English speaking world. His importance for the development in the
German speaking world is hard to overestimate. Among the philosophers
to build on Mach’s ideas was Rudolf Carnap in his
Aufbau (1928). As a physicist who also did physiological and
psychological research, Mach strove to adopt an inclusive and
economical framework that would allow him to pursue all of these
inquiries in a unified and coherent fashion. In the simple components
of experience—hot and cold, red and green, sweet and sour,
etc.—he finds typical examples of a much larger group of
elements whose functional interrelations are studied by the various
sciences (see Banks 2014, ch. 1 on the resolute realism of Mach's
view). While a given element is, intrinsically, neither mental nor
physical, the various groups to which it belongs may display
functional relationships that are characteristic of physics or of
psychology. In this case the neutral element forms part of the subject
matter of physics and of psychology. In the following quotation Mach
uses a color and our perception of it to illustrate this point. A
single neutral element—the color—gets to be both the
physical color of a physical object and our mental
perception/sensation of it. The color can be called physical,
qua constituent of the one group, and mental (a sensation),
qua constituent of the other group, but is the same
unchanging and intrinsically neutral element that figures in these two
different contexts:
Thus the great gulf between physical and psychological research
persists only when we acquiesce in our habitual stereotyped
conceptions. A color is a physical object as soon as we consider its
dependence, for instance, upon its luminous source, upon other colors,
upon temperatures, upon spaces, and so forth. When we consider,
however, its dependence upon the retina…it is a psychological
object, a sensation. Not the subject matter, but the direction of
investigation, is different in the two domains. (Mach 1886:
17–18)
In this way material objects and the ego are dissolved into
elements/sensations that are related in certain complex ways. Spelled
out for material objects, this reads: 
thing, body, matter, are nothing apart from the combinations of the
elements,—the colors, sounds, and so forth—nothing apart
from their so-called attributes. (Mach 1886: 7) 
And the fate of the ego is similar:
The primary fact is not the ego, but the elements
(sensations)…The elements constitute the I. I have the
sensation green, signifies that the element green occurs in a given
complex of other elements (sensations, memories). When I
cease to have the sensation green, when I die, then the
elements no longer occur in the ordinary, familiar association. That
is all. Only and ideal mental-economical unity, not a real unity, has
ceased to exist. (Mach 1886: 23–24)
For Mach the world presents itself as “a viscous mass [of
elements], at certain places (as in the ego) more firmly coherent than
in others” (Mach 1886: 17). The neutral elements (only a minute
fraction of which are sensations) and their relations are the basic
reality. We draw boundaries around certain groups of elements that are
related to each other in interesting ways, because this serves our
purposes—the purposes of science and of ordinary life. We can
continue to talk about material things and selves; it is economical to
do so. But, strictly speaking, “both [object and ego] are
provisional fictions of the same kind” (Mach 1905: 9).
The primary source for Mach’s views on neutral monism are a
number of essays and chapters contained in his books that were
originally published in Mach 1886, 1894, and 1905. The size of these
books grew significantly as they went through numerous editions. Some
of the important papers on neutral monism are not contained in the
available English translations of these works.
William James’s (1842–1910) uses the term “radical
empiricism” for the view he sets forth in James 1912—the
view that has become the paradigm of neutral monism. His critique of
the relational account of experience—according to which the self
directs an act onto an object—was the model upon which Russell
later shaped his analysis of experience. James presents this argument
as an attack on a particular conception of consciousness. He finds it
in the Neo-Kantian tradition and in the early analytic tradition. And
today we can find it in philosophies as diverse as existentialism and
philosophical naturalism. Roughly, it is the notion of consciousness
as a diaphanous, transparent, elusive medium or container of some sort
in which the objects of consciousness appear. The objects that are, in
this sense, “in” consciousness simply present themselves
to us. But the consciousness that makes this kind of object
presentation possible eludes our grasp. This thin notion of
consciousness is the one James wants to eliminate:
I believe that ‘consciousness,’ when once it has
evaporated to this estate of pure diaphaneity, is on the point of
disappearing altogether. It is the name of a nonentity, and has no
right to a place among first principles. Those who still cling to it
are clinging to a mere echo, the faint rumor left behind by the
disappearing ‘soul’ upon the air of philosophy. (James
1904b: 2)
His radical proposal is to simply discard this shadowy something and
to make do with what remains, with what used to be the object of the
conscious act. He introduces the term “pure experience” to
stand for this datum. Prior to any further categorization, pure
experience is, according to James, neutral—neither mental nor
physical:
The instant field of the present is at all times what I call the
‘pure’ experience. It is only virtually or potentially
either object or subject as yet. For the time being, it is plain,
unqualified actuality, or existence, a simple that. (James 1904b:
23)
Mind and matter, knower and known, thought and thing, representation
and represented are then interpreted as resulting from different
functional groupings of pure experience (see James 1905: 64).
In perceptual knowledge perceiver and perceived fuse or merge (James
uses both terms): one bit of pure experience is the thing perceived as
well as the perceiving of this thing. The difference lies only in how
this single portion of pure experience is related to other parts of
pure experience:
The paper seen and the seeing of it are only two names for one
indivisible fact which, properly named, is the datum, the
phenomenon, or the experience. The paper is in the mind and the
mind is around the paper, because paper and mind are only two names
that are given later to the one experience, when, taken in a larger
world of which it forms a part, its connections are traced in
different directions. To know immediately, then, or intuitively,
is for mental content and object to be identical. (James 1895:
110)
Conceptual knowledge is more complex. In the simplest case of
conceptual representation we are dealing with 
two pieces of actual experience belonging to the same
subject, with definite tracts of conjunctive transitional experience
between them. (James 1904a: 53) 
The first piece of pure experience is the thought—the thinking
of it as well as the content that is thought—perhaps it is a
thought about Harvard’s Memorial Hall, as in James’s
famous example (see James 1904a: 55ff). And, in the simplest case, the
second piece of pure experience is the thing—Memorial
Hall—that was thought of, as well as the perception of Memorial
Hall. The thought has led us to Memorial Hall and now we stand in
front of it and see it. It is this function of leading (about
the details of which James has much to say) that constitutes the
thought’s intentionality, that constitutes the fact that the
thought was a thought about a certain thing. Once the thought has lead
one to the Hall, 
the percept not only verifies the concept, proves its
function of knowing that percept to be true, but the percept’s
existence as the terminus of the chain of intermediaries
creates the function. Whatever terminates that chain was,
because it now proves itself to be, what the concept ‘had in
mind’. (James 1904a: 60–1) 
This is James’s way of reconstructing the idea of representation
in a way that does not invoke suspect mental powers of intrinsic
intentionality. He values this as a signal achievement of his radical
empiricism:
The towering importance for human life of this kind of knowing lies in
the fact that an experience that knows another can figure as its
representative, not in any quasi-miraculous
‘epistemological’ sense, but in the definite practical
sense of being its substitute in various operations,
sometimes physical and sometimes mental, which lead us to its
associates and results. (James 1904a: 61)
Not all conceptual experience results in knowledge. If the process of
leading does not get started, or fails to arrive at an experience of
termination, there is nothing that the first piece of experience gets
to know. In that case the representation is empty or false.
The essays in which James sets out his radical empiricism are among
the most influential and most readable documents of the neutral
monistic literature. It is probably fair to say that James converted
Russell to neutral monism. And his influence on the neutral monists
among the American New Realists is massive. The primary source for
James’s views on neutral monism are the essays collected in his
1912.
Following a series of critical engagements with neutral monism (see
especially Russell 1914a,b), Russell adopted it in Russell 1919 and
remained a neutral monist for the rest of his long career: “I am
conscious of no major change in my opinions since the adoption of
neutral monism” is what he says in an interview from 1964 (Eames
1969: 108). But the question whether Russell’s neutral monism is
best seen as a single theory or as a sequence of related but
significantly different theories, as well as the question which, if
any, of these different doctrines should count as versions of neutral
monism, have been much debated (see Wishon 2015; Bostock 2012; Stace
1946). Russell’s 1919 and 1921 are generally considered to
represent the early versions of his neutral monism. Russell’s
1927a and 1927b contain the mature doctrine. In his later
works—Russell 1948 and 1956a—he no longer used the term
“neutral monism”. But the doctrine seems largely
unchanged.
When Russell looks at neutral monism, he sees a theory that embodies
the spirit of the “supreme maxim in scientific
philosophising” (Russell 1914c: 155) in an especially striking
way. This maxim is Occam’s Razor: entities are not to be
multiplied without necessity. In one of Russell’s formulations
it reads: “Wherever possible, substitute constructions out of
known entities for inferences to unknown entities” (Russell
1924: 326). Known entities are those that we know directly or
noninferentially; unknown entities are ones we accept only on the
basis of inferences from known entities. Russell’s maxim
encourages us to discover complex structures of known entities that
can play the role the inferred entities were supposed to play. Upon
substituting these complex structures—the
constructions—for the inferred entities, everything continues to
work as before. The point of this complicated procedure is epistemic:
we are now no longer burdened with the risky inference to the inferred
entity, and the risk of error is reduced. Russell remains agnostic as
to the existence of the target entities of construction. They are
neither identified with nor eliminated by the corresponding
construction. And no claim about supervenience, emergence,
constitution, or grounding is implied.
Neutral monism holds out the alluring promise that such constructions
can be found for all of the inferred entities of physics, of
psychology, and of common sense. All of these bodies of knowledge are
preserved, but at a hugely reduced epistemic cost. These are the
considerations that drive Russell to embrace neutral monism: it is a
perfect fit with his longstanding commitment to the program of logical
construction. An added benefit of substituting constructions of
neutral entities for physical and mental entities is an elegant
solution to the mind-body problem.
Logical construction is a process of discovery, not of manipulation:
to logically construct xs out of ys is to discover that
ys, when they manifest a certain type of structure, can play
the role of xs. Russell’s constructions of a point in
space, an instant in time, a table, and of a belief may illustrate the
procedure. (i) A Russian doll is a good model of how Russell
(following Whitehead) proposes to construct a point in space. The
rough idea is to take “the class of all those objects which, as
one would naturally say, contain the point” (Russell 1914a: 117)
and to substitute this class of nested objects (the structure of
ys) for points in space (the xs). (ii) Experienced
instants in time (the xs) are constructed by discovering that
the experiences of a person, each of which is extended in time, can
overlap each other in ways that converge on an instant. It is 
a group of events, all belonging to his experience, and having the
following two properties: (1) any two of the events overlap; (2) no
event outside the group overlaps with every member of the group.
(Russell 1927b: 288) 
(iii) Rather than viewing a table as the cause of our table
sensations, Russell proposes (again just as a first approximation) to
view the table as “the set of all those particulars which would
naturally be called ‘aspects’ of the table from different
points of view” (Russell 1921: 98). (iv) The logical
construction that is to take the place of beliefs consists of the
following three components: 
(a) We have a proposition, consisting of interrelated images, and
possibly partly of sensations; (b) we have the feeling of assent,
which is presumably a complex sensation demanding analysis; (c) we
have a relation, actually subsisting, between the assent and the
proposition, such as is expressed by saying that the proposition in
question is what is assented to. (Russell 1921: 251)
As these examples show, there is no single method of construction, no
single type of structure, suitable for different projects of logical
construction. The nature of the xs (the targets of
construction) and of the ys (the construction materials) guide
the search for structures that will work in the case at hand.
The initial stock of known entities with which Russell proposes to
carry out this grand project of logical construction seems frightfully
small and strikingly non-neutral. It consists of his sensations and
images—these loom large in Russell 1919, 1921—and his
perceptions (percepts)—these play a prominent role in Russell
1927a, 1927b, 1948. Everything else—electrons, apples, galaxies,
and selves, etc.—is in need of logical construction.
For an entity to be neutral is to “have neither the hardness and
indestructibility of matter, nor the reference to objects which is
supposed to characterize the mind” (Russell 1921: 36; cf. 124).
Russell never suspected sensations of being material (in this sense).
That sensations are mental (in this sense)—that they consist of
a mental act of sensing directed at a non-mental object—was,
however, a pivotal part of his earlier view. But then his views
changed: 
I formerly believed that my own inspection showed me the distinction
between a noise [the object] and my hearing of a noise [the act of
sensing], and I am now convinced that it shows me no such thing, and
never did. (Russell 1918b: 255) 
All that Russell now finds upon introspecting a sensory episode is a
single item “which may be called indifferently a noise or
hearing a noise” (Russell 1918b: 255). Switching the example to
colors, he writes that 
the sensation we have when we see a patch of colour simply is
that patch of colour…the patch of colour and our sensation in
seeing it are identical. (Russell 1921: 142–3) 
And since noises and patches of color are not intentional—they
are not directed at anything, they are simply there—sensations
are non-mental. This establishes the neutrality of sensations. And
because images have the same intrinsic nature as sensations (cf.
Russell 1921: 117, 121, 154, 156, 287, 297), they too are
 neutral.[3]
 Percepts are composed of sensations and images and inherit their
neutrality.
Russell’s focus on sensations, images, and percepts explains why
Russell’s neutral monism has often been dismissed as a form of
phenomenalism. But in the preceding section we have seen how Russell
argued for the nonmentality of these items. Moreover this criticism
overlooks that Russell worked with a vastly expanded set of
construction materials. He allows for the enlargement of the realm of
the known by a series of cautious
 inferences.[4]
 In a first step he argues that “all our percepts are composed
of imperceptible parts” (Russell 1927a: 282); second, there are
sensations, images, and percepts that are not our own; third, and most
importantly, we can infer the existence of vast numbers of entities
that “do not form part of any experience” (Russell 1921:
 25).[5]
 In this way Russell arrives at the view “that the world is very
full of events” (Russell 1927a: 258), only a vanishingly small
number of which are his own experiences.
Our own percepts, images, and
 sensations[6]
 occupy a privileged place in this system of entities—they are
“what is most indubitable in our knowledge of the world”
(Russell 1927b: 139). This knowledge is of a “more intimate
qualitative” (Russell 1927a: 389) kind; it reveals the intrinsic
character of these entities. But our knowledge of the “physical
world [the world constructed out of entities outside my experience] is
purely abstract: “we know certain logical characteristics of its
structure, but nothing of its intrinsic character” (Russell
1927b: 306–307).
Russell takes all of these different entities to be neutral (in the
Neither Sense); and he takes all of them to be
 events[7],
 where an event is understood as “something occupying a small
finite amount of space–time” (Russell 1927b: 287). The
noise and the color patch considered above are typical examples of
events. A Russellian event is absolute, in C.D. Broad’s sense:
“it should not itself be a state of invariance or of
change in the qualities or relationships of any thing” (Broad
1959: 739; see also Maxwell 1978: 385–6 on pure events).
According to Russell, physics teaches that events “just happen,
and do not happen ‘to’ matter or ‘to’ anything
else” (Russell 1927b: 289). This means that we must not think of
mental events (or any events) “as consisting of motions of bits
of matter” (Russell 1927b: 292), for “matter in
motion…is not an event in our sense” (Russell 1927b:
296).
Russell’s neutral monist universe is a plenum of (absolute)
events—a vast assemblage of overlapping small occurrences which,
given their short lifespan, are constantly replaced by new events.
This mass of ever-changing events manifests all sorts of complex
dynamic patterns. We have not yet discovered the laws that govern
these events and give rise to the formation of these complex dynamic
patterns. But we have physics, which describes the behavior of certain
groups of law-governed events under the name of matter. And we have
psychology, which describes a set of quite different regularities that
obtain in very specific regions of this plenum of events—viz. in
those regions that are filled by the pieces of matter that are called
brains. But all the building blocks of the logical constructions that
are matter, and all the building blocks of the logical constructions
that are mental stats, have the same nature—they are neutral
events.
There are, of course, many other philosophers whom one might want to
include in the list of neutral monists. In the German speaking world
we find Richard Avenarius (1843–96), who was in contact with
Mach, and Joseph Petzoldt (1862–1929), who built on the work of
Avenarius. Avenarius’s main reflections on neutral monism are
contained in Avenarius 1888/90, 1891, and 1894/95. Petzoldt’s
relevant works are Petzoldt 1900, 1904 and 1906. In the English
speaking world, neutral monism thrived within the movement of American
new realism. Ralph Barton Perry (1876–1957)—a student and
friend of James—is the most visible neutral monist of this
group. His 1912 is the main source for his views about neutral monism.
And Edwin B. Holt (1873–1946) developed an ambitious neutral
monist program in his 1912 and 1914.
Anticipating the current revival in interest in neutral monism by a
few decades, Kenneth Sayre (1929–) published his main ideas on
neutral monism in the 1970s. Unlike the big three, Sayre
finds the neutral base of his system not in experience, but in the
Platonic realm of pure information, where information is understood in
the strict information theoretical sense. His proposal must not be
mistaken for the uncontroversial claim that that mental and physical
processes can be described in information theoretic terms. Sayre puts
forward an ontological claim about the ultimate nature of
reality—that ultimate reality consists of informational
states:
If the project…is successful, it will have been shown not only
that the concept of information provides a primitive for the analysis
of both the physical and the mental, but also that states of
information…existed previously to states of mind. Since
information in this sense is prior to mentality, but also implicated
in all mental states, it follows that information is prior also in the
ontological sense…Success of the present project thus will show
that an ontology of informational states is adequate for an
explanation of the phenomena of mind, as distinct from an ontology of
physical events. [And Sayre adds:] It is a reasonable conjecture that
an ontology of information is similarly basic to the physical
sciences…. (Sayre 1976: 16)
The greatest challenge faced by the traditional versions of neutral
monism is to show how basic entities that are derived from experience
can be neutral, rather than mental. By choosing an ontology of
informational states as his “neutral stuff”, Sayre
elegantly bypasses this problem. But while the neutrality of
informational states may be taken for granted, the question of the
relationship of this abstract “stuff” to concrete world of
physical and mental entities becomes all the more pressing.
Sayre’s main work on neutral monism is his 1976. More recently
David Chalmers has explored the idea of an informational ontology (see
Chalmers 1996). And the related ideas that ultimate reality purely
structural (Ladyman and Ross 2007; Floridi 2008, 2009), that it is a
computational process (Fredkin 2003; Lloyd 2006), or a purely
mathematical (Tegmark 2014) are the subject of a lively
discussion.
In his recent book The Realistic Empiricism of Mach, James, and
Russell. Neutral Monism Reconceived (2014), Erik Banks presents a
critical survey of the big three of neutral monism, as well as his own
development of the doctrine.
The neutral monist core of Banks’s view amounts to this: 
individual events are neutral, neither mental nor physical. Neutral
events make up “physical” systems and extensions and
“mental” sensations in minds through different functional
relations. (Banks 2014: 203) 
This is very much in keeping with the traditional version of neutral
monism, especially the event-based flavor of the view that Russell
advocated in the years after 1927. But Banks embeds this core idea
into a larger metaphysical framework. The resulting theory is
thoroughly original.
In a first step, Banks explains how this core idea fits into a larger
a posteriori physicalist picture. Physicalism, according to
Banks, is best thought of as the view that mental supervenes on the
physical. Standard physicalism focuses on the question of how mental
properties and relations depend physical properties and relations. But
standard physicalism does not specify the nature of the entities that
exemplify these properties and relations. Any set of entities will do,
so long as the supervenience relationships between the physical and
mental properties and relations are preserved. Enhanced physicalism
goes beyond standard physicalism in specifying the nature of the
entities that bear or instantiate the relevant properties and
relations: 
In enhanced physicalism…the instantiation of all physical
properties are individualized event particulars in causal-functional
relations to each other. (Banks 2014: 147) 
This is how the neutral events slot into the enhanced physicalist
picture that Banks favors.
In a second step, Banks provides us with an account of events. Events
have, and are individuated by, intrinsic characters or concrete
qualities. None of those qualities are mental; but experience
familiarizes us with some of those qualities (see Banks 2014: 6).
These qualities are the ways certain powers manifest themselves in
events (see Banks 2014: 6). Examples of the sorts of powers (or
energies) are electromagnetism, gravitation, and nuclear forces, and,
most relevant in the present context, neural energy—the internal
energies in neurons (see Banks 2014,149, 203). Manifesting itself
qualitatively at the level of the single neuron, this energy may yield
an electrical discharge event; but manifesting itself at the level of
a complex brain event—an event that is “somehow
‘composed’ of neurons firing in some kind of
cluster” (Banks 2014: 147)—this very same neural energy
may yield the event that is a sensation of blue. This closes the
apparent chasm between the experience of blue and the firing of a
bunch of neurons, once it is understood that 
the quality blue and the individual electrical discharges are just
different and mutually exclusive manifestations of the same natural
powers which we mistakenly see as belonging to totally different
categories of event. (Banks 2014: 164)
This is an attractive picture, but it is difficult to see it as a
monism of neutral events. Wherein does the neutrality of these
events—an experience of blue and neural firing
events—consist? It does appear, moreover, that events (whether
neutral or not) no longer play a fundamental ontological role. In
their place we find the powers/energies that give rise to events.
Banks addresses this second problem head on. Powers are identical with
their token manifestations, identical with the events that consist in
the individual qualities wherein these powers manifest
 themselves[8]
 (see Banks 2014: 149). That is, there is no separate, more
fundamental level of reality underlying the events. The powers just
are the events. The neural energy is identical with the event
that is the electrical discharges of a group of neurons; this same
neural energy is also identical with event that is a sensation of
blue. But, and this is a crucial part of Banks’s view, the
discharge events are not identical with the blue sensation. Banks sees
the question that this poses clearly: 
how can it be the case that the powers are identical with each of
their token manifestations and even identical qua powers across
different token manifestation events, but that different token
manifestation events are not identical to each other? (Banks 2014:
149) 
This is not an easy knot to unravel. Perhaps an appeal to relative
identity might help.
Assuming that the fundamentality of events has been established, we
still face the question in which sense they qualify as neutral.
Consider 
the event of seeing a blue patch and the event of having all the
configured neurons fire in the region of the brain
responsible for seeing the blue patch. (Banks 2014: 164) 
To the naïve opinion that the first of these events is mental,
while the second is physical, Banks replies as follows:
The phenomenon of sensation simply falls into place as a certain type
of physical event among others in nature. The separate category of
mental phenomena simply ceases to exist, except as a provisional way
of talking. (Banks 2014: 164)
The monism expressed in this answer is beyond reasonable doubt; but
the neutrality is somewhat elusive.
For want of a better label, John Heil has presents his view on the
mind-body relation as a form of neutral monism. He resists being
labeled a materialist 
because it carries with it the implication that there is an
asymmetryin the identification of mental qualities with
material qualities: the mental is supplanted by the material. (Heil
2013: 242) 
Nor does he see himself as an idealist. And he has systematic and deep
reasons for rejecting the property dualism that characterizes the
various versions of nonreductive materialism. The neutral monism that
he accepts is characterized as follows:
Neutral monism includes the denial that there is a
mental–material chasm to be bridged. The mental–material
distinction is, as Spinoza and Donald Davidson contend, a distinction
of conception only, not a realdistinction, not a distinction
in reality. (Heil 2013: 242)
An example will help to illustrate the gist of this view. Take the
well-worn claim that pain is c-fiber
 stimulation.[9]
 According to Heil, this says that the predicate “c-fiber
stimulation” and the predicate “pain” apply to the
same things: all things that are truly described as being c-fiber
stimulations are also truly described as pains. But—and this is
a crucial claim that cannot be developed here—this does
not mean that there is a property of being a c-fiber
stimulation and a property of being a pain, and that these two
properties stand in some interesting relationship, such as identity,
reduction, realization, etc. What this does mean is that there is a
complex object that makes both of these claims true. The nature of the
parts of this object, as well as their intricate relationships to one
another, is the reality that is correctly described as a c-fiber
stimulation and as a pain.
This part of Heil’s account appears to be consistent with the
spirit of traditional neutral monism. One is reminded of
Russell’s pithy description of his project: “What I wish
to do in this essay is to restate the relations of mind and brain in
terms not implying the existence of either” (Russell 1956a:
145). This can easily be read as a denial of the existence of a chasm
between mental and physical properties. And Heil’s complex
objects that serve as the truth-makers for mental and physical
descriptions may be seen as analogous to Russell’s groups
(logical constructions) of events that can properly be described in
physical and mental terms. This makes for a significant parallel
between the two views.
But there is an additional part to the neutral monist
picture—one that all of the mainline neutral monists agree
on—that Heil rejects. When he tells the “deep story”
(Heil’s term) about the nature of the complex objects (the
truth-makers for claims about c-fibers and pains etc.), he turns to
fundamental physics: 
I take it to be an empirical question—a question for science,
for fundamental physics—what the substances are and what they
are like, how they are. (Heil 2013: 201–2) 
So the basic constituents of the world—the substances and the
properties—that Heil describes are, in the best sense of the
term, physical. Here the neutral monist (who is committed to
the Neither View of neutrality parts company with Heil. The
deep story of the neutral monist has it that the fundamental
entities—be they events, bits of information, substances,
properties, etc.—are not physical (and not mental, of course).
That is to say, they are not the sort of thing that fundamental
physics (or psychology) reveals.
In his recent book Mind and Cosmos (2012) Thomas Nagel
asserts that “the weight of the evidence favors some form of
neutral monism over the traditional alternatives of materialism,
idealism, and dualism” (2012: 5). Neutral monism is understood
as a view that “accounts for the relation between mind and brain
in terms of something more basic about the natural order” (2012:
56). This yields a picture of a “general monism according to
which the constituents of the universe have properties that explain
not only its physical but its mental character” (2012: 56).
Borrowing a concept from Tom Sorrell (whom Nagel cites approvingly),
we can say that these basic constituents of the universe are
“transphysical and transmental” (2012: 57). This nicely
captures the relevant sense of neutrality. The claim that all of the
basic constituents must be of the same kind—the conclusion that
we are dealing with a monism—is supported by the consideration
that any basic constituent could be part of a psychophysical creature,
such as ourselves. Hence every basic constituent must be of the kind
that can explain the physical and mental traits as we know them. 
All that has been said up to this point supports the view that Nagel
endorses neutral monism. But what Nagel says next seems to contradict
this simple picture. He writes:
Everything, living or not, is constituted from elements having a
nature that is both physical and nonphysical—that is, capable of
combining into mental wholes. So this reductive account can also be
described as a form of panpsychism: all the elements of the physical
world are also mental. (Nagel 2012: 57)
Note that the description of the basic constituents has changed from
“transphysical and transmental” to “physical and
mental”—from the Neither View to the Both
View. And Nagel is very much aware that these are not the same
thing. In an earlier paper in which he considers neutral monism, he
writes:
this view would imply that the fundamental constituents of the world,
out of which everything is composed, are neither physical nor mental
but something more basic. This position is not equivalent to
panpsychism. Panpsychism is, in effect, dualism all the way down. This
is monism all the way down. (Nagel 2002: 231)
Is there a way to overcome this apparent tension and to see these two
views as parts of a coherent whole? In a personal communication Prof.
Nagel offered the following explanation: 
the fundamental elements would be neither merely physical nor merely
mental, but something that was necessarily both physical and mental,
(or protomental); but since this necessary connection can’t hold
directly between the physical and the mental as we conceive them, it
would require that the real character of these fundamental
constituents be something more basic that accounts for their being
both physical and (proto)mental.
The resulting picture is this. Described at the most fundamental
level, the constituents of the world have properties that are neither
mental nor physical. These neutral properties of every fundamental
entity give rise to physical and mental (or protomental) properties.
Thus each fundamental constituent is complex: it has mental (or
protomental) properties, it has physical properties, and it has these
two sets of properties as a necessary consequence of its having a
third set of properties—the neutral properties.
The foundational role played by the neutral properties (in the
Neither Sense) suggests that the view is a form of neutral
monism. This interpretation can be further supported by arguing that
the neutral properties ground the other properties of the basic
entities, and that grounded properties make for “no addition to
being”.
Others will object to the neutral monist interpretation of
Nagel’s view, insisting that basic entities that have mental and
physical properties cannot count as neutral, given the Neither
Sense of
 neutrality.[10]
 The case for calling it a panpsychism rests on the fact that each
fundamental entity has mental features. The case for calling it a
dual-aspect theory rests on the fact that each fundamental entity has
physical and mental features. And if neutrality is understood in the
Both Sense, then this very same fact indicates that we are
dealing with a version of neutral monism after all. But if one follows
the traditional neutral monists in understanding neutrality in the
Neither Sense, and if one follows them further in assuming
that the properties of being mental and being physical are properties
that can only be possessed by groups of basic entities, not by
individual basic entities, then it is advisable to deny that
Nagel’s view is a version of neutral monism. Perhaps it is best
characterized as a form of the dual-aspect theory, or as a form of
property dualism, if aspects are distinguished from properties (see
section
 8.3
 below).
In the search for a solution to the mind-body problem one may be
captivated by the thought that we know less about matter than we are
commonly led to believe. All we do (or can) know are the dispositional
properties of
 matter.[11]
 When combined with the insight that dispositions need categorical
grounds, one discovers that one’s conception of matter is
radically incomplete. In addition to all the dispositional properties
that physics treats of, matter must have intrinsic categorical
properties. Since the nature of these intrinsic properties is unknown,
the following bold thought suggests itself. Perhaps these properties
play a dual role: in addition to grounding to dispositional properties
of matter, they also serve as the grounds of our conscious experience.
These are the kinds of considerations that may lead one to Russellian
monism, the view that 
matter has intrinsic properties that both constitute consciousness and
serve as categorical bases for the dispositional properties described
in physics. (Alter and Nagasawa 2015: 1) 
The basic constituents of the world of Russellian monism are the
fundamental entities of physics (not the insubstantial events of
Russell’s world). But the most fundamental properties of these
fundamental entities are not their physical properties, but the
intrinsic properties in virtue of which they have those physical
properties. And these same intrinsic properties do, when arranged
appropriately, give rise to conscious experience. Therein consists the
monism of this view: at the bottom there are fundamental entities with
certain intrinsic properties; all else is grounded in this fact.
There are many versions of Russellian Monism. Differences are due, in
part, to varying views about the relations between the intrinsic
properties, on the one side, and the mental and physical properties,
on the other. But the central disagreement concerns the nature of the
intrinsic properties. They have been held to be physical (Montero
2015; Pereboom 2015), mental (Bolender 2001), mental and physical
(Strawson 2015, 2016), or neutral (Coleman 2014). Accordingly there
are physicalist, idealist (mentalist), and neutral monist versions or
Russellian monism. The precise nature of these disagreements are
difficult to pin down, given the number of different notions of the
mental and the physical that are in play in this discussion.
The best known version of Russellian neutral monism is
panprotopsychism—a view that David Chalmers has explored over
many years (Chalmers 1996, 2015). In the standard form of this theory
the postulated intrinsic properties are characterized as being neither
experiential (they are proto-psychic) nor physical (they lack
the structural/dispositional nature of physical properties). That
makes them neutral (in the Neither Sense). But this purely
negative characterization of the intrinsic properties has occasioned
considerable discomfort. A variant of this
theory—panqualityism—addresses this problem in a most
satisfactory manner, while creating new problems of its own.
It takes redness, greenness, sweetness, roundness, etc.—the
primitive sensory qualities given to us in experience, and considered
just as such—to be the intrinsic properties of the fundamental
physical entities (cf. Chalmers 2015: 272). One’s being aware of
redness—i.e., the property of phenomenal redness—is
mental, but redness itself is not. Nor is (this kind of) redness a
physical, structural property. So panqualityism has secured a neutral
base with which we are intimately familiar.
Panqualityism has its contemporary defenders—Chalmers points to
Sam Coleman’s neutral monist proposal (Coleman 2014). And he
boldly conjectures that 
versions of the view itself were popular among the neutral monists of
the early twentieth century, including William James (1904b), Ernst
Mach (1886), and Bertrand Russell (1921). (Chalmers 2015: 271)
One may wonder how an electron’s being red can ground its
negative charge. And one may agree with Chalmers that qualities, no
matter how intricately arranged, cannot ground the phenomenal
properties of our experience. For “no instantiations of
qualities ever necessitate awareness of qualities” (Chalmers
2015: 273). Finally, one may share Wilfrid Sellars’s (1963: 35)
view that it makes no sense to think that fundamental physical
entities might have primitive sensory qualities like redness.
What the consideration of Russellian Monism shows is that (i) new
versions of neutral monism are currently being developed that borrow
relatively little from the ideas of traditional neutral monism; (ii)
but even the most developed versions of Russellian neutral monism face
considerable problems.
The case for neutral monism is best made by enumerating its
virtues.
We have already Russell’s reasons for valuing ontological
parsimony (see section 
 4.3.1
 above). Neutral monism has this theoretical virtue to a high degree.
The “immense simplification” (Russell 1959: 252) it
affords was what most attracted him to this view. The spirit of
Mach’s neutral monism is similarly antimetaphysical: 
nothing is important except what can be observed or is a datum for us,
and everything hypothetical, metaphysical and superfluous, is to be
eliminated. (Mach 1886: 27–28) 
First on the list of “metaphysical entities” (Mach 1905:
13) that have to go are “the ‘unfathomable’ thing
and the equally ‘unexplorable’ ego” (Mach 1905: 8).
And James concurs: “Consciousness as it is ordinarily understood
does not exist, any more than does Matter” (James 1905: 63).
Mach, James, and Russell agree that neutral monism solves the
mind-body problem. Russell’s account of experience (of
perceptual consciousness) may serve as an illustration of the point.
Russell frequently emphasized the miracle or mystery involved in
traditional accounts of perception (1927b: 147, 154; 1927a: 275, 400).
At the end of a purely physical chain of causes there mysteriously
arises something of a completely different nature: an experience (a
sensation of red, say). This is the hard problem of consciousness. The
neutral monist solves this problem by maintaining that “we
cannot say that ‘matter is the cause of our sensations”
(1927b: 290). Mach agrees: “Bodies do not produce
sensations” (Mach 1886: 29). To suggest otherwise is to rely on
“the monstrous idea of employing atoms to explain psychical
processes” (Mach 1886: 311). Matter/bodies are, after all,
nothing but collections of neutral entities, i.e., of Russellian
events or Machian elements. So mind-body causation reduces to causal
relations among events or elements. And, for all we know, the
event/element causing a sensation may be quite similar to the
sensation it causes. This closes the apparent chasm between the
“material process” and the ensuing experience, and the
mystery of perception vanishes.
The Analysis of Matter (Russell 1927a) is widely regarded as
the most important text of the neutral monist literature. Chapter one
of this book, entitled “The Nature of the Problem”, states
it as follows: 
the world of physics is, prima facie, so different from the
world of perception that it is difficult to see how the one can afford
evidence for the other; moreover, physics and physiology themselves
seem to give grounds for supposing that perception cannot give very
accurate information as to the external world, and thus weaken the
props upon which they are built…We must therefore find an
interpretation of physics which gives a due place to perceptions; if
not, we have no right to appeal to the empirical evidence. (Russell
1927a: 6–7; see also Russell 1948: Part III, Ch. IV) 
The previous remarks addressed to the mind-body problem in general,
and to the problem of perceptual experience in particular, contain the
core of the solution Russell proposes. By “bridging the gulf
between physics (as commonly interpreted) and perception”
(Russell 1927a: 7), neutral monism promises to solve this
problem—a problem that Russell took to be difficult and largely
unnoticed (see Russell 1948: 175–176).
Mach and James understand neutral monism as an especially radical form
of achieving perceptual contact with the world. It might be understood
as a limiting case of naïve realism—a case in which the
relation between the subject and its perceptual object becomes the
identity relation. In perception “subject and object
merge” (James 1905: 57). A single reality—a red patch,
say, when we see a tomato—is a constituent of two groups of
neutral entities: the group that is the perceiver, and the group that
is the tomato. The mind and its object become one. In James’s
words: 
A given undivided portion of experience, taken in one context of
associates, play[s] the part of the knower, or a state of mind, or
“consciousness”; while in a different context the same
undivided bit of experience plays the part of a thing known, of an
objective “content”. In a word, in one group it figures as
a thought, in another group as a thing. (James 1904b: 9–10) 
Some have seen this epistemic achievement as the most important reward
of neutral monism.
But Russell dissented. There are well known problems surrounding
accounts of perception that conceive it as a form of direct contact
with the world. Among them are the problems arising from the fact that
an object can present different and incompatible appearances to
different observers. Some neutral monists concluded that “nature
is a seething chaos of contradiction” (Holt 1914: 276). But
Russell chose to abandon the view that in perception “subject
and object merge”. Instead he locates the red patch you see when
looking at a tomato in your brain, and distinguishes it from the
tomato (from the group of events that constitute the tomato). That is
why he can assert that he “know[s] about what is happening in
the brain exactly what naïve realism thinks it knows about what
is happening in the outside world” (Russell 1927b: 138). This
solves the problem of different and incompatible appearances:
compatibility is restored by moving the conflicting features away from
the single physical object and into the brains of the different
percipients. But in making this move Russell abandons the naïve
realism of Mach and James and puts a version of representative realism
in its place. Thereby the problem of our knowledge of the external
world is reintroduced in full
 force.[12]
Mach operates on the assumption that all sciences form a whole (see
Mach 1886: 30). The great virtue of neutral monism is that it affords
a unified perspective from which scientific inquiry can be undertaken:
what I aimed at was merely to attain a safe and clear philosophical
standpoint, whence practicable paths, shrouded in no metaphysical
clouds, might be seen leading not only into the field of physics but
also into that of psycho-physiology. (Mach 1886: 47)
The idea of neutral monism as a bridge between different sciences is
also present in Russell. He presents neutral monism as 
an attempt to harmonize two different tendencies, one in psychology,
the other in physics…[viz.]…the materialistic tendency
of psychology and the anti-materialistic tendency of physics. (Russell
1921: 5–6)
According to Jerry Fodor, “the form of a philosophical theory,
often enough, is: Let’s try looking over here”
(Fodor 1981: 31). The current revival of interest in neutral monism
is, perhaps, best seen as part of the general movement to explore all
possible options in the metaphysics of consciousness—a movement
that is driven by the sense that the traditional positions face
insurmountable obstacles. David Chalmers’s paper
“Panpsychism and Panprotopsychism” (Chalmers 2015)
provides an illuminating account of the dialectic that drives some
contemporary philosophers to explore the little known neutral monistic
territory.
Every version of reductionism must deal with the question of the
ontological status of the entities it reduces: are they retained or
eliminated? Both of these components are present in traditional
neutral monism. It eliminates mind and matter as these are
traditionally conceived. There are neither “solid
persistent objects moving through space”, nor are there states
with an inbuilt and primitive “reference to objects”
(Russell 1921: 124, 36). But, on the other hand, it provides
constructions of neutral entities that are designed to play the roles
of the entities they displace. On this picture there is no sharp
boundary between retention and elimination. As the distance between
the two roles—that played by the target entity, and that played
by its neutral monist replacement—increases we move from the
pole of retention toward that of elimination. The success of this
strategy will have to be assessed on a case by case basis. There are
relatively few objections to neutral monism that turn on the details
of proposed reductions. (But see C.D. Broad’s critique of
Russell, 1925: 577–584). This fact may, however, owe less to the
excellence than to the rarity of such reductions in the literature.
The most challenging criticisms of neutral monism do not engage with
technical details, but aim squarely at the central idea of the
doctrine—the idea of neutrality.
The most frequent type of objection to the traditional versions of
neutral monism is that they are all forms of mentalistic monism:
Berkleyan idealism, panpsychism, or phenomenalism. The argument is
simple: sensations (Mach), pure experience (James) and
sensations/percepts (Russell) are paradigms of non-neutral, mental
entities. Hence there is nothing neutral about these versions of
neutral monism. The prima facie plausibility of this
objection is beyond doubt. But it is also clear that Mach, James, and
Russell were acutely aware of the problem and took themselves to have
responded in a satisfactory manner. They reject the view that a
sensation or an experience consists of a subject directing a mental
act—awareness, consciousness, acquaintance—onto on an
object. Dispensing with the subject and the act, they are left with
what used to be the object—a red patch, say. And they hold that
there is nothing mental about red patches. All it takes for this red
patch to turn into a red-sensation is for it to be appropriately
related to other entities of the same kind. There is no quick way to
adjudicate this dispute. A careful assessment of each case is
required. This type of objection—the “mentalism
suspicion”—has been articulated by a diverse group of
philosophers, among them: (Lenin 1909: 34; Stace 1946; Ayer 1971;
Feigl 1958: 426, 1975: 26–7; Maxwell 1976: 354; Popper &
Eccles 1977: 199; Strawson 1994: 97; Chalmers 1996: 155; Tully 2003:
355, 369).
The second type of objection to neutral monism argues that neutral
monism cannot accommodate experience. The argument is driven by two
deep metaphysical convictions. First, experience cannot be reduced to
(or constructed from) the non-experiential; second, strong emergence
(see section
 8.4
 below) is unintelligible. Assuming that the neutral must be
non-experiential, it follows that the neutral monist world has no room
for experience. Galen Strawson has wielded this argument against all
forms of traditional materialism, and occasionally also against
neutral monism (see Strawson 1994: 46–54, 96–99; Strawson
2016.).
Chalmers’s main objection to the panqualityist form of neutral
monism (see section
 4.3.2
 above) though stated in different terms, leads up to the same result.
There is no path that leads from the qualities we experience (but
which are not experiential themselves) to the experience of those
qualities. Having an experience is a matter of having phenomenal
qualities. Phenomenal qualities involve awareness of qualities. But
“no instantiations of qualities ever necessitate awareness of
qualities” (Chalmers 2015: 273). This “quality/awareness
gap” (Chalmers 2015: 273) shows that no structure of qualities
can add up to
 experience.[13]
But is it really true that the resources of neutral monism are too
limited to “manufacture” awareness? Here it is instructive
to reflect briefly on Russell’s changing ideas about awareness.
Before embracing neutral monism, Russell defended a simple and very
influential account of awareness: to be aware of x (a red sense-datum,
say) just is to bear a special (simple and unanalyzable)
relation to x—the so-called acquaintance relation. We have seen
that Russell abandoned this account of awareness (see section
 4.3.2
 above). But perhaps it is possible to rebuild a structurally similar
account of awareness within the neutral monist framework. In place of
a simple (Cartesian style) subject or self, there now is a complex
bundle-self (composed of neutral events). In place of a simple
two-place relation of acquaintance, there now is a complex n-place
relation obtaining between x (a red patch, say) and the various other
events composing the complex bundle self of which the red patch is a
member. And for S (the bundle-self) to be aware of x (the red patch)
just is for x to bear this special n-place relation to x to
the other members of the bundle that make up S. The overall shape of
the two accounts of awareness is the same: a self bearing a special
relation to an object. This suggests the following thought: if it is
granted that Russell’s old account of awareness did shed some
light one the question how experience enters the world, then why not
accept that the new (neutral monistically reconstructed) account of
awareness is equally illuminating. So if the quality/awareness gap had
no force against Russell’s old account of awareness, then we
should not expect it to have force against the neutral monistically
reconstructed account of awareness.
This does not establish that neutral monism can overcome the problem
of experience. Both accounts can be rejected, either on the grounds
that experience is fundamental and unanalyzable, or on the grounds
that they misconstrue the nature of experience. And even if
Russell’s original analysis is accepted, its neutral monistic
reconstruction may be rejected, on the grounds that the assumed
analogy does not hold. So what we have here is no more than a
tentative proposal how the traditional neutral monist, and the
contemporary panqualityist, might begin to think about the difficult
problem of accommodating experience in the neutral monist framework.
To the extent that his proposal succeeds, it does raise a question
suggested by Strawson’s argument above: is experience, thus
understood in a neutral monist setting, a feature that is emergent in
an objectionable way (see section
 8.4
 below)? 
The neutral monism of Mach and James is committed to naively realistic
account of perceptual experience (see section
 6.4
 above). Nonveridical experiences—illusions, hallucinations,
dreams, etc.—are difficult to accommodate within naïve
realism. For the entities needed to constitute nonveridical
experiences—e.g., the pink rat that the drunkard
“sees”—do not exist.
But traditional neutral monism provides an ontology rich enough to
address this problem. The pink shape experienced by the drunkard
exists: it is a portion of pure experience (James), or an element
(Mach). This much naïve realism is true, even in the cases of
nonveridical experience. But the pink rat that the drunkard takes
himself to see does not exist—the pink patch he sees is not a
member of a group of neutral elements that constitute a rat. There is
nothing wrong with the drunkard’s visual experience; what is
mistaken is his assumption that what he sees is a rat. Russell (though
not a naïve realist himself) states this point most succinctly:
“There are in fact no illusions of the senses, but only mistakes
in interpreting sensational data as signs of things other than
themselves” (Russell 1948: 149–50). Mach puts the point as
follows: 
When we consider elements like red, green, hot, cold and the rest,
which are physical and mental in virtue of their dependence on both
external and internal circumstances, and are in both respects
immediately given and identical, the question as to illusion and
reality loses its sense. Here we are simultaneously confronted by the
elements of the real world and of the ego. The only possible further
question of interest concerns their functional
interdependence…. (Mach 1905: 7–8)
Traditional neutral monism has been characterized as a form of
reductionism or constructionism. The reductionist version of neutral
monism takes mental and physical phenomena to be identical with groups
of neutral entities. Russell’s constructionist version of the
doctrine contents itself with the claim that there are logical
constructions of neutral entities that play the roles of physical and
mental entities; whether there also are mental and physical entities,
as originally conceived, is a question that the constructionist does
not address. Neutral monism differs from other versions of
reductionism/constructionism by insisting on the neutrality of the
basis. And its reductive/constructionist spirit sets it apart from the
certain versions of nonreductive theories (about the mental) with
which it is occasionally confused or identified. Panpsychism,
phenomenalism, emergentism, and the dual aspect theory (sometimes
understood as property dualism) are the leading candidates. And
recently a number of philosophers have argued that neutral
monism—in its traditional form as well as in its new Russellian
monist form—is best interpreted as a nonstandard version of
physicalism.
Panpsychism holds that every basic entity—usually understood as
a physical entity—is also a mind. The physical nature (if
present) and the mental nature of the basic entities are fundamental,
i.e., irreducible (to each other or to anything else). On the face of
it, panpsychism and neutral monism are strikingly different. Neutral
monism reduces mental and physical phenomena, panpsychism does not;
neutral monism holds that basic reality is neutral, panpsychism does
not. And neutral monism is compatible with the view that most physical
objects, and all their parts, are absolutely nonmental, whereas
panpsychism is not. This is how things look on the Neither
View of neutrality. On the Both View of neutrality,
things are less clear. The most natural reading of the Both
View will, however, not yield panpsychism—the view that
every basic physical entity has a mind—but a dual aspect
view—a view according to which every basic entity has a physical
and and a mental aspect or side. This raises further questions about
how to distinguish panpsychist and dual aspect
theories—questions that are too specialized to be pursued
here.
While the definition of neutral monism may distinguish it clearly from
panpsychism, consideration of the extant versions of neutral monism
has tended to suggest a different picture. The allegedly neutral basic
entities of traditional neutral monism strike many as manifestly
mental (see section
 7.2
 above). This is not the place to assess the accuracy of this
impression. But there can be little doubt that it is the source of the
wide-spread suspicion that neutral monism is best understood as a
version of panpsychism or of phenomenalism.
Phenomenalism has been defended as a doctrine about language, about
facts, and about things. Taken in this last sense, it attempts to
“reduce material objects to sensa, that is, to explain them as
consisting solely of sensa or as being primarily groups or patterns of
them” (Hirst 2006: 271). We might substitute the terms
“sense-data”, “sensations”,
“percepts”, “experiences”, etc. for
Hirst’s term “sensa”. The worry is always the same:
the basic entities of neutral monism are not neutral but mental. Hence
neutral monism is a form of purely mentalistic metaphysics. It is true
that traditional neutral monism is stated in terms of sensations
(Mach), pure experience (James), and sensations and percepts
(Russell). But, as used by the neutral monists, these terms are
supposedly purged of their usual mental dimension. In the neutral
monist framework, the predicates “mental” and
“physical” apply solely to groups of neutral entities. To
call a particular element—a sensation, a percept, a bit of pure
experience—mental or physical is to speak elliptically: it is to
say that this neutral entity is a constituent of a group of elements
that, taken as a whole, is mental or physical. Moreover, neutral
monism is not limited to those entities that are sensations and
perceptions—this is particularly clear in the case of Mach and
Russell. The existence of vast majority of neutral entities is
inferred from the minute set of elements that are sensations and
perceptions. These inferred elements are outside of all minds (see
especially section
 4.3.3
 above). These are the strong anti-phenomenalist claims that neutral
monism makes. How successfully the various neutral monists defend
these claims is, of course, a difficult further question.
As in the case of the panpsychism suspicion, the source of the worry
that neutral monism may collapse into phenomenalism is grounded, not
in the definition of neutral monism, but in the actual versions of
neutral monism that have been put forth. The worry is that the
allegedly neutral entities are really mental, thereby turning neutral
monism into phenomenalism.
The theory of dual or double aspects is usually traced back to Spinoza
(1677). The fundamental idea uniting the family of views that are
gathered together under this label is that there is an underlying
reality that we can grasp as mental or as physical, depending on the
point of view from which we apprehend it. The mental and the physical
are aspects of this underlying reality which, in itself, is neither
mental nor physical. Each one of us can know their own brain under
both of these aspects—via introspection and (scientific)
observation. But the claim of the theory is quite general: everything
there is is to be understood as consisting of an underlying reality
that has these two aspects.
Neutral monism and the dual-aspect theory share a central claim: there
is an underlying reality that is neither mental nor physical. But that
is where the agreement stops. Neutral monism has no room for the
central feature of the dual-aspect theory: the mental and physical
aspects, or sides, or properties that characterize the underlying
entities of dual-aspect theory. The neutral monist accepts the
mental/physical distinction. But it resides at the level or groups of
neutral entities. Grouped one way, the neutral entities that
constitute your brain are thoughts and feelings; grouped another way,
they are atoms and neurons and lobes. Whether a given group of
interrelated neutral entities counts as mental or physical depends on
the functional role this group occupies (see section
 3).
 On this picture, the mentality and physicality are features of
complex structures of neutral entities. But the entities themselves
are free of mental or physical aspects/sides/properties. Therein
consists their neutrality.
But if neutrality is understood according to the Both View,
the case for identifying neutral monism with the dual-aspect theory is
strengthened. Much will turn on how the details of the Both
View are articulated. It must not, for example, be understood as
proposing the identification of mental and physical properties. For
the dual-aspect theory insists that the two aspects are fundamental
and irreducible to each other. Another question concerns the
relationship of the aspects and properties. If aspects are understood
as properties, dual-aspect theory may simply collapse into property
dualism (see, e.g., Van Gulick 2014). Dual-aspect theorists have
pushed back by insisting that aspects are not properties (see Skrbina
2014: 228–29). But this may, in turn, block the project of
reconciling the dual-aspect theory with neutral monism. For the
neutrality, on the Both as well as on the Neither
View, is understood in terms of mental and physical
properties.
There is a lively debate concerning the relationship between neutral
monism and dual-aspect theory (see, e.g., Velmans 2008; Skrbina 2014;
see also section
 5.4).
 The decision about these two types of theory—whether they are
incompatible rivals, whether they are distinct but compatible, or
whether they are identical—is still out.
The basic idea of emergence has to do with the fact that complex
systems may display interesting novel properties—properties not
possessed by their parts. This idea has been regimented in various
ways. Following Chalmers, we can distinguish between weak and strong
emergence. Weakly emergent phenomena are merely unexpected, given our
knowledge of the domain from which they arise. Strongly emergent
phenomena are not just unexpected; they cannot (not even in principle)
be deduced from the domain from which they arise (see Chalmers 2006:
244).
Weak emergence will, no doubt, be a wide-spread phenomenon in the
neutral monist world. It poses no problem. But neutral monism,
understood as a form of reductionism/constructionism appears to rule
out strong emergence. Phenomena that cannot be deduced from the domain
from which they arise cannot be reduced to it or constructed from it.
The existence of strongly emergent features would therefore falsify
the neutral monist thesis that everything is reducible
to/constructible from the underlying neutral level of the neutral
monist ontology.
The contrary view is defended by Landini, who argues that (strong)
emergence plays a crucial role in Russell’s neutral monism. If
the fundamental transient physical particulars (or events) have no
phenomenal characters (or qualia), such qualities must be understood
as strongly emergent features within the framework of Russell’s
neutral monism. 
Qualia never occur in transient particulars. In Russell’s view,
qualia emerge from the series of brain states…colors, pitches,
smells, tastes and textures are emergent properties of series of brain
states…. (Landini 2011: 302–305)
But Russell’s remarks about emergence (Russell 1927b:
293–96) allow different reading. When called upon to present
examples of events, Russell gives the following list: 
seeing a flash of lightning…hearing a tyre burst, or smelling a
rotten egg, or feeling the coldness of a frog…particular colors
and sounds and so on are events. (Russell 1927b: 287–88) 
All of these events are percepts—the only kinds of events we can
know without inference. And, pace Landini, all of these events do have
qualitative characters. When Russell speaks of emergence, he has in
mind the relationship between the abstract mathematical properties of
events and their intrinsic qualitative characters. And he maintains
that latter are emergent with respect to the former because there is
no inferential path leading from the abstract mathematical features of
an event to its intrinsic qualitative features. What this means is
that if one were to carry out the neutral monist program by focusing
exclusively on the abstract mathematical characteristics of events,
then the existence qualitative characters of certain events would
constitute a (strongly) emergent fact. For such abstract and
mathematical considerations 
cannot conceivably…prove that there are visual events, or
auditory events, or events of any of the kind that we know by
perception. (Russell 1927b: 295) 
But this is not how the neutral monist (who follows Russell’s
lead) starts out. Our percepts are our initial data, and they are
qualitative through and through. The existence of quality is not
something that we have to deduce from other known facts. On the
contrary, it is the initial datum. Such other events as we may believe
in, whose intrinsic qualities we do not know, are all inferred from
this bedrock of qualitatively loaded percepts. It is therefore a
mistake to try to explain the existence of qualitative characteristics
(or qualia) as emerging from complex brain states. These
characteristics are there, in the form of our percepts, at the very
foundation of Russell’s neutral monism.
In the past neutral monism has often been interpreted as a form of
mentalism. A number of contemporary philosophers argue that it is best
understood as a form of physicalism.
Daniel Stoljar (2001), Derk Pereboom (2011, 2015), and Barbara Montero
(2015) have interpreted Russellian monism (see section
 5.5)
 as a form of physicalism. They argue that the categorical properties
that ground the dispositional properties that feature in physical
theory are themselves physical properties, albeit physical properties
of a different kind. Once the realm of the physical is thus expanded,
the attempt to classify the categorical bases of the dispositional
properties of physics as neutral properties appears misguided. The
proposal to construe the categorical bases as neutral results from an
unduly narrow conception of the physical.
The recent literature also contains a number of attempts to interpret
traditional neutral monism as a form of physicalism. Banks (see
section
 5.2)
 presents his neutral monism (realistic empiricism) as a direct
descendant of traditional neutral monism (Banks 2014, viii). But he
also holds that his neutral monism is “a kind of
physicalism” (Banks 2014: 7, 142). Like Russell, he embraces an
ontology of events. And he takes himself to follow Russell in
construing these events as manifestations of underlying powers or
energies—such as electromagnetism, gravitation, and nuclear
forces (Banks 149), as well as neural energies (Banks 2014: 142).
These considerations lead him to the following observation about the
nature of Russell’s (and his own) event particulars: 
Russellian neutral event particulars are so physicalistic in
nature that there does not seem to be any reason to assume that these
natural qualities in physics have anything at all in common with our
sensations, which are qualities of a very different order. A typical
event particular in Russell’s universe would be something
perhaps like the emission of a quantum of radiation from an atom,
having little or nothing to do with events in the human nervous system
at a very different scale of complexity and size. (Banks 2014: 156)
There is much more to Banks’s complex view. But this suffices to
convey something of the physicalistic flavor of his interpretation of
traditional neutral monism.
After a careful survey of the development of Russell’s neutral
monism, Donovan Wishon concludes that Russell’s final version of
neutral monism (developed in the 1940s and after) “is
very plausibly interpreted as a version of ‘Russellian
Physicalism’” (Wishon 2015: 92). Among other things, he
draws our attention to Russell’s own claim that “I find
myself in ontology increasingly materialistic” (Russell 1946:
700). And he points out that Russell argues that all events,
including all our mental events, are subject to the laws of physics.
Hence “mental events will turn out to be a subclass of the
physical events that make up reality” (Wishon 2015: 112).
According to Wishon, this shows that mental events are not
ontologically distinct from physical events. Only their special
epistemic accessibility distinguishes them from the other physical
events (Wishon 2015: 112). In this way, Wishon suggests, Russell final
version of neutral monism effectively turns into a version of
Russellian Physicalism.
We have noted (see section
 1)
 how Landini’s interpretation of the notion of neutrality
(according to (3)—the Possible Constituent View) allows
him to argue that neutral monism is compatible with physicalism. As he
sees it, Russell is committed to such a version of physicalist neutral
monism. Accordingly, Russell is engaged in the project of
“constructing both [minds and matter] out of orderings of
physical events that are their stages” (Landini 2011: 280).
After a detailed discussion (Landini 2011: 291–297), Landini
reaches the conclusion that the transient particulars (or events) from
which Russell constructs mind and matter “are without intrinsic
phenomenal character” (Landini 2011: 297). This makes it
possible to regard them as physical entities in good standing. Their
neutrality consists in the fact that they are the building blocks of
both mental and physical continuants (see Landini 2011: 292).
These attempts to combine neutral monism with physicalism, or to
reinterpret neutral monism along physicalist lines pose a serious
challenge to neutral monism as usually understood. They deny the
central claim that the fundamental building blocks of the world are
neutral, i.e., nonphysical and nonmental. But no less noteworthy is
the degree to which these versions of physicalism depart from more
standard versions of physicalism. These nonstandard versions of
physicalism agree with neutral monism in holding that physics provides
an incomplete picture of the world. The disagreement is limited to a
dispute about the nature of the materials that are needed to fill out
the picture that physics provides. The neutral monist searches for
something that is neither mental nor physical, in the traditional
senses of these terms. The physicalists whom we are currently
considering hope to find the missing materials in something that is
physical, but not physical in the traditional sense of the term. This
does suggest that the difference between neutral monism and this sort
of physicalism may not be so deep after all (see Chalmers 2015 for
more on this question).
The traditional versions of neutral monism of Mach, James, and Russell
reflect the empiricist outlook of their authors. This leads them to
turn to experience, when searching for their neutral entities. And
this leads us to see their doctrines as tainted by mentalism. Perhaps
the traditional neutral monists were wrong to forge this tight link
between the neutral entities and experience. Perhaps we are too quick
in dismissing their efforts to discover a neutral base in this area.
The rising interest in the history of analytic philosophy, the gradual
rediscovery of Russell as a metaphysician and epistemologist, and the
existence of new work such as Erik Banks’s new study of
traditional neutral monism (Banks 2014) hold out some hope for better
understanding of traditional neutral monism.
But the fortunes of neutral monism are no longer exclusively tied to
the fate of traditional neutral monism. The neutral monist strand
within the broader movement of Russellian monism (see section
 5.5
 above) is a promising new development. Despite invoking
Russell’s name, these versions of neutral monism explore fresh
ideas that hold out hope for a new life for neutral monism. And some
contemporary attempts to revive neutral monism are free of any ties to
the traditional versions of the doctrine. Thomas Nagel’s recent
defense of neutral monism comes to mind (see section
 5.4).
 And the idea to make abstract entities—information, structure,
computation, mathematical reality—into the neutral basis of a
metaphysical system is being actively developed by philosophers and
scientists alike (see section
 5.1).
Until quite recently it seemed that neutral monism (in its traditional
form) was a brief and unimportant sideshow on the grand stage of
metaphysics. Notwithstanding the fact that the three main
protagonists—Mach, James, and Russell—were important
figures, whose ideas profoundly influenced many areas of contemporary
thought, their speculations about neutral monism seemed to have
vanished from the philosophical scene. But the current wave of
interest in the traditional versions of neutral monism, as well as the
lively development of alternative versions of neutral monism, indicate
that neutral monism may, once more, become a live option in the
ongoing efforts to explore the metaphysics of mind.