Relatively little is known for certain about Machiavelli's early life
in comparison with many important figures of the Italian Renaissance
(the following section draws on Capponi 2010; Vivanti 2013; Celenza
2015) He was born 3 May 1469 in Florence and at a young age became a
pupil of a renowned Latin teacher, Paolo da Ronciglione. It is
speculated that he attended the University of Florence, and even a
cursory glance at his corpus reveals that he received an excellent
humanist education. It is only with his entrance into public view,
with his appointment in 1498 as the Second Chancellor of the Republic
of Florence, however, that we begin to acquire a full and accurate
picture of his life. For the next fourteen years, Machiavelli engaged
in a flurry of diplomatic activity on behalf of Florence, traveling to
the major centers of Italy as well as to the royal court of France and
to the imperial curia of Maximilian. A large body of extant letters,
dispatches, and occasional writings testify to his political
assignments as well as to his acute talent for the analysis of
personalities and institutions.
Florence had been under a republican government since 1494, when the
leading Medici family and its supporters had been driven from power.
During this time, Machiavelli thrived under the patronage of the
Florentine gonfaloniere (or chief administrator for life)
Piero Soderini. In 1512, however, with the assistance of papal troops,
the Medici defeated the republic's armed forces and dissolved the
government. Machiavelli was a direct victim of the regime change: he
was initially placed in a form of internal exile and, when he was
(wrongly) suspected of conspiring against the Medici in 1513, he was
imprisoned and tortured for several weeks. His retirement thereafter
to his farm outside of Florence afforded the occasion and the impetus
for him to turn to literary pursuits.
The first of his writings in a more reflective vein was also
ultimately the one most commonly associated with his name, The
Prince. Written at the end of 1513 (and perhaps early 1514), but
only formally published posthumously in 1532, The Prince was
composed in great haste by an author who was, among other things,
seeking to regain his status in Florentine political affairs. (Many of
his colleagues in the republican government were quickly rehabilitated
and returned to service under the Medici.) Originally written for
presentation to Giuliano de'Medici (who may well have appreciated it),
the dedication was changed, upon Giuliano's death, to Lorenzo
de'Medici, who almost certainly did not read it when it came into his
hands in 1516.
Meanwhile, Machiavelli's enforced retirement led him to other literary
activities. He wrote verse, plays, and short prose, penned a study of
The Art of War (published in 1521), and produced biographical
and historical sketches. Most importantly, he composed his other major
contribution to political thought, the Discourses on the Ten Books
of Titus Livy, an exposition of the principles of republican rule
masquerading as a commentary on the work of the famous historian of
the Roman Republic. Unlike The Prince, the
Discourses was authored over a long period of time
(commencing perhaps in 1514 or 1515 and completed in 1518 or 1519,
although again only published posthumously in 1531). The book may have
been shaped by informal discussions attended by Machiavelli among some
of the leading Florentine intellectual and political figures under the
sponsorship of Cosimo Rucellai.
Near the end of his life, and probably as a result of the aid of
well-connected friends whom he never stopped badgering for
intervention, Machiavelli began to return to the favor of the Medici
family. In 1520, he was commissioned by Cardinal Giulio de'Medici to
compose a History of Florence, an assignment completed in
1525 and presented to the Cardinal, who had since ascended to the
papal throne as Clement VII, in Rome. Other small tasks were
forthcoming from the Medici government, but before he could achieve a
full rehabilitation, he died on 21 June 1527.
It has been a common view among political philosophers that there
exists a special relationship between moral goodness and legitimate
authority. Many authors (especially those who composed
mirror-of-princes books or royal advice books during the Middle Ages
and Renaissance) believed that the use of political power was only
rightful if it was exercised by a ruler whose personal moral character
was strictly virtuous. Thus rulers were counseled that if they wanted
to succeed—that is, if they desired a long and peaceful reign
and aimed to pass their office down to their offspring—they must
be sure to behave in accordance with conventional standards of ethical
goodness. In a sense, it was thought that rulers did well when they
did good; they earned the right to be obeyed and respected inasmuch as
they showed themselves to be virtuous and morally upright (see Briggs
and Nederman forthcoming).
Machiavelli criticizes at length precisely this moralistic view of
authority in his best-known treatise, The Prince. For
Machiavelli, there is no moral basis on which to judge the difference
between legitimate and illegitimate uses of power. Rather, authority
and power are essentially coequal: whoever has power has the right to
command; but goodness does not ensure power and the good person has no
more authority by virtue of being good. Thus, in direct opposition to
a moralistic theory of politics, Machiavelli says that the only real
concern of the political ruler is the acquisition and maintenance of
power (although he talks less about power per se than about
“maintaining the state”.) In this sense, Machiavelli
presents a trenchant criticism of the concept of authority by arguing
that the notion of legitimate rights of rulership adds nothing to the
actual possession of power. The Prince purports to reflect
the self-conscious political realism of an author who is fully
aware—on the basis of direct experience with the Florentine
government—that goodness and right are not sufficient to win and
maintain political office. Machiavelli thus seeks to learn and teach
the rules of political power. For Machiavelli, power
characteristically defines political activity, and hence it is
necessary for any successful ruler to know how power is to be used.
Only by means of the proper application of power, Machiavelli
believes, can individuals be brought to obey and will the ruler be
able to maintain the state in safety and security.
Machiavelli's political theory, then, represents a concerted effort to
exclude issues of authority and legitimacy from consideration in the
discussion of political decision-making and political judgment.
Nowhere does this come out more clearly than in his treatment of the
relationship between law and force. Machiavelli acknowledges that good
laws and good arms constitute the dual foundations of a well-ordered
political system. But he immediately adds that since coercion creates
legality, he will concentrate his attention on force. He says,
“Since there cannot be good laws without good arms, I will not
consider laws but speak of arms” (Prince CW 47). In
other words, the legitimacy of law rests entirely upon the threat of
coercive force; authority is impossible for Machiavelli as a right
apart from the power to enforce it. Consequently, Machiavelli is led
to conclude that fear is always preferable to affection in subjects,
just as violence and deception are superior to legality in effectively
controlling them. Machiavelli observes that 
one can say this in general of men: they are ungrateful, disloyal,
insincere and deceitful, timid of danger and avid of profit….
Love is a bond of obligation which these miserable creatures break
whenever it suits them to do so; but fear holds them fast by a dread
of punishment that never passes. (Prince CW 62; translation
revised) 
As a result, Machiavelli cannot really be said to have a theory of
obligation separate from the imposition of power; people obey only
because they fear the consequences of not doing so, whether the loss
of life or of privileges. And of course, power alone cannot obligate
one, inasmuch as obligation assumes that one cannot meaningfully do
otherwise.
Concomitantly, a Machiavellian perspective directly attacks the notion
of any grounding for authority independent of the sheer possession of
power. For Machiavelli, people are compelled to obey purely in
deference to the superior power of the state. If I think that I should
not obey a particular law, what eventually leads me to submit to that
law will be either a fear of the power of the state or the actual
exercise of that power. It is power which in the final instance is
necessary for the enforcement of conflicting views of what I ought to
do; I can only choose not to obey if I possess the power to resist the
demands of the state or if I am willing to accept the consequences of
the state's superiority of coercive force. Machiavelli's argument in
The Prince is designed to demonstrate that politics can only
coherently be defined in terms of the supremacy of coercive power;
authority as a right to command has no independent status. He
substantiates this assertion by reference to the observable realities
of political affairs and public life as well as by arguments revealing
the self-interested nature of all human conduct. For Machiavelli it is
meaningless and futile to speak of any claim to authority and the
right to command which is detached from the possession of superior
political power. The ruler who lives by his rights alone will surely
wither and die by those same rights, because in the rough-and-tumble
of political conflict those who prefer power to authority are more
likely to succeed. Without exception the authority of states and their
laws will never be acknowledged when they are not supported by a show
of power which renders obedience inescapable. The methods for
achieving obedience are varied, and depend heavily upon the foresight
that the prince exercises. Hence, the successful ruler needs special
training.
Machiavelli presents to his readers a vision of political rule
allegedly purged of extraneous moralizing influences and fully aware
of the foundations of politics in the effective exercise of power. The
term that best captures Machiavelli's vision of the requirements of
power politics is virtù. While the Italian word would
normally be translated into English as “virtue”, and would
ordinarily convey the conventional connotation of moral goodness,
Machiavelli obviously means something very different when he refers to
the virtù of the prince. In particular, Machiavelli
employs the concept of virtù to refer to the range of
personal qualities that the prince will find it necessary to acquire
in order to “maintain his state” and to “achieve
great things”, the two standard markers of power for him. This
makes it brutally clear there can be no equivalence between the
conventional virtues and Machiavellian virtù.
Machiavelli's sense of what it is to be a person of
virtù can thus be summarized by his recommendation
that the prince above all else must possess a “flexible
disposition”. That ruler is best suited for office, on
Machiavelli's account, who is capable of varying her/his conduct from
good to evil and back again “as fortune and circumstances
dictate” (Prince CW 66; see Nederman and Bogiaris
2018).
Not coincidentally, Machiavelli also uses the term
virtù in his book The Art of War in order to
describe the strategic prowess of the general who adapts to different
battlefield conditions as the situation dictates. Machiavelli sees
politics to be a sort of a battlefield on a different scale. Hence,
the prince just like the general needs to be in possession of
virtù, that is, to know which strategies and
techniques are appropriate to what particular circumstances (Wood
1967). Thus, virtù winds up being closely connected to
Machiavelli's notion of the power. The ruler of virtù
is bound to be competent in the application of power; to possess
virtù is indeed to have mastered all the rules
connected with the effective application of power.
Virtù is to power politics what conventional virtue is
to those thinkers who suppose that moral goodness is sufficient to be
a legitimate ruler: it is the touchstone of political success.
What is the conceptual link between virtù and the
effective exercise of power for Machiavelli? The answer lies with
another central Machiavellian concept, Fortuna (usually
translated as “fortune”). Fortuna is the enemy of
political order, the ultimate threat to the safety and security of the
state. Machiavelli's use of the concept has been widely debated
without a very satisfactory resolution. Suffice it to say that, as
with virtù, Fortuna is employed by him in a
distinctive way. Where conventional representations treated
Fortuna as a mostly benign, if fickle, goddess, who is the
source of human goods as well as evils, Machiavelli's fortune is a
malevolent and uncompromising fount of human misery, affliction, and
disaster. While human Fortuna may be responsible for such
success as human beings achieve, no man can act effectively when
directly opposed by the goddess (Discourses CW
407–408).
Machiavelli's most famous discussion of Fortuna occurs in
Chapter 25 of The Prince, in which he proposes two analogies
for understanding the human situation in the face of events.
Initially, he asserts that fortune resembles 
one of our destructive rivers which, when it is angry, turns the
plains into lakes, throws down the trees and buildings, takes earth
from one spot, puts it in another; everyone flees before the flood;
everyone yields to its fury and nowhere can repel it. 
Yet the furor of a raging river does not mean that its depredations
are beyond human control: before the rains come, it is possible to
take precautions to divert the worst consequences of the natural
elements. “The same things happen about Fortuna”,
Machiavelli observes, 
She shows her power where virtù and wisdom do not
prepare to resist her, and directs her fury where she knows that no
dykes or embankments are ready to hold her. (Prince CW 90)
Fortune may be resisted by human beings, but only in those
circumstances where “virtù and wisdom”
have already prepared for her inevitable arrival.
Machiavelli reinforces the association of Fortuna with the
blind strength of nature by explaining that political success depends
upon appreciation of the operational principles of Fortuna.
His own experience has taught him that 
it is better to be impetuous than cautious, because Fortuna
is a woman and it is necessary, in order to keep her under, to beat
and maul her. 
In other words, Fortuna demands a violent response of those
who would control her. “She more often lets herself be overcome
by men using such methods than by those who proceed coldly”,
Machiavelli continues, “therefore always, like a woman, she is
the friend of young men, because they are less cautious, more
spirited, and with more boldness master her” (Prince CW
92). The wanton behavior of Fortuna demands an aggressive,
even violent response, lest she take advantage of those men who are
too retiring or “effeminate” to dominate her.
Machiavelli's remarks point toward several salient conclusions about
Fortuna and her place in his intellectual universe.
Throughout his corpus, Fortuna is depicted as a primal source
of violence (especially as directed against humanity) and as
antithetical to reason. Thus, Machiavelli realizes that only
preparation to pose an extreme response to the vicissitudes of
Fortuna will ensure victory against her. This is what
virtù provides: the ability to respond to fortune at
any time and in any way that is necessary.
These basic building blocks of Machiavelli's thought have induced
considerable controversy among his readers going back to the sixteenth
century, when he was denounced as an apostle of the Devil, but also
was read and applied sympathetically by authors (and politicians)
enunciating the doctrine of “reason of state” (Meinecke
1924 [1957]). The main source of dispute concerned Machiavelli's
attitude toward conventional moral and religious standards of human
conduct, mainly in connection with The Prince. For many, his
teaching endorses immoralism or, at least, amoralism. The most extreme
versions of this reading find Machiavelli to be a “teacher of
evil”, in the famous words of Leo Strauss (1958: 9–10), on
the grounds that he counsels leaders to avoid the common values of
justice, mercy, temperance, wisdom, and love of their people in
preference to the use of cruelty, violence, fear, and deception. A
more moderate school of thought, associated with the name of Benedetto
Croce (1925), views Machiavelli as simply a “realist” or a
“pragmatist” advocating the suspension of commonplace
ethics in matters of politics. Moral values have no place in the sorts
of decisions that political leaders must make, and it is a category
error of the gravest sort to think otherwise. Perhaps the mildest
version of the amoral hypothesis has been proposed by Quentin Skinner
(1978), who claims that the ruler's commission of acts deemed vicious
by convention is a “last best” option. Concentrating on
the claim in The Prince that a head of state ought to do good
if he can, but must be prepared to commit evil if he must
(Prince CW 58), Skinner argues that Machiavelli prefers
conformity to moral virtue ceteris paribus.
Disinterest in ethical concerns also permeates the claim, popular in
the early- and mid-twentieth century, that Machiavelli simply adopts
the stance of a scientist—a kind of “Galileo of
politics”—in distinguishing between the
“facts” of political life and the “values” of
moral judgment (Olschki 1945; Cassirer 1946; Prezzolini 1954 [1967[). He is
thereby set into the context of the scientific revolution more
generally. The point of Machiavellian “science” is not to
distinguish between “just” and “unjust” forms
of government, but to explain how politicians deploy power for their
own gain. Thus, Machiavelli rises to the mantle of the founder of
“modern” political science, in contrast with Aristotle's
classical norm-laden vision of a political science of virtue. More
recently, the Machiavelli-as-scientist interpretation has largely gone
out of favor, although some have recently found merit in a revised
version of the thesis (e.g., Dyer and Nederman 2016).
Other of Machiavelli's readers have found no taint of immoralism in
his thought whatsoever. Jean-Jacques Rousseau long ago held that the
real lesson of The Prince is to teach the people the truth
about how princes behave and thus to expose, rather than celebrate,
the immorality at the core of one-man rule. Various versions of this
thesis have been disseminated more recently. Some scholars, such as
Garrett Mattingly (1958), have pronounced Machiavelli the supreme
satirist, pointing out the foibles of princes and their advisors. The
fact that Machiavelli later wrote biting popular stage comedies is
cited as evidence in support of his strong satirical bent. Thus, we
should take nothing Machiavelli says about moral conduct at face
value, but instead should understand his remarks as sharply humorous
commentary on public affairs. Alternatively, Mary Deitz (1986) asserts
that Machiavelli's agenda was driven by a desire to “trap”
the prince by offering carefully crafted advice (such as arming the
people) designed to undo the ruler if taken seriously and
followed.
A similar range of opinions exists in connection with Machiavelli's
attitude toward religion in general, and Christianity in particular.
Machiavelli was no friend of the institutionalized Christian Church as
he knew it. The Discourses makes clear that conventional
Christianity saps from human beings the vigor required for active
civil life (CW 228–229, 330–331). And The Prince
speaks with equal parts disdain and admiration about the contemporary
condition of the Church and its Pope (CW 29, 44–46, 65,
91–92). Many scholars have taken such evidence to indicate that
Machiavelli was himself profoundly anti-Christian, preferring the
pagan civil religions of ancient societies such as Rome, which he
regarded to be more suitable for a city endowed with
virtù. Anthony Parel (1992) argues that Machiavelli's
cosmos, governed by the movements of the stars and the balance of the
humors, takes on an essentially pagan and pre-Christian cast. For
others, Machiavelli may best be described as a man of conventional, if
unenthusiastic, piety, prepared to bow to the externalities of worship
but not deeply devoted in either soul or mind to the tenets of
Christian faith. A few dissenting voices, most notably Sebastian de
Grazia (1989) and Maurizio Viroli (2006 [2010]), have attempted to
rescue Machiavelli's reputation from those who view him as hostile or
indifferent to Christianity. Grazia demonstrates how central biblical
themes run throughout Machiavelli's writings, finding there a coherent
conception of a divinely-centered and ordered cosmos in which other
forces (“the heavens”, “fortune”, and the
like) are subsumed under a divine will and plan. Cary Nederman (2009:
28–49) extends and systematizes Grazia's insights by showing how
such central Christian theological doctrines as grace and free will
form important elements of Machiavelli's conceptual structure. Viroli
considers, by contrast, the historical attitudes toward the Christian
religion as manifested in the Florentine republic of Machiavelli's
day.
Machiavelli has also been credited (most recently by Skinner 1978)
with formulating for the first time the “modern concept of the
state”, understood in the broadly Weberian sense of an
impersonal form of rule possessing a monopoly of coercive authority
within a set territorial boundary. Certainly, the term lo
stato appears widely in Machiavelli's writings, especially in
The Prince, in connection with the acquisition and
application of power in a coercive sense, which renders its meaning
distinct from the Latin term status (condition or station)
from which it is derived. Moreover, scholars cite Machiavelli's
influence in shaping the early modern debates surrounding
“reason of state”—the doctrine that the good of the
state itself takes precedence over all other considerations, whether
morality or the good of citizens—as evidence that he was
received by his near-contemporaries as a theorist of the state
(Meineke 1924 [1957]). Machiavelli's name and doctrines were widely
invoked to justify the priority of the interests of the state in the
age of absolutism.
Yet, as Harvey Mansfield (1996) has shown, a careful reading of
Machiavelli's use of lo stato in The Prince and
elsewhere does not support this interpretation. Machiavelli's
“state” remains a personal patrimony, a possession more in
line with the medieval conception of dominium as the
foundation of rule. (Dominium is a Latin term that may be
translated with equal force as “private property” and as
“political dominion”.) Thus, the “state” is
literally owned by whichever prince happens to have control of it.
Moreover, the character of governance is determined by the personal
qualities and traits of the ruler—hence, Machiavelli's emphasis
on virtù as indispensable for the prince's success.
These aspects of the deployment of lo stato in The
Prince mitigate against the “modernity” of his idea.
Machiavelli is at best a transitional figure in the process by which
the language of the state emerged in early modern Europe, as Mansfield
concludes.
Another factor that must be kept in mind when evaluating the general
applicability of Machiavelli's theory in The Prince stems
from the very situation in which his prince of virtù
operates. Such a ruler comes to power not by dynastic inheritance or
on the back of popular support, but purely as a result of his own
initiative, skill, talent, and/or strength (all words that are English
equivalents for virtù, dependent upon where it occurs
in the text). Thus, the Machiavellian prince can count on no
pre-existing structures of legitimation, as discussed above. In order
to “maintain his state”, then, he can only rely upon his
own fount of personal characteristics to direct the use of power and
establish his claim on rulership. This is a precarious position, since
Machiavelli insists that the throes of fortune and the conspiracies of
other men render the prince constantly vulnerable to the loss of his
state. The idea of a stable constitutional regime that reflects the
tenor of modern political thought (and practice) is nowhere to be seen
in Machiavelli's conception of princely government.
Indeed, one might wonder whether Machiavelli, for all of his alleged
realism, actually believed that a prince of complete
virtù could in fact exist. He sometimes seems to
imagine that a successful prince would have to develop a psychology
entirely different from that known hitherto to mankind, inasmuch as
this “new” prince is 
prepared to vary his conduct as the winds of fortune and changing
circumstances constrain him and … not deviate from right
conduct if possible, but be capable of entering upon the path of
wrongdoing when this becomes necessary. (MP 62) 
This flexibility yields the core of the “practical” advice
that Machiavelli offers to the ruler seeking to maintain his state:
exclude no course of action out of hand, but be ready always to
perform whatever acts are required by political circumstance. Yet
Machiavelli himself apparently harbored severe doubts about whether
human beings were psychologically capable of generating such flexible
dispositions within themselves. In spite of the great number of his
historical examples, Machiavelli can point in The Prince to
no single ruler who evinced the sort of variable virtù
that he deems necessary for the complete control of fortune. Rather,
his case studies of successful rulers repeatedly point to the
situation of a prince whose characteristics suited his times but whose
consistency of conduct (as in the case of Pope Julius II) “would
have brought about his downfall” if circumstances had changed
(Prince CW 92). Even the Emperor Severus, whose techniques
Machiavelli lauds, succeeded because he employed “the courses of
action that are necessary for establishing himself in power”; he
is not, however, to be imitated universally (Prince CW 73).
Machiavelli's evaluation of the chances for creating a new,
psychologically flexible type of character is extremely guarded, and
tends to be worded in conditional form and in the subjective mood:
“If it were possible to change one's nature to suit the times
and circumstances, one would always be successful”
(Prince CW 91, translation revised). Such observations must make
us wonder whether Machiavelli's advice that princes acquire
dispositions which vary according to circumstance was so
“practical” (even in his own mind) as he had asserted.
While The Prince is doubtless the most widely read of his
works, the Discourses on the Ten Books of Titus Livy perhaps
most honestly expresses Machiavelli's personal political beliefs and
commitments, in particular, his republican sympathies. The
Discourses certainly draw upon the same reservoir of language
and concepts that flowed into The Prince, but the former
treatise leads us to draw conclusions quite different from—many
scholars have said contradictory to—the latter. In particular,
across the two works, Machiavelli consistently and clearly
distinguishes between a minimal and a full conception of
“political” or “civil” order, and thus
constructs a hierarchy of ends within his general account of communal
life. A minimal constitutional order is one in which subjects live
securely (vivere sicuro), ruled by a strong
government which holds in check the aspirations of both nobility and
people, but is in turn balanced by other legal and institutional
mechanisms. In a fully constitutional regime, however, the goal of the
political order is the freedom of the community (vivere
libero), created by the active participation of, and
contention between, the nobility and the people. As Quentin Skinner
(2002, 189–212) has argued, liberty forms a value that anchors
Machiavelli's political theory and guides his evaluations of the
worthiness of different types of regimes. Only in a republic, for
which Machiavelli expresses a distinct preference, may this goal be
attained.
Machiavelli adopted this position on both pragmatic and principled
grounds. During his career as a secretary and diplomat in the
Florentine republic, he came to acquire vast experience of the inner
workings of French government, which became his model for the
“secure” (but not free) polity. Although Machiavelli makes
relatively little comment about the French monarchy in The
Prince, he devotes a great deal of attention to France in the
Discourses.
Why would Machiavelli effusively praise (let alone even analyze) a
hereditary monarchy in a work supposedly designed to promote the
superiority of republics? The answer stems from Machiavelli's aim to
contrast the best case scenario of a monarchic regime with the
institutions and organization of a republic. Even the most excellent
monarchy, in Machiavelli's view, lacks certain salient qualities that
are endemic to properly constituted republican government and that
make the latter constitution more desirable than the former.
Machiavelli asserts that the greatest virtue of the French kingdom and
its king is the dedication to law. “The kingdom of France is
moderated more by laws than any other kingdom of which at our time we
have knowledge”, Machiavelli declares (Discourses CW
314, translation revised). The explanation for this situation Machiavelli
refers to the function of the Parlement. “The kingdom of
France”, he states, 
lives under laws and orders more than any other kingdom. These laws
and orders are maintained by Parlements, notably that of Paris: by it
they are renewed any time it acts against a prince of the kingdom or
in its sentences condemns the king. And up to now it has maintained
itself by having been a persistent executor against that nobility.
(Discourses CW 422, translation revised) 
These passages of the Discourses seem to suggest that
Machiavelli has great admiration for the institutional arrangements
that obtain in France. Specifically, the French king and the nobles,
whose power is such that they would be able to oppress the populace,
are checked by the laws of the realm which are enforced by the
independent authority of the Parlement. Thus, opportunities for
unbridled tyrannical conduct are largely eliminated, rendering the
monarchy temperate and “civil”.
Yet such a regime, no matter how well ordered and law-abiding, remains
incompatible with vivere libero. Discussing the
ability of a monarch to meet the people's wish for liberty,
Machiavelli comments that 
as far as the … popular desire of recovering their liberty, the
prince, not being able to satisfy them, must examine what the reasons
are that make them desire being free. (Discourses CW 237).
He concludes that a few individuals want freedom simply in order to
command others; these, he believes, are of sufficiently small number
that they can either be eradicated or bought off with honors. By
contrast, the vast majority of people confuse liberty with security,
imagining that the former is identical to the latter: “But all
the others, who are infinite, desire liberty in order to live securely
(vivere sicuro)” (Discourses CW 237.
Although the king cannot give such liberty to the masses, he can
provide the security that they crave:
As for the rest, for whom it is enough to live securely
(vivere sicuro), they are easily satisfied by making
orders and laws that, along with the power of the king, comprehend
everyone's security. And once a prince does this, and the people see
that he never breaks such laws, they will shortly begin to live
securely (vivere sicuro) and contentedly
(Discourses CW 237).
Machiavelli then applies this general principle directly to the case
of France, remarking that 
the people live securely (vivere sicuro) for no
other reason than that its kings are bound to infinite laws in which
the security of all their people is comprehended. (Discourses
CW 237) 
The law-abiding character of the French regime ensures security, but
that security, while desirable, ought never to be confused with
liberty. This is the limit of monarchic rule: even the best kingdom
can do no better than to guarantee to its people tranquil and orderly
government.
Machiavelli holds that one of the consequences of such vivere
sicuro is the disarmament of the people. He comments that
regardless of “how great his kingdom is”, the king of
France “lives as a tributary” to foreign mercenaries.
This all comes from having disarmed his people and having preferred
… to enjoy the immediate profit of being able to plunder the
people and of avoiding an imaginary rather than a real danger, instead
of doing things that would assure them and make their states
perpetually happy. This disorder, if it produces some quiet times, is
in time the cause of straitened circumstances, damage and irreparable
ruin (Discourses CW 410).
A state that makes security a priority cannot afford to arm its
populace, for fear that the masses will employ their weapons against
the nobility (or perhaps the crown). Yet at the same time, such a
regime is weakened irredeemably, since it must depend upon foreigners
to fight on its behalf. In this sense, any government that takes
vivere sicuro as its goal generates a passive and
impotent populace as an inescapable result. By definition, such a
society can never be free in Machiavelli's sense of vivere
libero, and hence is only minimally, rather than completely,
political or civil.
Confirmation of this interpretation of the limits of monarchy for
Machiavelli may be found in his further discussion of the disarmament
of the people, and its effects, in The Art of War. Addressing
the question of whether a citizen army is to be preferred to a
mercenary one, he insists that the liberty of a state is contingent
upon the military preparedness of its subjects. Acknowledging that
“the king [of France] has disarmed his people in order to be
able to command them more easily”, Machiavelli still concludes
“that such a policy is … a defect in that kingdom, for
failure to attend to this matter is the one thing that makes her
weak” (Art CW 584, 586–587). In his view,
whatever benefits may accrue to a state by denying a military role to
the people are of less importance than the absence of liberty that
necessarily accompanies such disarmament. The problem is not merely
that the ruler of a disarmed nation is in thrall to the military
prowess of foreigners. More crucially, Machiavelli believes, a
weapons-bearing citizen militia remains the ultimate assurance that
neither the government nor some usurper will tyrannize the populace:
“So Rome was free four hundred years and was armed; Sparta,
eight hundred; many other cities have been unarmed and free less than
forty years” (Art CW 585). Machiavelli is confident
that citizens will always fight for their liberty—against
internal as well as external oppressors. Indeed, this is precisely why
successive French monarchs have left their people disarmed: they
sought to maintain public security and order, which for them meant the
elimination of any opportunities for their subjects to wield arms. The
French regime, because it seeks security above all else (for the
people as well as for their rulers), cannot permit what Machiavelli
takes to be a primary means of promoting liberty.
The case of disarmament is an illustration of a larger difference
between minimally constitutional systems such as France and fully
political communities such as the Roman Republic, namely, the status
of the classes within the society. In France, the people are entirely
passive and the nobility is largely dependent upon the king, according
to Machiavelli's own observations. By contrast, in a fully developed
republic such as Rome's, where the actualization of liberty is
paramount, both the people and the nobility take an active (and
sometimes clashing) role in self-government (McCormick 2011; Holman
2018). The liberty of the whole, for Machiavelli, depends upon the
liberty of its component parts. In his famous discussion of this
subject in the Discourses, he remarks,
To me those who condemn the tumults between the Nobles and the Plebs
seem to be caviling at the very thing that was the primary cause of
Rome's retention of liberty…. And they do not realize that in
every republic there are two different dispositions, that of the
people and that of the great men, and that all legislation favoring
liberty is brought about by their dissension (Discourses CW
202–203).
Machiavelli knows that he is adopting an unusual perspective here,
since customarily the blame for the collapse of the Roman Republic has
been assigned to warring factions that eventually ripped it apart. But
Machiavelli holds that precisely the same conflicts generated a
“creative tension” that was the source of Roman liberty.
For “those very tumults that so many inconsiderately
condemn” directly generated the good laws of Rome and the
virtuous conduct of its citizens (Discourses CW 202). Hence,
Enmities between the people and the Senate should, therefore, be
looked upon as an inconvenience which it is necessary to put up with
in order to arrive at the greatness of Rome. (Discourses CW
211) 
Machiavelli thinks that other republican models (such as those adopted
by Sparta or Venice) will produce weaker and less successful political
systems, ones that are either stagnant or prone to decay when
circumstances change.
Machiavelli evinces particular confidence in the capacity of the
people to contribute to the promotion of communal liberty. In the
Discourses, he ascribes to the masses a quite extensive
competence to judge and act for the public good in various settings,
explicitly contrasting the “prudence and stability” of
ordinary citizens with the unsound discretion of the prince. Simply
stated, “A people is more prudent, more stable, and of better
judgment than a prince” (Discourses CW 316). This is
not an arbitrary expression of personal preference on Machiavelli's
part. He maintains that the people are more concerned about, and more
willing to defend, liberty than either princes or nobles
(Discourses CW 204–205). Where the latter tend to
confuse their liberty with their ability to dominate and control their
fellows, the masses are more concerned with protecting themselves
against oppression and consider themselves “free” when
they are not abused by the more powerful or threatened with such abuse
(Discourses CW 203). In turn, when they fear the onset of
such oppression, ordinary citizens are more inclined to object and to
defend the common liberty. Such an active role for the people, while
necessary for the maintenance of vital public liberty, is
fundamentally antithetical to the hierarchical structure of
subordination-and-rule on which monarchic vivere
sicuro rests. The preconditions of vivere
libero simply do not favor the security that is the aim of
constitutional monarchy.
One of the main reasons that security and liberty remain, in the end,
incompatible for Machiavelli—and that the latter is to be
preferred—may surely be traced to the “rhetorical”
character of his republicanism. Machiavelli clearly views speech as
the method most appropriate to the resolution of conflict in the
republican public sphere; throughout the Discourses, debate
is elevated as the best means for the people to determine the wisest
course of action and the most qualified leaders. The tradition of
classical rhetoric, with which he was evidently familiar, directly
associated public speaking with contention: the proper application of
speech in the realms of forensic and deliberative genres of rhetoric
is an adversarial setting, with each speaker seeking to convince his
audience of the validity of his own position and the unworthiness of
his opponents'. This theme was taken up, in turn, by late medieval
Italian practitioners and theorists of rhetoric, who emphasized that
the subject matter of the art was lite (conflict). Thus,
Machiavelli's insistence upon contention as a prerequisite of liberty
also reflects his rhetorical predilections (Viroli 1998). By contrast,
monarchic regimes—even the most secure constitutional monarchies
such as France—exclude or limit public discourse, thereby
placing themselves at a distinct disadvantage. It is far easier to
convince a single ruler to undertake a disastrous or ill-conceived
course of action than a multitude of people. The apparent
“tumult” induced by the uncertain liberty of public
discussion eventually renders more likely a decision conducive to the
common good than does the closed conversation of the royal court.
This connects to the claim in the Discourses that the popular
elements within the community form the best safeguard of civic liberty
as well as the most reliable source of decision-making about the
public good. Machiavelli's praise for the role of the people in
securing the republic is supported by his confidence in the generally
illuminating effects of public speech upon the citizen body. Near the
beginning of the first Discourses, he notes that some may
object to the extensive freedom enjoyed by the Roman people to
assemble, to protest, and to veto laws and policies. But he responds
that the Romans were able to
maintain liberty and order because of the people's ability to discern
the common good when it was shown to them. At times when ordinary
Roman citizens wrongly supposed that a law or institution was designed
to oppress them, they could be persuaded that their beliefs are
mistaken … [through] the remedy of assemblies, in which some
man of influence gets up and makes a speech showing them how they are
deceiving themselves. And as Tully says, the people, although they may
be ignorant, can grasp the truth, and yield easily when told what is
true by a trustworthy man (Discourses CW 203).
The reference to Cicero (one of the few in the Discourses)
confirms that Machiavelli has in mind here a key feature of classical
republicanism: the competence of the people to respond to and support
the words of the gifted orator when he speaks truly about the public
welfare.
Machiavelli returns to this theme and treats it more extensively at
the end of the first Discourse. In a chapter intended to demonstrate
the superiority of popular over princely government, he argues that
the people are well ordered, and hence “prudent, stable and
grateful”, so long as room is made for public speech and
deliberation within the community. Citing the formula vox
populi, vox dei, Machiavelli insists that
public opinion is remarkably accurate in its prognostications….
With regard to its judgment, when two speakers of equal skill are
heard advocating different alternatives, very rarely does one find the
people failing to adopt the better view or incapable of appreciating
the truth of what it hears (Discourses CW 316).
Not only are the people competent to discern the best course of action
when orators lay out competing plans, but they are in fact better
qualified to make decisions, in Machiavelli's view, than are princes.
For example, 
the people can never be persuaded that it is good to appoint to an
office a man of infamous or corrupt habits, whereas a prince may
easily and in a vast variety of ways be persuaded to do this.
(Discourses CW 316) 
Likewise, should the people depart from the law-abiding path, they may
readily be convinced to restore order: 
For an uncontrolled and tumultuous people can be spoken to by a good
man and easily led back into a good way. But no one can speak to a
wicked prince, and the only remedy is steel…. To cure the
malady of the people words are enough. (Discourses CW 317)
The contrast Machiavelli draws is stark. The republic governed by
words and persuasion—in sum, ruled by public speech—is
almost sure to realize the common good of its citizens; and even
should it err, recourse is always open to further discourse.
Non-republican regimes, because they exclude or limit discursive
practices, ultimately rest upon coercive domination and can only be
corrected by violent means.
Machiavelli's arguments in favor of republican regimes also appeal to
his skeptical stance toward the acquisition of virtù
by any single individual, and hence the implication that a truly
stable principality may never be attainable. The effect of the
Machiavellian dichotomy between the need for flexibility and the
inescapable constancy of character is to demonstrate an inherent
practical limitation in single-ruler regimes. For the reader is
readily led to the conclusion that, just because human conduct is
rooted in a firm and invariant character, the rule of a single man is
intrinsically unstable and precarious. In the Discourses,
Machiavelli provides a psychological case that the realities of human
character tends to favor a republic over a principality, since the
former “is better able to adapt itself to diverse circumstances
than a prince owing to the diversity found among its citizens”
(Discourses CW 253).
Machiavelli illustrates this claim by reference to the evolution of
Roman military strategy against Hannibal. After the first flush of the
Carthaginian general's victories in Italy, the circumstances of the
Roman required a circumspect and cautious leader who would not commit
the legions to aggressive military action for which they were not
prepared. Such leadership emerged in the person of Fabius Maximus,
“a general who by his slowness and his caution held the enemy at
bay. Nor could he have met with circumstances more suited to his
ways” (Discourses CW 452). Yet when a more offensive
stance was demanded to defeat Hannibal, the Roman Republic was able to
turn to the leadership of Scipio, whose personal qualities were more
fitted to the times. Neither Fabius nor Scipio was able to escape
“his ways and habits” (Discourses CW 452), but
the fact that Rome could call on each at the appropriate moment
suggests to Machiavelli an inherent strength of the republican
system.
If Fabius had been king of Rome, he might easily have lost this war,
since he was incapable of altering his methods according as
circumstance changed. Since, however, he was born in a republic where
there were diverse citizens with diverse dispositions, it came about
that, just as it had a Fabius, who was the best man to keep the war
going when circumstances required it, so later it had a Scipio at a
time suited to its victorious consummation (Discourses CW
452).
Changing events require flexibility of response, and since it is
psychologically implausible for human character to change with the
times, the republic offers a viable alternative: people of different
qualities fit different exigencies. The diversity characteristic of
civic regimes, which was so reviled by Machiavelli's predecessors,
proves to be an abiding advantage of republics over
principalities.
This does not mean that Machiavelli's confidence in the capacity of
republican government to redress the political shortcomings of human
character was unbridled. After all, he gives us no real indication of
how republics manage to identify and authorize the leaders whose
qualities are suited to the circumstances. It is one thing to observe
that such variability has occurred within republics, quite another to
demonstrate that this is a necessary or essential feature of the
republican system. At best, then, Machiavelli offers us a kind of
empirical generalization, the theoretical foundations of which he
leaves unexplored. And the Discourses points out that
republics have their own intrinsic limitation in regard to the
flexibility of response needed to conquer fortune. For just as with
individual human beings, it is difficult (if not impossible) to change
their personal characteristics, so 
institutions in republics do not change with the times … but
change very slowly because it is more painful to change them since it
is necessary to wait until the whole republic is in a state of
upheaval; and for this it is not enough that one man alone should
change his own procedure. (Discourses CW 453) 
If the downfall of principalities is the fixed structure of human
character, then the failing of republics is a devotion to the
perpetuation of institutional arrangements whose time has passed.
Whether it is any more plausible to hold out hope for the creation of
more responsive republican institutions than to demand flexibility in
the personal qualities of princes is not directly examined by the
Discourses.
Machiavelli thus seems to adhere to a genuinely republican position.
But how are we to square this with his statements in The
Prince? It is tempting to dismiss The Prince as an
inauthentic expression of Machiavelli's “real” views and
preferences, written over a short period in order to prove his
political value to the returned Medici masters of Florence. (This is
contrasted with the lengthy composition process of the
Discourses.) Yet Machiavelli never repudiated The
Prince, and indeed refers to it in the Discourses in a
way that suggests he viewed the former as a companion to the latter.
Although there has been much debate about whether Machiavelli was
truly a friend of princes and tyrants or of republics, and hence
whether we should dismiss one or another facet of his writing as
ancillary or peripheral, the questions seems irresolvable. Mark
Hulliung's suggestion that “both” Machiavellis need to be
lent equal weight thus enjoys a certain plausibility (Hulliung
1983).
What is “modern” or “original” in
Machiavelli's thought? What is Machiavelli's “place” in
the history of Western ideas? The body of literature debating this
question, especially in connection with The Prince and
Discourses, has grown to truly staggering proportions. John
Pocock (1975), for example, has traced the diffusion of Machiavelli's
republican thought throughout the so-called Atlantic world and,
specifically, into the ideas that guided the framers of the American
constitution. Paul Rahe (2008) argues for a similar set of influences,
but with an intellectual substance and significance different than
Pocock. For Pocock, Machiavelli's republicanism is of a civic humanist
variety whose roots are to be found in classical antiquity; for Rahe,
Machiavelli's republicanism is entirely novel and modern. The
“neo-Roman” thinkers (most prominently, Pettit, Skinner
and Viroli) appropriate Machiavelli as a source of their principle of
“freedom as non-domination”, while he has also been put to
work in the defense of democratic precepts and values. Likewise, cases
have been made for Machiavelli's political morality, his conception of
the state, his religious views, and many other features of his work as
the distinctive basis for the originality of his contribution.
Yet few firm conclusions have emerged within scholarship. (The
unsettled state of play in current research on Machiavelli is well
represented in Johnston et al. 2017.) One plausible explanation for
the inability to resolve these issues of “modernity” and
“originality” is that Machiavelli was in a sense trapped
between innovation and tradition, between via antiqua and
via moderna (to adopt the usage of Janet Coleman 1995), in a
way that generated internal conceptual tensions within his thought as
a whole and even within individual texts. This historical ambiguity
permits scholars to make equally convincing cases for contradictory
claims about his fundamental stance without appearing to commit
egregious violence to his doctrines. This point differs from the
accusation made by certain scholars that Machiavelli was fundamentally
“inconsistent” (see Skinner 1978) or simply driven by
“local” agendas (Celenza 2015). Rather, salient features
of the distinctively Machiavellian approach to politics should be
credited to an incongruity between historical circumstance and
intellectual possibility. What makes Machiavelli a troubling yet
stimulating thinker is that, in his attempt to draw different
conclusions from the commonplace expectations of his audience, he
still incorporated important features of precisely the conventions he
was challenging. In spite of his repeated assertion of his own
originality (for instance, Prince CW 10, 57–58), his
careful attention to preexisting traditions meant that he was never
fully able to escape his intellectual confines. Thus, Machiavelli
ought not really to be classified as either purely an
“ancient” or a “modern”, but instead deserves
to be located in the interstices between the two.