Well, why not? Why expect nothing rather than something? No
experiment could support the hypothesis ‘There is nothing’
because any observation obviously implies the existence of an
observer.
Is there any a priori support for ‘There is
nothing’? One might respond with a methodological principle that
propels the empty world to the top of the agenda. For instance, many
feel that whoever asserts the existence of something has the burden of
proof. If an astronomer says there is water at the south pole of the
Moon, then it is up to him to provide data in support of the lunar
water. If we were not required to have evidence to back our existential
claims, then a theorist who fully explained the phenomena with one set
of things could gratuitously add an extra entity, say, a pebble outside our
light cone. We
recoil from such add-ons. To prevent the intrusion of superfluous
entities, one might demand that metaphysicians start with the empty
world and admit only those entities that have credentials. This is the
entry requirement imposed by René Descartes. He clears everything out and then
only lets back in what can be proved to exist.
St. Augustine had more conservative counsel: we should not start at
the beginning, nor at the end, but where we are, in the middle. We
reach a verdict about the existence of controversial things by
assessing how well these entities would harmonize with the existence of
better established things. If we start from nothing, we lack the
bearings needed to navigate forward. Conservatives, coherentists and
scientific gradualists all cast a suspicious eye on ‘Why is there
something rather than nothing?’.
Most contemporary philosophers feel entitled to postulate whatever
entities are indispensable to their best explanations of well accepted
phenomena. They feel the presumption of non-existence is only plausible
for particular existence claims. Since the presumption only applies on
a case by case basis, there is no grand methodological preference for
an empty world. Furthermore, there is no burden of proof when everybody
concedes the proposition under discussion. Even a solipsist agrees
there is at least one thing!
A more popular way to build a presumption in favor of nothingness is
to associate nothingness with simplicity and simplicity with
likelihood. The first part of this justification is plausible.
‘Nothing exists’ is simple in the sense of being an easy to
remember generalization. Consider a test whose questions have the form
‘Does x exist?’. The rule ‘Always answer
no!’ is unsurpassably short and comprehensive.
In Les Misérables, Victor Hugo contrasts universal
negation with universal affirmation:
As far as simplicity is concerned, there is a tie between the nihilistic rule
‘Always answer no!’ and the inflationary rule ‘Always
answer yes!’. Neither rule makes for serious metaphysics.
Even if ‘Nothing exists’ were the uniquely simplest
possibility (as measured by memorability), why should we expect that
possibility to be actual? In a fair lottery, we assign the same
probability of winning to the ticket unmemorably designated 4,169,681
as to the ticket memorably labeled 1,111,111.
Indeed, the analogy with a lottery seems to dramatically reverse the
presumption of non-existence. If there is only one empty world and many
populated worlds, then a random selection would lead us to expect a
populated world.
Peter van Inwagen (1996) has nurtured this statistical argument. In
an infinite lottery, the chance that a given ticket is the winner is 0.
Van Inwagen reasons that since there are infinitely many populated
worlds, the probability of a populated world is equal to 1. Although
the empty world is not impossible, it is as improbable as anything can
be!
For the sake of balanced reporting, van Inwagen should acknowledge
that, by his reasoning, the actual world is also as improbable as
anything can be. What really counts here is the probability of
‘There is something’ as opposed to ‘There is
nothing’.
Is this statistical explanation scientific? Scientists stereotypically
offer causal explanations. These are not feasible given the comprehensive reading of
‘Why is there something rather than nothing?’. However,
Elliott Sober (1983) argues that scientists also accept “equilibrium
explanations”. These explain the actual situation as the outcome of
most or all of the possible initial states. There is no attempt to
trace the path by which the actual initial state developed into the
present situation. It suffices that the result is invariant. Why do I
have enough oxygen to breathe even though all the oxygen molecules
could have congregated in one corner of my room?  The physicist explains
that while this specific arrangement is just as likely as any other,
the overwhelming majority of arrangements do not segregate
oxygen.  
Most philosophers would grant Peter van Inwagen’s premise that there
is no more than one empty world. They have been trained to model the
empty world on the empty set. Since a set is defined in terms of its
members, there can be at most one empty set.
However, medieval philosophers differentiated empty worlds by the
power of places within those worlds (Grant 1981). The Condemnation of
1277 forced Aristotelian philosophers to acknowledge the possibility
of a void (to respect God’s omnipotence and the Christian doctrine of
creation from nothing). Most thinkers retained Aristotle’s assumption
that there was a unique center of the universe. If rocks were
introduced into such a world, they would all head toward their natural
location at the center of the universe. (Aristotle uses this point to
provide a spectacular explanation of why there are not two earths;
they would have collided!) However, Nicole Oresme imagined a world
without any center. He predicted the rocks would head toward each
other. Since air, fire, earth, and water each had their own places in
Aristotle’s physics, fourteenth century philosophers could imagine
worlds that differed as to which of these places to retain. The void
was rarely pictured as homogeneous.
Aristotle’s world was self-governed. Objects have powers that
collectively explain the order of the universe. Thinkers in the
Abrahamic tradition replaced Aristotle’s invisible hand explanation
with God’s hidden hand. God dictated laws of nature to which He made
periodic adjustments (like clockmakers who regularly serviced their
creations, correcting the accumulating errors). Reflection on God’s
perfection eventually made these divine interventions seem like an
impious slight against God’s foreknowledge. After the miracles were
rescinded, God Himself was retired. What was left were the laws of
nature. Since there was no longer any constraint on what laws had to
be, the actual world looks highly contingent. At first blush, this
vindicates van Inwagen’s probabilistic argument. But the contingency
of laws also raises the possibility of individuating empty worlds by
their laws (Carroll 1994, 64). For instance, Isaac Newton’s first law
of motion says an undisturbed object will continue in motion in a
straight line. Some previous physicists suggested that such an object
will slow down and tend to travel in a circle. This empty world
differs from the Newtonian empty world because different
counterfactual statements are true of it.
If variation in empty worlds can be sustained by differences in the
laws that apply to them, there will be infinitely many empty worlds.
The gravitational constant of an empty world can equal any real number
between 0 and 1, so there are more than countably many empty worlds.
Indeed, any order of infinity achieved by the set of populated possible
worlds will be matched by the set of empty worlds.
John Heil (2013) is bemused by this War of the Possible Worlds. Having
given up the Law Maker, we should give up the laws. Once we return to
a self-governed world, there will be no temptation to see the world as
a lucky accident. After all, we do not literally see states of affairs
as contingent.  Contingency, unlike color or shape, is not
perceptible. Nor is there any presumption for regarding states of
affairs as contingent. According to Heil, ‘Why is there
something rather than nothing?’ owes its urgency to a partisan
background theory, not a neutral arbiter such as perception or
methodology.
Although possible worlds became intensely popular among analytic
philosophers after revolutionary advances in modal logic in the 1960s,
they receive little attention from existentialists. Their discussion
of objects is more in line with powers ontology advocated by
Heil. Indeed, some existentialists picture nothingness as a kind of
force that impedes each object’s existence. Since there is something
rather than nothing, any such nihilating force cannot have actually
gone unchecked.  What could have blocked it? Robert Nozick (1981, 123)
toys with an interpretation of Heidegger in which this nihilating
force is self-destructive. This kind of double-negation is depicted in
the Beatles’s movie Yellow Submarine. There is a creature
that zooms around like a vacuum cleaner, emptying everything in its
path.  When this menace finally turns on itself, a richly populated
world pops into existence.
Some cultures have creation myths reminiscent of Yellow
Submarine. Heidegger would dismiss them as inappropriately
historical. ‘Why is there something rather than nothing?’
is not about the origin of the world. Increasing the scientific
respectability of the creation story (as with the Big Bang hypothesis)
would still leave Heidegger objecting that the wrong question is being
addressed.
Some disagree with van Inwagen’s assumption that each possible
world is as likely as any other (Kotzen 2013). There have been metaphysical systems
that favor less populated worlds.
Indeed, the original purveyor of possible worlds, Gottfried Leibniz,
pictured possible things as competing to become actual. The more a
thing competes with other things, the more likely that there will be
something that stops it from becoming real.  The winners in Leibniz’s
struggle for existence are cooperative. They uniquely fit the niche
formed by other things. This key hole into existence implicitly
conveys information about everything.  The little bit that is not,
tells us about all that there is.
On the one hand, this metaphysical bias in favor of simplicity is
heartening because it suggests that the actual world is not too complex
for human understanding. Scientists have penetrated deeply into the
physical world with principles that emphasize parsimony and
uniformity: Ockham’s razor, the least effort principle, the anthropic
principle, etc.
On the other hand, Leibniz worried that the metaphysical bias for
simplicity, when driven to its logical conclusion, yields the
embarrassing prediction that there is nothing. After all, an empty
world would be free of objects trying to elbow each other out. It is
the world that requires the least effort to produce (Just do nothing!) and
sustain (Continue doing nothing!). So why is there something rather
than nothing?
Leibniz’s worry requires a limbo between being and
non-being. If the things in this limbo state do not really exist, how
could they prevent anything else from existing? 
Leibniz’s limbo illustrates an explanatory trap. To explain why
something exists, we standardly appeal to the existence of something
else. There are mountain ranges on Earth because there are plates on
its surface that slowly collide and crumple up against each other.
There are rings around Saturn because there is an immense quantity of
rubble orbiting that planet. This pattern of explanation is not
possible for ‘Why is there something rather than nothing’.
For instance, if we answer ‘There is something because the
Universal Designer wanted there to be something’, then our
explanation takes for granted the existence of the Universal Designer.
Someone who poses the question in a comprehensive way will not grant
the existence of the Universal Designer as a starting point.
If the explanation cannot begin with some entity, then it is hard to
see how any explanation is feasible. Some philosophers conclude
‘Why is there something rather than nothing?’ is
unanswerable. They think the question stumps us by imposing an
impossible explanatory demand, namely, Deduce the existence of
something without using any existential premises. Logicians should
feel no more ashamed of their inability to perform this deduction than
geometers should feel ashamed at being unable to square the circle.
David Hume offers a consolation prize: we might still be able to
explain the existence of each event even if it is impossible to explain
everything all together. Suppose that the universe is populated with an
infinite row of dominoes. The fall of each domino can be explained by
the fall of its predecessor.
But what is responsible for the arrangement to begin with? Why is
there anything in our domain of discourse? There is a tradition of
denying that this kind of comprehensive questioning is
coherent. Principles that apply within a system need not be applicable
to the system itself.
Is there a world? Can worlds be counted in the way presupposed by
modal metaphysics? Doubts about absolute generality can descend from
logical theorizing about quantification (Rayo 2013). They can also
bubble up from suspicions about abstraction (Maitzen 2012). A sortal
such as KITTEN tells us the nature of a thing, thereby supplying
criteria for counting and persistence. THING is a dummy sortal. How
many things do you have when you have a capped pen? The question
cannot be answered because you have not been given criteria governing
whether the cap and the pen count as separate objects. All questions
about existence must be relativized to sorts. Consequently, the
question of why there is something rather than nothing is
incomplete. Once we remedy the incompleteness with a sortal, the
question will be answered by science.
Empiricists such as Hume deny that the existence of anything could be
proved by reason alone. Rationalists have been more optimistic. Many
have offered
a priori proofs of God’s existence. Such a proof would double
as an explanation of why there is something. If God exists, then
something exists. After all, God is something.
But would God be the right sort of something? If we are only seeking
an a priori proof of something (anything at all!),
then why not rest content with a mathematical demonstration that there
exists an integer between a square and a cube? There must exist
such an integer because 25 is a square and 27 is a cube and only one
integer can be between 25 and 27. Therefore, something exists.
Why does this come off as a mathematical joke?
Van Inwagen’s answer is that we are actually interested in
concrete things. A grain of sand, a camel, and an oasis are
each concrete entities. They are part of the causal order. In
contrast, abstract entities (numbers, sets, possible worlds) do not
cause anything. Those who adopt the principle that only causes are
real will become nominalists; everything is concrete.
A second characterization of concrete entities is in terms of
locatability; a concrete entity has a position in space or time. Since
concrete entities are situated, they have boundaries with their
environment. (The only exception would be an entity that took up all
space or all time, say Nature.)  
Admittedly, points in space and time have locations. But concrete
entities are only accidentally where and when they are. All concrete
entities have intrinsic properties (which make their boundaries
natural rather than conventional, say Efird and Stoneham (2005,
314)). Their natures are not exhausted by their relationships with
other things. Max Black imagines twin iron spheres in an otherwise
empty universe. The spheres are distinct yet have the same
relationships and the same intrinsic properties.
All material things are concrete but some concrete things might be
immaterial. Shadows and holes have locations and durations but they
are not made of anything material. There is extraneous light in
shadows and extraneous matter in holes; but these are contaminants
rather than constituents. Cracks can spread, be counted, and
concealed. Once we acknowledge the existence of cracks, we get an
unexpected transcendental explanation of why there is
something: If there is nothing then there is an absence of
anything. Therefore, there exists something (either a positive
concrete entity or an absence).
Ontological pluralists do not dismiss this proof as sophistry. Kris
McDaniel (2013, 277) thinks the proof is trivially correct. To address
a more interesting question, McDaniel follows Aristotle’s principle
that there are many ways of being. From the pluralist’s perspective,
debate over whether holes exist is equivocal. The friends of absences
use a broad sense of being. The enemies of holes speak from a higher
link in the chain of being. From this altitude, holes depend on their
hosts and so cannot be as real. Alexius Meinong’s talk of subsistence
alludes to the lowest level of being. “Why does anything
subsist?” is a perfectly legitimate question, according to
McDaniel.
If there are souls or Cartesian minds, then they will also qualify as
immaterial, concrete entities. Although they do not take up space,
they take up time. An idealist such as George Berkeley could ask
‘Why is there something rather than nothing?’ even though
he was convinced that material things are not possible. 
William James denied that his defense of parapsychology provided a
resource for answering, ‘How comes the world to be here at all
instead of the non-entity which might be imagined in its
place?’ Philosophy, be it natural or supernatural, can make no
progress on this issue “for from nothing to being there is no
logical bridge” (1911, 40). James concludes: “The question
of being is the darkest in all philosophy. All of us are beggars here,
and no school can speak disdainfully of another or give itself
superior airs” (1911, 46).
Although all concrete things are in space or time, neither space nor
time are concrete things. Where would space be? When would time occur?
These questions can only be answered if space were contained in
another higher space. Time would be dated within another time. Since
the same questions can be posed for higher order space and higher
order time, we would face an infinite regress.
There is no tradition of wondering ‘Why is there space and
time?’. One reason is that space and time seem like a framework
for there being any contingent things.
Absolutists think of the framework as existing independently of what
it frames.  For instance, Newton characterized space as an eternal,
homogeneous, three dimensional container of infinite extent.  He
believed that the world was empty of objects for an infinite period
prior to creation (setting aside an omnipresent God). An empty world
would merely be a continuation of what creation interrupted.
Others think the framework depends on what it frames.  Like Leibniz,
Albert Einstein pictured (or “pictured”) space as an
abstraction from relations between objects.  Consequently, space can
be described with the same metaphors we use for family trees. Maybe
space grows bigger. Maybe space is curved or warped or has
holes. There is much room to wonder why space has the properties that it
has. But since space is an abstraction from objects, answers to any
riddles about space reduce to questions about objects. One can wonder why
there is space. But this is only to wonder why there are objects.
All concrete things appear to be contingent beings. For instance,
the planet Earth would not have existed had the matter which now constitutes
our solar system formed, as usual, two stars instead of one. If no
concrete thing is a necessary being, then no concrete thing can explain the
existence of concrete things.
Even if God is not concrete, proof of His existence would raise hope
of explaining the existence of concrete things. For instance, the
Genesis creation story suggests that God made everything
without relying on any antecedent ingredients. The story also suggests
that God had a reason to create. If this account could be corroborated
we would have an explanation of why there are some concrete
things.
This divine explanation threatens to over-explain the data. Given
that God is a necessary being and that the existence of God
necessitates the existence of Earth, then Earth would be a
necessary being rather than a contingent being.
The dilemma was generalized by William Rowe (1975). Consider all the
contingent truths. The conjunction of all these truths is itself a
contingent truth. On the one hand, this conjunction cannot be explained
by any contingent truth because the conjunction already contains all
contingent truths; the explanation would be circular. On the other
hand, this conjunction cannot be explained by a necessary truth because
a necessary truth can only imply other necessary truths. This dilemma
suggests that ‘Why are there any contingent beings?’ is
impossible to answer.
Rowe presupposes that an answer would have to be
a deductive explanation.  If there are ‘inferences to
the best explanation’ or inductive explanations, then there
might be a way through the horns of Rowe’s dilemma.
There also remains hope that Rowe’s dilemma can be bypassed by showing
that the empty world is not a genuine possibility. Then the retort to
‘Why is there something rather than nothing?’ is
‘There is no alternative to there being
something!’. 
 ‘There might be nothing’ is false when read
epistemically. (Roughly, a proposition is epistemically possible if it
is consistent with everything that is known.) For we know that
something actually exists and knowledge of actuality
precludes all rival epistemic possibilities.  But when read metaphysically,
‘There might be nothing’ seems true. So ‘Why is
there something rather than nothing?’ is, so far, a live
question.  
 The question is not undermined by the a priori status of
knowledge that something exists. (I know a priori that
something exists because I know a priori that I exist and
know this entails ‘Something exists’.)  Knowledge, even
a priori knowledge, that something is actually true is
compatible with ignorance as to how it could be true.  
 Residual curiosity is possible even when the proposition is known to
be a necessary truth.  A reductio ad absurdum proof that 1
− 1/3 + 1/5 − 1/7 + … converges to π/4 might
persuade one that there is no alternative without illuminating how it
could be true. For this brute style of proof does not explain how π
wandered into the solution. (Reductio ad absurdum just shows
a contradiction would follow if the conclusion were not true.)  This
raises the possibility that even a logical demonstration of the
metaphysical necessity of ‘Something exists’ might still
leave us asking why there is something rather than nothing (though
there would no longer be the wonder about the accidentality of there
being something). This leads Andrew Brenner (2016) to deny that
‘Why is there something rather than nothing?’ is
restricted to contingent entities. Brenner argues the question is
highly ambiguous. At best there is only a family resemblance between
the questions under discussion. What appears to be disagreement is too
often a verbal dispute.
Henri Bergson maintained that nothingness is precluded by the
positive nature of reality. The absence of a female pope is not a brute
fact. ‘There is not a female pope’ is made true by a
positive fact such as the Catholic Church’s regulation that all priests
be men and the practice of drawing popes from the priesthood. Once we
have the positive facts and the notion of negation, we can derive all
the negative facts. ‘There is nothing’ would be a
contingent, negative fact. But then it would have to be grounded on
some positive reality. That positive reality would ensure that there is
something rather than nothing.
Human beings have a strong intuition that positive truths, such as
‘Elephants are huge’ are more fundamental than negative
truths such as ‘Elephants do not jump’. The robustness of
this tendency makes negative things objects of amusement. Consider the
Professor’s remark during his chilly banquet in Lewis Carroll’s
Sylvie and Bruno Concluded.
The sentence sounded well, but somehow I couldn’t quite
understand it … (chapter 22)
How can we perceive absences? They seem causally inert and so not
the sort of thing that we could check empirically. Negative truths seem
redundant; there are no more truths than those entailed by the
conjunction of all positive truths. The negative truths seem
psychological; we only assert negative truths to express a frustrated
expectation. When Jean Paul Sartre (1969, 41) arrives late for his
appointment with Pierre at the cafe, he sees the absence of Pierre but
not the absence of the Duke of Wellington.
Philosophers have had much trouble vindicating any of these
intuitions. Bertrand Russell (1985) labored mightily to reduce negative
truths to positive truths. Russell tried paraphrasing ‘The cat is
not on the mat’ as ‘There is a state of affairs
incompatible with the cat being on the mat’. But this paraphrase
is covertly negative; it uses ‘incompatible’ which means
not compatible. He tried modeling ‘Not
p’ as an expression of disbelief that p. But
‘disbelief’ means believing that something is not
the case. Is it even clear that absences are causally inert? Trapped
miners are killed by the absence of oxygen. In the end Russell
surrendered his intuition that reality is positive.  In a famous
lecture at Harvard, Russell concluded that irreducibly negative facts
exist. He reports this nearly caused a riot.
Were it not for the threat to social order, one might stand the
intuition on its head: Negative truths are more fundamental than
positive truths. From a logical point of view, there is greater promise
in a reduction of positive truths to negative truths. Positive truths
can be analyzed as the negations of negative truths or perhaps as
frustrated disbelief. Positive truths would then be the redundant
hanger-ons, kept in circulation by our well-documented difficulty in
coping with negative information. Think of photographic negatives. They
seem less informative than positive prints. But since the prints are
manufactured from the negatives, the negatives must be merely more
difficult for us to process.
As difficult as negation might be psychologically, it is easier to
work with than the alternatives suggested by Henry Sheffer. In 1913,
he demonstrated that all of the logical connectives can be defined in
terms of the dual of conjunction, now known as NAND (short for NOT
AND). Sheffer translates ‘p NAND q’ as
‘either not p or not q’.
‘Not p’ is defined as ‘p
NAND p’.  Sheffer notes that the dual of disjunction, NOR
(short for NOT OR), can also define all the connectives. Sheffer
translates ‘p NOR q’ as
‘neither p nor q’. From a logical point
of view, negation is dispensable. This raises hope that all of the
paradoxes of negation can be translated away.
Bertrand Russell quickly incorporated NAND into Principia
Mathematica. Sheffer’s functions have also been a great economy
to the assembly line symbol manipulation of computers (as witnessed by
the popularity of NAND gates and NOR gates).  However, human beings
have trouble achieving fluency with Sheffer’s connectives. Even
Sheffer translates them negatively. Psychologically, the phrases
‘either not p or not q’ and
‘neither p nor q’ are each heard as a
double dose of negation rather than as an alternative to negation.
But we could let computers do our metaphysics just as we let them do
our taxes.  The only serious objection is that the problems of
negation do not really go away when we translate into artificial
languages. For instance, the challenge posed by negative existential
sentences such as ‘Pegasus does not exist’ persists when
translated as ‘Pegasus exists NAND Pegasus exists’.  Any
desire to make ‘Pegasus does not exist’ come out true
warrants a desire to make ‘Pegasus exists NAND Pegasus
exists’ come out true. (Since classical logic does not permit
empty names, the NAND existential sentence will not be true.)
The more general concern is that the problems which are naturally
couched in terms of negation persist when they are translated into a
different logical vocabulary.  Given that the translation preserves
the meaning of the philosophical riddle, it will also preserve its
difficulty.
 We engage in negative thinking to avoid highly complicated positive
thinking.  What is the probability of getting at least one head in ten
tosses of a coin? Instead of directly computing the probability of
this highly disjunctive positive event, we switch to a negative
perspective. We first calculate the probability of a total absence of
heads and then exploit the complement rule: Probability (at least one
head) = 1 − Probability (no heads). An apt anagram of NEGATIVISM
is TIMESAVING.
 Some possible worlds are easier to contemplate negatively. Thales
said that all is water. Suppose he was nearly right except for the
existence of two bubbles. These two absences of water become the
interesting players (just as two drops of water in an otherwise empty
space become interesting players in the dual of this universe). How
would these bubbles relate to each other? Would the bubbles repel each other?
Would the bubbles be mutually unaffected? Deep thinking about gravity yields
the conclusion that the bubbles would attract each other! (Epstein
1983, 138–9) 
 The hazard of drawing metaphysical conclusions from psychological
preferences is made especially vivid by caricatures. We know that
caricatures are exaggerated representations. Despite the flagrant
distortion (and actually because of it) we more easily recognize
people from caricatures rather than from faithful portraits.  
 For navigational purposes, we prefer schematic subway maps over ones
that do justice to the lengths and curves of the track lines. But this
is not a basis for inferring that reality is correspondingly schematic.  
 Our predilection for positive thinking could reflect an objective
feature of our world (instead of being a mere anthropocentric
projection of one style of thought). But if this objective
positiveness is itself contingent, then it does not explain why there
is something rather than nothing. For Bergson’s explanation to
succeed, the positive nature of reality needs to be a metaphysically
necessary feature.  
Thomas Baldwin (1996) reinforces the possibility of an
empty world by refining the following thought experiment: Imagine a world
in which there are only finitely many objects. Suppose each object
vanishes in sequence. Eventually you run down to three objects, two
objects, one object and then Poof! There’s your empty
world.
What can be done temporally can be done modally. There is only a small
difference between a possible world with a hundred objects and a
possible world with just ninety-nine, and from there …. well,
just do the arithmetic!
Can the subtraction be completed if there necessarily are infinitely
many things?  Penelope Maddy (1990) claims that unit sets are concrete
entities, sharing the location of their members. The existence of one
concrete entity would guarantee the existence of infinitely
many. Consequently, there would be no finite worlds. 
Baldwin avoids this issue with a different definition. Concrete
entities are violators of Leibniz’s principle of the identity of
indiscernibles. Concrete things may have exact duplicates. For
instance, Cameron Winklevoss could have a twin who PERFECTLY resembles
him (unlike his homozygotic twin Tyler Winklevoss). In contrast, the
unit set comprised of Cameron Winklevoss cannot have a perfect
twin. All sets obey Leibniz’s principle of the identity of
indiscernibles and so Baldwin counts them as abstract entities. 
Geraldine Coggins (2010, chapter 4) objects that Baldwin’s definition
of concreteness is inferior to the customary spatiotemporal definition. She
deems the distinction between intrinsic and extrinsic properties as
too problematic to ground the distinction between concrete and
abstract objects.
Another concern is that infinite proliferation can be
precipitated by the constitution relation. Assume that each part of a
concrete entity is itself concrete. Also assume that concrete entities
are infinitely divisible (as seems natural given that space is
dense). An infinitely complex object cannot be nibbled away with any
number of finite bites.
Gonzalo Rodriguez-Pereyra (2013) suggests that we instead take big,
infinite bites. Instead of subtracting entity by entity, subtract by
the chunk (of infinitely composite entities).
Our metaphysical calculations are subliminally influenced by how we picture
possible worlds (Coggins 2010, chapter 3).  If possible worlds are envisaged as
containers, then they can be completely emptied.  Similarly, if
possible worlds are pictured as stories (say maximally consistent ways
things could have been), then our library will contain a tale lacking
any concrete entities as characters. But if possible worlds are
pictured mereologically, as giant conglomerates of concrete objects
(Lewis 1986), our subtraction falters before we reach zero. Similarly,
if possible worlds require an active construction (say, Ludwig
Wittgenstein’s imaginary rearrangements of objects drawn from the
actual world), then the very process of construction ensures that
there are some concrete objects in every possible world.
Some kind of background theory of possible worlds is needed. For
without this substantive guidance, the subtraction argument seems
invalid. More specifically, from a metaphysically neutral perspective,
the fact that it is possible for each object to not exist seems
compatible with it being necessary that at least one object
exists.
The founder of modal logic, Aristotle, has special reason to deny that
‘Necessarily (p or q)’ entails
‘Necessarily p or necessarily
q’. Aristotle believed that all abstract entities
depend on concrete entities for their existence. Yet he also believed
that there are necessary truths. The existence of any particular
individual is contingent but it is necessary that some individuals
exist.
Science textbooks teem with contingent abstract entities: the
equator, Jupiter’s center of gravity, NASA’s space budget, etc.
Twentieth century mathematics makes sets central. Sets are defined in
terms of their members. Therefore, any set that contains a contingent
entity is itself a contingent entity. Any set that contains Cameron Winklevoss is an
abstract entity that has no weight or color or electric charge. But it
still depends on Winklevoss for its existence.
Mathematics can be reconstructed in terms of sets given the assumption
that something exists. From Cameron Winklevoss, set theorists can
derive the set containing him, then the set containing that set, then
the set containing that larger set, and so on. Through arachnophilic
craftiness, all of mathematics can be reconstructed from sets. But
founding all of mathematics on Cameron Winklevoss would fail to
reflect the necessary status of mathematical truth. Founding
mathematics on a necessary being such as God would alienate
atheists. So ecumenical set theorists instead spin this amazing
structure from only the set that does not depend on the existence of
anything: the empty set. This is the closest mathematicians get to
creation from nothing!
This does not avoid all controversy. Early set theorists and an array
contemporary metaphysicians reject the empty set. Yet the loveliness
of the construction makes many of their colleagues receptive to Wesley
Salmon’s ontological argument: “The fool saith in his heart that
there is no empty set. But if that were so, then the set of all such
sets would be empty, and hence it would be the empty
set.”
E. J. Lowe (2013, 192) argues on behalf of the fool: Two sets are
identical exactly if they have the same members. So the identity of a
set is grounded on the identity conditions of its members. In the
absence of members, the set is ill-defined. Mathematicians may wield
it as a useful fiction. But utility should not be confused with
truth. Since mathematical statements such as ‘The first prime
number after 1,000,000 is 1,000,003’ are necessary truths and
can only be rendered true by the existence of a contingent being, such
as Cameron Winklevoss, Lowe concludes that there necessarily exists
at least one contingent being. Consequently, the empty world is
impossible even if there are no necessary beings.
There are other metaphysical systems that make the existence of some
concrete entities necessary without implying that there are any
necessarily existing concrete things. In his Tractatus phase,
Ludwig Wittgenstein takes a world to be a totality of facts. A fact
consists of one or more objects related to each other in a certain
way. By an act of selective attention, we concentrate on just the
objects or just the relations. But objects and relations are always
inextricably bound up with each other. Since every fact requires at
least one object, a world without objects would be a world without
facts. But a factless world is a contradiction in terms. Therefore,
the empty world is impossible.
Nevertheless, the persuasiveness of the subtraction argument is not
entirely hostage to background theories about the nature of possible
worlds. Even those with metaphysical systems that guarantee the
existence of some concrete entities feel pressure to revise those
systems to accommodate the empty world, or at least to look for some
loophole that would make their system compatible with Baldwin’s
thought experiment. 
Consider the combinatorialist David Armstrong. He eventually acquiesced
to the empty world by relaxing his account of truthmakers. A
truthmaker is a piece of reality that makes a statement true.
Armstrong believes that every contingent truth is made true by a
truthmaker and has wielded the principle forcefully against analytical
behaviorists, phenomenalists, nominalists, and presentists. Since
there can be no truthmaker for an empty world, Armstrong appears to
have a second objection to the empty world (supplementing the
objection based on his combinatorial conception of a possible
world). Yet Armstrong (2004, 91) instead claims that the empty world
could borrow truthmakers from the actual world. His idea is that the
truthmakers for possibilities are actual objects and that these actual
objects could serve as the truthmakers for the empty world. David
Efird and Tom Stoneham (2009) object that cross-world truthmakers
would be equally handy to the analytical behaviorists, phenomenalists
and their ilk. Whether or not Armstrong has contradicted himself, he
has illustrated the persuasiveness of the subtraction argument.
Aristotle assumes that universal generalizations have existential
import; ‘All gods are immortal’ implies that there are
gods. Contemporary logicians agree that universal quantifiers have
existential import: pantheism, ‘All is god’, entails
theism, ‘There is a god’ . However, contemporary logicians
differ from Aristotle in analyzing universal generalizations as
conditionals.  They think ‘All gods are immortal’ has the
form ‘For each thing, if it is a god, then it is
immortal’. So if there are no gods, the conditional is vacuously
true. This explains why the atheist can consistently argue: All gods
are immortal. Immortality is impossible. Therefore, there are no
gods.
Contemporary logicians are also impressed by the intuitive equivalence
between ‘All men are mortal’ and its contrapositive
‘All immortals are non-men’.  This equivalence is
predicted by the hypothesis that universal generalizations are
conditionals.
Tolerance of vacuously true generalizations does not stop contemporary 
classical logic from precluding an empty world.
Since its universal quantifier has existential import, each of
its logical laws imply that something exists. For instance, the
principle of identity,
Everything is identical to itself entails There exists
something that is identical to itself. All sorts of attractive
inferences are jeopardized by the empty world.
Logicians do not treat their intolerance of the empty world as a
resource for metaphysicians. They do not want to get involved in
metaphysical disputes. They feel that logic should be neutral with
respect to the existence of anything. They yearn to rectify this
“defect in logical purity” (Russell 1919, 203).
The ideal of ontological neutrality has led some philosophers to
reject classical logic. A direct response would be to challenge the
existential import of the classical quantifiers. 
Proponents of “free logic” prefer to challenge the
existential presupposition of singular terms (Lambert 2003, 124). In
classical logic, names must have bearers. Free logic lacks this
restriction and so countenances empty names as in ‘Sherlock
Holmes is a detective’ and negative existentials such as
‘Pegasus does not exist’.  Proponents of free logic
suggest that these departures are a necessary condition for not
trivially implying an existential proposition. Jan Heylen (2017)
agrees but contends that free logic trivially implies other
existential sentences. He concludes that any deductive answer to the
question will beg the question. The background logic will always
intrude.
In any case, the changes recommended by free logicians would certainly
undermine W. V. Quine’s (1953a) popular criterion for ontological
commitment. Quine says that we can read off our ontology from the
existentially quantified statements constituting our well-accepted
theories. For instance, if evolutionary theory says that there are
some species that evolved from other species, and if we have no way to
paraphrase away this claim, then biologists are committed to the
existence of species. Since philosophers cannot improve on the
credentials of a scientific commitment, metaphysicians would also be
obliged to accept species.
So how does Quine defend his criterion of ontological commitment
from the menace looming from the empty domain? By compromise. Normally
one thinks of a logical theorem as a proposition that holds in all
domains. Quine (1953b, 162) suggests that we weaken the requirement to
that of holding in all non-empty domains. In the rare circumstances in
which the empty universe must be considered, there is an easy way of
testing which theorems will apply: count all the universal
quantifications as true, and all the existential quantifications as
false, and then compute for the remaining theorems.
Is Quine being ad hoc? Maybe. But exceptions are common for
notions in the same family as the empty domain. For instance,
instructors halt their students’ natural pattern of thinking about
division to forestall the disaster that accrues from permitting
division by zero. If numbers were words, zero would be an irregular
verb.
Many of the principles used to rule out total emptiness also preclude
small pockets of emptiness. Leibniz says that the actual world must
have something rather than nothing because the actual world must be the
best of all possible worlds, and something is better than nothing. But
by the same reasoning, Leibniz concludes there are no vacuums in the
actual world: more is better than less.
Leibniz also targets the possibility
of there being more than one void. If there could be more than one
void, then there could be two voids of exactly the same shape and size.
These two voids would be perfect twins; everything true of one void
would be true of the other. This is precluded by the principle of the
identity of indiscernibles: if everything true of x is true of
y, then x is identical to y.
A second problem with multiple voids arises from efforts to
paraphrase them away. From the time of Melissus, there have been
arguments against the possibility of a void existing in the manner that
an object exists: “Nor is there any void, for void is nothing, and
nothing cannot be.” (Guthrie 1965, 104) If you say there is a vacuum in
the flask, then you are affirming the existence of something in the
flask—the vacuum. But since ‘vacuum’ means an
absence of something, you are also denying that there is something in
the flask. Therefore, ‘There is a vacuum in the flask’ is a
contradiction.
Some react to Melissus’s argument by analyzing vacuums as properties
of things rather than things in their own right. According to C. J. F.
Williams (1984, 383), ‘There is a vacuum in the flask’
should be rendered as ‘The flask noths’. He does this in
the same spirit that he renders ‘There is fog in
Winchester’ as ‘Winchester is foggy’ and
‘There is a smell in the basement’ as ‘The basement
smells’.
If this paraphrase strategy works for vacuums, it ought to work for
the more prosaic case of holes. Can a materialist believe that there
are holes in his Swiss cheese? The holes are where the matter is not. So to
admit the existence of holes is to admit the existence of immaterial
objects! 
One response is to paraphrase ‘There is a hole in the
cheese’ as ‘The cheese holes’ or, to be a bit easier
on the ear, as ‘The cheese is perforated’. What appeared to
be a wild existential claim has been domesticated into a comment on the shape of the
cheese.
But how are we to distinguish between the cheese having two holes as
opposed to one? (Lewis and Lewis 1983, 4) Well, some cheese is singly
perforated, some cheese is doubly-perforated, yet other cheese is
n-perforated where n equals the number of holes in
the cheese.
Whoa! We must be careful not to define
‘n-perforation’ in terms of holes; that would
re-introduce the holes we set out to avoid. 
Can holes be evaded by confining ourselves to the process of perforation? 
Single-hole punchers differ from triple-hole punchers by how they act; singlely
rather than triply.
 
The difficulty with this process-oriented proposal that the product, a
hole, is needed to distinguish between successful and merely attempted
perforation. Furthermore, the paraphrase is incomplete because it does
not extend to holes that arise from processes such as looping. If the universe
popped into existence five minutes ago, then most holes formed without
any process.
Can we just leave expressions of the form
‘n-perforated’ as primitive, unanalyzed shape
predicates? David and Stephanie Lewis (1983) note that this strands us with an infinite
list of primitive terms. Such a list could never have been
memorized. The Lewises do not see how
‘n-perforated’ can be recursively defined without
alluding to holes.
The paraphrase prospects seem equally bleak for being
‘n-vacuumed’. Big meteorites pass through the
atmosphere in about one second leaving a hole in the
atmosphere—a vacuum in “thin air”. The air cannot
rush in quickly enough to fill the gap. This explains why rock vapor
from the impact shoots back up into the atmosphere and later rains
down widely on the surface. During a meteorite shower, the atmosphere
is multiply vacuumed. But this is just to say that there are many
vacuums in the atmosphere.
The trouble sustaining multiple voids may push us to the most
extreme answer to ‘Why is there something rather than
nothing?’, namely, ‘There must not only be something but
there must not be any emptiness at all!’.
Parmenides maintained that it is self-defeating to say that
something does not exist. The linguistic rendering of this insight is
the problem of negative existentials: ‘Atlantis does not
exist’ is about Atlantis. A statement can be about something only
if that something exists. No relation without relata! Therefore,
‘Atlantis does not exist’ cannot be true. Parmenides and
his disciples elaborated conceptual difficulties with negation into an
incredible metaphysical monolith.
The Parmenideans were opposed by the atomists. The atomists said
that the world is constituted by simple, indivisible things moving in
empty space. They self-consciously endorsed the void to explain
empirical phenomena such as movement, compression, and absorption.
Parmenides’s disciple, Zeno of Elea, had already amassed an amazing
battery of arguments to show motion is impossible. Since these imply
that compression and absorption are also impossible, Zeno rejects the
data of the atomists just as physicists reject the data of parapsychologists.
Less radical opponents of vacuums, such as Aristotle, re-explained
the data within a framework of plenism: although the universe is full,
objects can move because other objects get out of the way. Compression
and absorption can be accommodated by having things pushed out of the way
when other things jostle their way in.
In the Timaeus, Aristotle’s teacher Plato attempted to
combine atomism with plenism as a “likely story”.  The
atoms are the Platonic solids (regular, convex polyhedra), each having
a distinctive role in the composition of objects. Like an irreverently
intelligent school boy, Aristotle objects that the Platonic solids
cannot fill space. Every arrangement of Platonic solids yields the
sort of gaps that one can more readily predict in a universe composed
solely of spherical atoms.
Aristotle agrees that atoms could fill space if they were all
cubes. Pressing his luck, Aristotle goes on to claim that tetrahedra
can also complete space. It is testament to Aristotle’s subsequent
authority that this claim was accepted for seventeen hundred 
years—despite being easily refutable by anyone trying to snugly
combine tetrahedral blocks. Almost any choice of shapes guarantees
interstitial vacua. This geometrical pressure for tiny vacua creates a
precedent for the cosmic void (which surrounds the material cosmos)
and the intermediate empty spaces that provide a promising explanation
of how motion is possible.
Yet Aristotle denied the void can explain how things move. Movement
requires a mover that is pushing or pulling the object. An object in a
vacuum is not in contact with anything else. If the object did move,
there would be nothing to impede its motion. Therefore, any motion in a
vacuum would be at an unlimited speed. This conflicts with the principle that
no object can be in two separate places at the same time.
Aristotle’s refutation of the void persuaded most commentators for
the next 1500 years. There were two limited dissenters to his thesis
that vacuums are impossible. The Stoics agreed that terrestrial vacuums
are impossible but believed there must be a void surrounding the
cosmos. Hero of Alexandria agreed that there are no naturally occurring
vacuums but believed that they can be formed artificially. He cites
pumps and siphons as evidence that voids can be created. Hero believed
that bodies have a natural horror of vacuums and struggle to prevent
their formation. You can feel the antipathy by trying
to open a bellows that has had its air hole plugged. Try as you might,
you cannot separate the sides. However, unlike Aristotle, Hero thought
that if you and the bellows were tremendously strong, you could
separate the sides and create a vacuum.
Hero’s views became more discussed after the Church’s
anti-Aristotelian condemnation of 1277 which required Christian
scholars to allow for the possibility of a vacuum. The immediate
motive was to preserve God’s omnipotence. God could have chosen to
create the world in a different spot. He could have made it bigger or
smaller. God could have also chosen to make the universe a different
shape. This possibilities entail the possibility of a vacuum.
A second motivation is a literal reading of Genesis 1:1. This opening
passage of the Bible describes God as creating the world from
nothing. Such a construction seems logically impossible. Commitment to
an illogical miracle jeopardized the Christian’s overarching
commitment to avoid outright irrationality.  If creation out of
nothing were indeed a demonstrable impossibility, then faith would be
forced to override an answer given by reason rather than merely answer
a question about which reason is silent.
All Greek philosophy had presupposed creation was from something more
primitive, not nothing. Consistently, the Greeks assumed destruction
was disassembly into more basic units. (If destruction into
nothingness were possible, the process could be reversed to get
creation from nothing.) The Christians were on their own when trying
to make sense of creation from nothing. (Ancient Chinese philosophers
are sometimes translated as parallel believers in creation from
nothing. JeeLoo Liu (2014) cautions that both the Daoist and
Confucians are speaking about formlessness rather than
nothingness.)
Creation out of nothing presupposes the possibility of total
nothingness.  This in turn implies that there can be some
nothingness. Thus Christians had a motive to first establish the
possibility of a little nothingness.  Their strategy was to start small
and scale up.
Accordingly, scholars writing in the aftermath of the condemnation of 1277
proposed various recipes for creating vacuums (Schmitt 1967). One scheme was to
freeze a sphere filled with water. After the water contracted into
ice, a vacuum would form at the top. 
Aristotelians replied that the sphere would bend at its weakest point. 
When the vacuists stipulated that the sphere was perfect, the rejoinder
was that this would simply prevent the water from turning into ice.
Neither side appears to have tried out the recipe. If either had, then
they would have discovered that freezing water expands rather than
contracts.
To contemporary thinkers, this dearth of empirical testing is bizarre.
The puzzle is intensified by the fact that the medievals did empirically
test many hypotheses, especially in optics. 
Hero was eventually refuted by experiments conducted by Evangelista
Torricelli and Blaise Pascal. In effect, they created a barometer
consisting of a tube partially submerged, upside down, in bowl of
mercury. What keeps the mercury suspended in the tube? Is there an
unnatural vacuum that causes the surrounding glass to pull the liquid
up? Or is there no vacuum at all but rather some rarefied and
invisible matter in the “empty space”? Pascal answered
that there really was nothing holding up the mercury. The mercury
rises and falls due to variations in the weight of the atmosphere. The
mercury is being pushed up the tube, not pulled up by
anything.
When Pascal offered this explanation, Descartes wrote Christian
Huygens (8 December 1647) that the hasty young man had the vacuum too
much on his mind. (A more amusing translation of the letter has
Descartes complaining that Pascal had too much vacuum in his head;
alas, Descartes’ writing loses something in the original.)  Descartes
identified bodies with extension and so had no room for vacuums. If
there were nothing between two objects, then they would be touching
each other. And if they are touching each other, there is no gap
between them.
Well maybe the apparent gap is merely a thinly occupied region of
space. On this distributional model, there is no intermediate “empty
object” that separates the two objects. There is merely unevenly spread
matter. This model is very good at eliminating vacuums in the sense of
empty objects. However, it is also rather good at eliminating ordinary
objects. What we call objects would just be relatively thick deposits
of matter. There would be only one natural object: the whole universe.
This may have been the point of Spinoza’s attack on vacuums (Bennett
1980).  (Indian philosophers associate nothingness with lack of differentiation.
They may prefer to describe Spinoza’s world as a realm of nothingness dominated
by a single overarching unity.)
Descartes was part of a tradition that denied action at a distance. This
orthodoxy included
Galileo. He was distressed by Johannes Kepler’s hypothesis that the moon
influences the tides because the hypothesis seems to require causal
chains in empty space. How could the great Kepler believe something so
silly? After Isaac Newton resurrected Kepler’s hypothesis he eventually capitulated
to orthodoxy and stuffed the space between the moon and the Earth with
ether.
Indeed, the universality of Newton’s law of gravitation seems to
require that the whole universe be filled with a subtle substance.
How else could the universe be bound together by causal chains?
Hunger for ether intensified as the wave-like features of light became
established. It is tautologous that a wave must have a medium.
Or is it? As the theoretical roles of the ether proliferated,
physicists began to doubt there could be anything that accomplished
such diverse feats. These doubts about the existence of ether were
intensified by the emergence of Einstein’s theory of relativity. He
presented his theory as a relational account of space; if there were no
objects, there would be no space. Space is merely a useful abstraction. 
Even those physicists who wished to retain substantival space broke
with the atomist tradition of assigning virtually no properties to the
void. They re-assign much of ether’s responsibilities to space itself.
Instead of having gravitational forces being propagated through the
ether, they suggest that space is bent by mass. To explain how space
can be finite and yet unbounded, they characterize space as spherical.
When Edwin Hubble discovered that heavenly bodies are traveling away
from each other (like ants resting on an expanding balloon),
cosmologists were quick to suggest that space may be expanding.
“Expanding into what?” wondered bewildered laymen,
“How can space bend?”, “How can space have a
shape?”, …. 
Historians of science wonder whether the ether that was loudly pushed
out the front door of physics is quietly returning through the back
door under the guise of “space”. Quantum field theory
provides especially fertile ground for such speculation. Particles are
created with the help of energy present in “vacuums”. To
say that vacuums have energy and energy is convertible into mass, is
to deny that vacuums are empty. Many physicists revel in the discovery
that vacuums are far from empty. 
Frank Wilczek (1980), Stephen Hawking and Leonard Mlodinow (2010, 180)
as well as Lawrence Krauss (2012) explicitly claim that this answers
the question of why there is something rather than nothing. The basic
idea goes back to an issue raised by the symmetry of matter and
anti-matter. Given that the symmetry implies equality, matter and
anti-matter should have annihiliated each other. Creation should have
been aborted. Why is there NOW something (particles) rather than
nothing (mere energy in a quantum field)? This question was answered
by calculations suggesting that there was about a billionth more
matter than anti-matter. Although it is still possible for the
universe to be without particles, the slight numeric imbalance biases
the universe toward states in which there are many particles. A small
random change can trigger a phase transition analogous to the
transformation of very cold liquid beer into solid beer when the cap of the bottle
is popped (suddenly reducing the pressure in the bottle). 
A proud physicist is naturally tempted to announce these insights
through the bullhorn of metaphysics. But philosophers interested in
the logic of questions will draw attention to the role of emphasis in
framing requests for explanations.  ‘Why did Eve eat
the apple?’, ‘Why did Eve eat the apple?’,
and ‘Why did Eve eat the apple?’ are different
questions because they specify different contrast classes (van
Fraassen 1980, 127–130). Philosophers read ‘Why is there
something rather than nothing?’ tenselessly as in

‘Why is π an irrational number?’. The philosophers also
read ‘something’ as a quantifier ranging over any concrete
entity. The quantum vacuum is a concrete entity (in the sense
described in sections 4 and 7) and so is in the philosopher’s domain
of discourse. But for rhetorical effect, physicists anachronistically
back-date their domain of discourse to the things of nineteenth
century physics. Thus the physicists wind up addressing
‘Why is there some thing rather than
nothing?’.
Philosophers complain of misleading advertising. They asked one
question and the proud physicists answered a different question.
Lawrence Krauss defends the switch as an improvement. Often scientists
make progress by altering the meaning of key terms. Why stick with an
intractable (and arguably meaningless) question? We should wriggle
free from the dead hand of the past and rejuvenate our curiosity with
the vocabulary of contemporary cosmology.  
The physicist turned philosopher, Rudolf Carnap (1950), recalls how
thermodynamicists explicated “heat” into the more
precise concepts of temperature, thermal energy, and heat
transfer. Although the new terms are not synonymous with the old, they
bear enough similarity to disarm the objection that the physicists are
merely changing the topic. Our questions, like our children, can
mature without losing their identity over time. (The idea of there
being two different questions being asked is pursued in Carroll 2012,
Other Internet Resources.)
David Albert is open to the possibility of old questions being
improved by new interests and discoveries. However, he denies that
Lawrence Krauss’s particular change of meaning constitutes an
improvement (2012, Other Internet Resources):
After a mystical experience in 1654, Blaise Pascal’s interest in
nothingness passed from its significance to science to the
significance of nothingness to the human condition. Pascal thinks
human beings have a unique perspective on their
finitude. His Pensées is a roller coaster ride surveying the
human lot. Pascal elevates us to the level of angels by exalting in
our grasp of the infinite, and then runs us down below the beasts for
wittingly choosing evil over goodness. From this valley of depravity
Pascal takes us up again by marveling at how human beings tower over
the microscopic kingdom, only to plunge us down toward insignificance
by having us dwell on the vastness of space, and the immensity of
eternity.
For in fact what is man in nature? A Nothing in comparison with the
Infinite, an All in comparison with the Nothing, a mean between nothing
and everything. Since he is infinitely removed from comprehending the
extremes, the end of things and their beginning are hopelessly hidden
from him in an impenetrable secret; he is equally incapable of seeing
the Nothing from which he was made, and the Infinite in which he is
swallowed up. (Pensées sect. II, 72)
Pascal’s association of nothingness with insignificance and
meaninglessness was amplified by the Romantics. Their poetry
de-emphasized salvation, seeking to immerse the reader in a raw
apprehension of nature, unmediated by reason. Kant further obscured
God by casting Him into the noumenal abyss, available only through
practical faith rather than theoretical reason.
As among the first forthright atheists, Arthur Schopenhauer faced the
full force of ‘Why is there something rather than
nothing?’. According to Schopenhauer, religion and rationalism
aim to reassure us that the universe has a design. Our astonishment
that there is anything betrays awareness that it is all a meaningless
accident.
Readers of Schopenhauer were presented with the awesome contingency as
an actuality rather than a terrible possibility.  The experience
captured the attention of William James (who had experimented with
nitrous oxide to understand the oceanic philosophy of Georg Hegel and,
in 1882, published the phenomenological investigation
in Mind). James provides a simple recipe for eliciting the
emotion:
One need only shut oneself in a closet and begin to think of the fact
of one’s being there, of one’s queer bodily shape in the darkness
… of one’s fantastic character and all, to have the wonder steal
over the detail as much as over the general fact of being, and to see
that it is only familiarity that blunts it. Not only
that anything should be, but that this very thing
should be, is mysterious! (1911, 39)
Another close reader of Schopenhauer, Ludwig Wittgenstein,
characterizes the phenomenology as exhausting the thrust of the riddle
of existence. Instead of expressing a well-formed question, ‘Why
is there something rather than nothing?’ is an expression of the
mystical wonder
6.44 It is not how things are in the world that is mystical, but that it exists.
6.45 To view the world sub specie aeterni is to view it as a whole—as a limited whole.
Feeling the world as a limited whole—it is this that is mystical.
6.5 When an answer cannot be put into words, neither can the question—the riddle does not
 exist. (From Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus)
This emotional characterization persists into Wittgenstein’s later
philosophy. In Lectures on Ethics, Wittgenstein uses the language of
seeing-as. ‘Why is there something rather than nothing?’
is a prompt to see the world as a miracle. This gestalt switch is not
a mistake. Nor is it an insight. Even the logical positivists were
willing to grant the question has emotive meaning (just not cognitive
meaning).
The characteristic phenomenology of the question has also been
suggested as a resource in explaining why we fail to recognize the
radical ambiguity of the question.  Andrew Brenner (2016, 1319)
conjectures that the multiplicity of interpretations is masked by the
emotional unity.
Thinkers in the tradition of Phenomenology retained Schopenhauer’s
conviction that the emotion harbors a metaphysical insight. Instead of
tossing the question into the emotivist waste basket, like the logical
positivists, or lapsing into quietism, like Wittgenstein,
existentialists provide detailed treatments of the awe expressed by
the ultimate question. They built on Schopenhauer’s literary approach
to philosophy, depicting the emotion in plays and novels such as
Sartre’s Nausea.
In The Concept of
Dread, Søren Kierkegaard (1844) claims that nothingness wells up
into our awareness through moods and emotions.  Emotions are
intentional states; they are directed toward something. If angered, I
am angry at something. If amused, there is something I find
amusing. Free floating anxiety is often cited as a counterexample. But
Kierkegaard says that in this case the emotion is directed at
nothingness.
According to Heidegger, we have several motives to shy away from the
significance of our emotional encounters with nothingness. They are
premonitions of the nothingness of death. They echo the groundlessness
of human existence.
Some have hoped that our recognition of our rootlessness would
rescue meaning from the chaos of nothing. But Heidegger denies
us such solace.
Heidegger does think freedom is rooted in nothingness. He also says
we derive our concept of logical negation from this experience of
nothing. This suggests a privileged perspective for human beings.
We differ from animals with respect to nothing. 
Since Heidegger thinks that animals do not experience nothingness, he
is committed to skepticism about animal reasoning involving
negation. Consider the Stoic example of a dog that is following a
trail. The dog reaches a fork in the road, sniffs at one road and
then, without a further sniff, proceeds down the only remaining
road. The Stoics took this as evidence that the dog has performed a
disjunctive syllogism: “Either my quarry went down this road or
that road. Sniff—he did not go down this road.
Therefore, he went down that road.” Heidegger must discount this
as anthropomorphism.
Many biologists and psychologists side with the Stoic’s emphasis on
our continuity with animals. They deny that human beings have a
monopoly on nothingness. A classic anomaly for the stimulus-response
behaviorist was the laboratory rat that responds to the absence of a
stimulus: 
These anomalies for behaviorism fill rationalists with mixed
emotions. On the one hand, the experiments refute the empiricist
principle that everything is learned from experience. On the other
hand, the experiments also constitute a caution against
over-intellectualizing absences. A correct explanation of emotional
engagement with absences must be more general and cognitively less
demanding than rationalists tend to presuppose. Even mosquito larvae
see shadows. Doubts about whether they have consciousness do not make
us doubt that they see shadows. So the perception of absences cannot
depend on consciousness or any other advanced mental state. Perhaps
the earliest form of vision was of these absences of light. So instead
of being a pinnacle of intellectual sophistication, cognition of
absences may be primal.
Existentialists tend to endorse the high standards assumed by
rationalists. Their disagreement with the rationalists is over whether
the standards are met.  The existentialists are impressed by the
contrast between our expectations of how reality ought to behave and
how it in fact performs.
This sense of absurdity makes existentialists more accepting of
paradoxes. Whereas rationalists nervously view paradoxes as a
challenge to the authority of reason, existentialists greet them as
opportunities to correct unrealistic hopes. Existentialists are fond
of ironies and do not withdraw reflexively from the pain of
contradiction.  They introspect upon the inconsistency in the hope of
achieving a resolution that does justice to the three dimensionality
of deep philosophical problems. For instance, Heidegger is sensitive
to the hazards of saying that nothing exists. Like an electrician who
must twist and bend a wire to make it travel through an intricate
hole, the metaphysician must twist and bend a sentence to probe deeply
into the nature of being.
Rudolf Carnap thinks Heidegger’s contorted sentences malfunction.  To
illustrate, Carnap quotes snippets from Heidegger’s What is
Metaphysics?:
This paragraph, especially the last sentence, became notorious as a
specimen of metaphysical nonsense.
The confusion caused by Heidegger’s linguistic contortions is
exacerbated by separating them from their original text and herding
them into a crowded pen. There is a difference between a failure
to understand and an understanding of failure. The real test for
whether Heidegger’s sentences are meaningless is to see what can be
made of them in action, applied to the questions they were designed to
answer. 
Carnap also needs to consider the possibility that Heidegger’s
sentences are illuminating nonsense. After all, Carnap was patient
with the cryptic Wittgenstein. In the Tractatus, Wittgenstein
speaks like an oracle. He even characterized his carefully enumerated
sentences as rungs in a ladder that must be cast away after we have
made the ascent and achieved an ineffable insight. And Wittgenstein
meant it, quitting philosophy to serve as a lowly schoolmaster in a
rural village.
Other critics deny that What is Metaphysics? suffers from an
absence of meaning. Just the reverse: they think Heidegger’s passages
about nothing involve too many meanings. When Heidegger
connects negation with nothingness and death, these logicians are put
in mind of an epitaph that toys with the principle of excluded middle:
Mrs Nott was Nott Alive and is Nott Dead. According to these
critics, Heidegger’s writings can only be understood in the way we
understand the solution to equivocal riddles:
(Leeming, 1953, 201)
The answer, Nothing, can only be seen through a kaleidoscope
of equivocations.
Some of the attempts to answer ‘Why is there something rather
than nothing?’ equivocate or lapse into meaninglessness.  The
comedic effect of such errors is magnified by the fundamentality of
the question.  Error here comes off as pretentious error.
Those who ask the question ‘Why is there something rather
than nothing?’ commonly get confused. But the question
itself appears to survive tests for being
merely a verbal confusion. 
In any case, the question (or pseudo-question) has helped to hone the
diagnostic tools that have been applied to it. As the issue gets
shaped and re-shaped by advances in our understanding of
‘is’, quantification and explanatory standards, it becomes
evident that the value of these diagnostic tools is not exhausted by
their service in exposing pseudo-questions. For genuine questions
become better understood when we can discriminate them from their
spurious look-alikes.