According to classical theism, God is omnipresent, that is, present
everywhere. But classical theism also holds that God is immaterial.
How can something that is not, or does not have, a body be located in
space? Early discussions of divine presence typically began by
distinguishing God’s presence in space from that of material
bodies.
 Augustine
 (354–430) writes, 
Elsewhere Augustine continues this theme and introduces a new element,
namely, the suggestion that divine presence might be understood by
analogy with the presence of the soul: 
Augustine adds two further points: First, God “knows how to be
wholly everywhere without being confined to any place”
(Letter 137). In contrast to material objects, which, having
parts in various parts of the space they occupy, are not wholly
present at any of those regions, God is wholly present
wherever he is. Second, God is not contained in or confined
by any of the places at which he exists. Augustine is thus explicit
that God is not present in the way corporeal substances are present,
but his positive proposal for divine presence is less well developed.
He notes that God’s light, strength, and wisdom reach everywhere
(Letter 187, Ch. 7), and he holds that “God so
permeates all things as to be not a quality of the world, but the very
creative substance of the world ruling the world without labor,
sustaining it without effort.” Rather than going on to explain
these ideas, however, this passage simply ends with what became a
familiar formula: 
Anselm
 (1033–1109) also distinguishes God’s presence from the
way in which material objects are contained in space, and he, too,
appeals to the concept of being wholly present. In his
Monologion Anselm discusses omnipresence in a series of
chapters with paradoxical titles. In chapter 20 he states that
“the Supreme Being exists in every place and at all
times.” But in the following chapter, he argues that God
“exists in no place and at no time.” Finally, he attempts
to reconcile these “two conclusions—so contradictory
according to their utterance, so necessary according to their
proof”, by distinguishing two senses of “being wholly in a
place.” In one sense those things are wholly in a place
“whose magnitude place contains by circumscribing it, and
circumscribes by containing it.” In this sense, an ordinary
material object is contained in a place. God, however, is not thus
contained in space, for it is “a mark of shameless impudence to
say that place circumscribes the magnitude of Supreme Truth.”
Instead, God is in every place in the sense that he is present at
every place. According to Anselm, “the Supreme Being must be
present as a whole in every different place at once.” Like
Augustine, then, Anselm denies that God is contained in space. Also,
like Augustine, he seems to leave unexplained this second relation of
being “present as a whole” in every place. 
In his (1988) Edward Wierenga attempts to supply the missing details.
He notes that Anselm holds that souls could be wholly present in more
than one place, provided that they sensed in more than one place, and
that Anselm (in his Proslogion) adds that perception for God
is a matter of having direct or immediate knowledge. Combining these
two ideas, Anselm could say that God is present everywhere in virtue
of having immediate knowledge of what is happening everywhere. Brian
Leftow (1989) objects to the details of this interpretation and
proposes instead that, for Anselm, God is everywhere in virtue of his
power. We will explore the combination of knowledge and power below.
It should be noted, however, as Christopher Conn (2011) emphasizes,
that Anselm himself discusses time in conjunction with space; perhaps
an adequate interpretation of Anselm would exploit this idea and
develop an account, as Conn suggests, according to which God
“contains” all of space-time. 
The two ideas of knowledge and power figure prominently in the account
of omnipresence given by
 Thomas Aquinas
 (1225–1274), which we will take up in the next section. Section
3 will consider two 20th century proposals very much in the spirit of
Aquinas’s. Some treatments of the problem of omnipresence seem
to have the consequence that God is related to the world as though it
is his body. That will be the subject of Section 4. In the final
section we will consider several recent proposals that depart from the
traditional formula. 
According to Thomas Aquinas, God’s presence is to be understood
in terms of God’s power, knowledge and essence. (In this view he
followed a formula put forth by Peter Lombard (late 11th C.–1160) in
his Sentences, I, xxxvii, 1.) He writes, “God is in all
things by his power, inasmuch as all things are subject to his power;
he is by his presence in all things, inasmuch as all things are bare
and open to his eyes; he is in all things by his essence, inasmuch as
he is present to all as the cause of their being” (Summa
Theologica I, 8, 3). Aquinas attempts to motivate this claim with
some illustrations:
Perhaps there is a sense in which a king is present wherever his power
extends. In any event, Aquinas seems to think so. He distinguishes two
kinds of being in place: by “contact of dimensive quantity, as
bodies are, [and] contact of power” (S.T. I, 8, 2, ad
1). In Summa contra Gentiles he writes that “an
incorporeal thing is related to its presence in something by its
power, in the same way that a corporeal thing is related to its
presence in something by dimensive quantity,” and he adds that
“if there were any body possessed of infinite dimensive
quantity, it would have to be everywhere. So if there were an
incorporeal being possessed of infinite power, it must be
everywhere” (SCG III, 68, 3). So the first aspect of
God’s presence in things is his having power over them. The
second aspect is having every thing present to him, having
everything “bare and open to his eyes” or being known to
him. The third feature, that God is present to things by his essence,
is glossed as his being the cause of their being.
This way of understanding God’s presence by reference to his
power and his knowledge treats the predicate ‘is present’
as applied to God as analogical with its application to
ordinary physical things. (For a fuller explanation of analogical
predication, see
 Medieval Theories of Analogy.)
 As applied to God, ‘is present’ is neither univocal (used
with the same meaning as in ordinary contexts) nor equivocal (used
with an unrelated meaning). Rather, its meaning can be explained by
reference to its ordinary sense: God is present at a place just in
case there is a physical object that is at that place and God has
power over that object, knows what is going on in that object, and God
is the cause of that object’s existence. Nicholas Everitt (2010,
p. 86) objects to this analogical approach, stating that “if
this is how omnipresence is interpreted, one might well think that it
would be clearer to say straightforwardly that God is not omnipresent
at all,” and he cites Joshua Hoffman and Gary Rosenkrantz (2002,
p. 41)) as agreeing with him. But Hoffman and Rosenkrantz in the cited
passage merely say that “there is no literal sense in
which [God] could be omnipresent,” which leaves it open that
there is an analogical sense in which God is omnipresent. Hud Hudson
(2009) also denies that God’s presence is analogical, but that
is because he thinks that there is a literal way in which God is
present everywhere. We will consider Hudson’s proposal in
Section 5. 
This account of omnipresence has the consequence that, strictly
speaking, God is only present where some physical thing is located.
Perhaps, however, this is exactly what the medievals had intended.
Anselm says, for example, that “the supreme Nature is more
appropriately said to be everywhere, in this sense, that it is in all
existing things, than in this sense, namely that it is merely in all
places” (Monologion, 23).
More recent philosophers have agreed that God’s presence is to
be understood analogically.
 Charles Hartshorne
 (1897–2000), for example, claims that “the relation of
God to the world must necessarily be conceived, if at all, by analogy
with relations given in human experience” (1941). Rather than
taking the relations to be knowledge of and power over things,
however, Hartshorne assumes that God’s relation to the world is
analogous to that of a human mind’s relation to its body.
Hartshorne develops this idea by making distinctions between kinds of
knowledge and kinds of power. Some things that human beings know are
known immediately, by “vivid and direct intuition”, while
other things are known only indirectly or through inference.
Hartshorne holds that the former kind of knowledge is infallible, and
it is the kind of knowledge human beings have of their own thoughts
and feelings. Since this kind of knowledge is the highest form of
knowledge, it is the kind God has, and he has it with respect to the
entire cosmos.
Similarly, some things human beings have power over they control
directly; other things can be controlled only indirectly. Human beings
have direct control only over their own volitions and movements of
their own bodies. Again, since this is the highest kind of power, it
is the kind of power God has—and he has it over every part of
the universe.
Thus far Hartshorne may be seen as developing the medieval view of
divine presence. God is present everywhere by having
immediate knowledge and direct power throughout the
universe (with the addition that his presence extends to unoccupied
regions of space). But Hartshorne endorses a surprising addition. He
adds that whatever part of the world a mind knows immediately and
controls directly is, by definition, its body. The world, therefore,
is God’s body.
Richard Swinburne (1977) also begins his discussion of omnipresence by
asking what it is for a person to have a body. Although he insists
that God is an immaterial spirit, he supposes this claim to be
compatible with a certain “limited embodiment.”
Subsequently (2016) he withdraws this suggestion, saying that since
“God is not supposed to be tied down to acting or learning
through … [the universe] or any chunk of matter … it
seems less misleading to say that he is not embodied.” Swinburne
develops his account by appeal to the notions of a “basic
action” (an action one performs, for example, moving ones limbs
in the typical case, without having to perform another action in order
to do it) and of “direct knowledge” (knowledge that is
neither inferential nor dependent on causal interaction). He then
presents the claim that God is omniscient as the claim that God
“can cause effects at every place directly (as an instrumentally
basic action) and knows what is happening at every place without the
information coming to him through some causal chain—for example,
without needing light rays from a distant place to stimulate his
eyes” (2016, p. 113). Swinburne’s account is thus, as he
notes, in the spirit of that of Aquinas.
As we have seen, Hartshorne explicitly endorses as a consequence of
the doctrine of divine omnipresence that the world is God’s
body, and Swinburne is initially willing to accept a “limited
embodiment.” But some philosophers have been loath to accept
divine embodiment as a consequence of omnipresence. Charles
Taliaferro, for example, while endorsing this overall account of
omnipresence, notes that the basic actions human beings perform
“can involve highly complex physical factors…[including]
many neural events and muscle movements, whereas with God there is no
such physical complexity” (Taliaferro, 1994). Taliaferro then
adds that this immediacy in the case of God’s action is
precisely a reason to say that “the world does not function as
God’s body the way material bodies function as our own.”
Edward Wierenga adds a second objection. He holds that as Hartshorne
and Swinburne develop accounts of God’s power and knowledge, God
would have the same knowledge of and control over what happens in
empty regions of space as he does with respect to those regions
occupied by material objects (Wierenga, 2010). In other words,
Hartshorne’s and Swinburne’s accounts of omnipresence,
unlike that of Aquinas, do not interpret God’s presence as
presence in things. But it would be implausible to count a
thing as part of God’s body on the basis of his knowledge of and
power over the region of space that thing occupies, when God’s
knowledge and power would extend in the same way to that region if it
were unoccupied. So it seems as though one could accept a version of
the traditional account of divine omnipresence without having to
conclude that the world is God’s body.
Although conceiving of omnipresence in terms of power, knowledge, and
essence is the traditional approach, with continued adherents, in
recent years several philosophers have proposed quite different
accounts of omnipresence. 
Robert Oakes (2006) suggests that space is “constituted
by” God’s omnipresence. He holds that things located in
space and the world itself are therefore distinct from God. Oakes then
draws on these claims to argue that divine omnipresence is
incompatible with
 pantheism.
 
Some recent work appeals to esoteric concepts from metaphysics. Luco
Johan van den Brom (1984; see also 1993) suggests that “God has
a spatial dimension of his own which he does not share with
the created cosmos.” Brom’s idea is that just as a
two-dimensional surface “transcends” a line on that
surface but is present at every point on the line, and similarly for a
three-dimensional space and a two-dimensional plane in that space,
“God, by existing in a higher dimensional system, is also
present in the places of all the objects in the three-dimensional
space of created cosmos without being contained by that
three-dimensional space” (1984, 654). Brom even conjectures that
God possesses at least two extra dimensions, making it impossible for
our space to bisect his. 
Other recent work draws on contemporary discussions on the metaphysics
of material objects and their relation to spacetime. Hud Hudson (2009)
describes several possible “occupation” relations. One of
these relations is “entension”, where an object
entends a region r just in case it is wholly and
entirely located at r and at every proper subregion of
r. An object is entirely located at a region r just
in case it is located at r and there is no region disjoint
from r at which it is located. And an object is wholly
located at r just in case it is located at r and no
proper part of it is not located at r. The typical way in
which an object is located at a region of space is by having various
of its parts at different subregions of that region; that is,
typically material objects are “spread out” or distributed
through a region they occupy (they “pertend”, to use a
technical term). In contrast, if an object entends a region, then it
is located as a whole throughout that region. Hudson then
proposes a “literal occupation account of omnipresence as
ubiquitous entension” (2009, 209). Omnipresence is location at
“the maximally inclusive region” plus being wholly located
at every subregion there is. Alexander R. Pruss (2013) also endorses a
version of this account, with slightly different details to allow
explicitly for divine timelessness. In Hudson’s view, any object
that occupies a region is space is a material object. He is thus
willing to accept as a consequence of his account of omnipresence as
ubiquitous entension that God is a material object. Ross Inman (2017),
while sympathetic to the appeal to ubiquitous entension, is unwilling
to accept the conclusion that God is a material object. Accordingly he
shows that careful attention to medieval discussions of the
distinction between material and immaterial objects yields at least
three ways of marking that distinction according to which God is not
material. 
Eleonore Stump (2010, see also 2008, 2011, 2013) defends adding
additional conditions to the traditional understanding of omnipresence
in terms of knowledge and power. She writes, “I … think,
however, that the attempt to capture personal presence in terms of
direct and unmediated cognitive and casual contact misses something
even in the minimal sense of personal presence” (2010, 111). She
continues, “what has to be added to the condition of direct and
unmediated casual and cognitive contact … are two
things––namely, second-person experience and shared
attention” (2010, 112). Second-person experience involves
being aware of and attending to someone else as a person when that
other person is conscious and functioning as a person. Shared
attention requires that two persons be aware of each other and aware
of their awareness, whether of each other or a third object.
Stump’s goal is to provide an understanding of the kind of union
to be desired in love. It may be, then, that her real topic is the
nature of God’s offer of love to people. But she explicitly
applies her remarks about personal presence to omnipresence when she
writes, “in order for God to be omnipresent, that is, in order
for God to be always and everywhere present, it also needs to
be the case that God is always and everywhere in a position to share
attention with any creature able and willing to share attention with
God” (2010, 117). Perhaps, then, Stump can be seen not only as
attempting to analyze omnipresence but to identify what is required
for it to be of religious or theological importance. 
Georg Gasser (2019) also defends adding an additional condition
involving agency to the traditional appeal to knowledge and power. He
considers a variety of proposed accounts of omnipresence, giving
special attention (and initial sympathy) to Hudson’s development
of ubiquitous entension. But he concludes that this proposal has a
hard time explaining “the biblical tradition and personal
religious experiences [according to which] God acts differently at
different places” (2019, 59). Perhaps he takes Stump’s
second-person attention and shared experience, which he
references, to provide the requisite agency, or perhaps he intends
such actions as, for example, God’s speaking to Moses in the
burning bush and also preventing the consumption of the bush by fire.
In any event, Gasser assumes that omnipresence includes, not only
God’s presence through his knowledge and power everywhere, but
also “acting from time to time … ‘specially’
in miraculous ways” (2019, 60). 