The idea of the moral point of view can be traced back to David
Hume’s account of the “judicious spectator.” Hume
sought to explain how moral judgments of approval and disapproval are
possible given that people normally are focused on achieving their
particular interests and concerns. He conjectured that in making moral
judgments individuals abstract in imagination from their own
particular interests and adopt an impartial point of view from which
they assess the effects of their own and others’ actions on the
interests of everyone. Since, according to Hume, we all can adopt this
impartial perspective in imagination, it accounts for our agreement in
moral judgments (see Hume 1739 [1978, 581]; Rawls, LHMP 84–93,
LHPP 184–187).
Subsequently, philosophers posited similar perspectives for moral
reasoning designed to yield impartial judgments once individuals
abstract from their particular aims and interests and assess
situations from an impartial point of view. But rather than being
mainly explanatory of moral judgments like Hume’s
“judicious spectator,” the role of these impartial
perspectives is to serve as a basis from which to assess and justify
moral rules and principles. Kant’s categorical imperative
procedure, Adam Smith’s “impartial spectator,”, and
Sidgwick’s “point of view of the universe” are all
different versions of the moral point of view. 
An important feature of the moral point of view is that it is designed
to represent what is essential to the activity of moral reasoning. For
example, Kant’s categorical imperative is envisioned as a point
of view any reasonable morally motivated person can adopt in
deliberating about what he/she ought morally to do (Rawls, CP 498ff).
When joined with the common assumption that the totality of moral
reasons is final and override non-moral reasons, the moral point of
view might be regarded as the most fundamental perspective that we can
adopt in practical reasoning about what we ought to do. 
Rawls’s idea of the original position, as initially conceived,
is his account of the moral point of view with regard to matters of
justice. The original position is a hypothetical perspective that we
can adopt in our moral reasoning about the most basic principles of
social and political justice. What primarily distinguishes
Rawls’s impartial perspective from its antecedents (in Hume,
Smith, Kant, etc.) is that, rather than representing the judgment of
one person, it is conceived socially, as a general agreement by
(representatives of all adult) members of an ongoing society. The
point of view of justice is then represented as a general social
“contract” or agreement by free and equal persons on the
basic terms of cooperation for their society. 
Historically the idea of a social contract had a more limited role
than Rawls assigns to it. In Hobbes and Locke the social contract
serves as an argument for the legitimacy of political authority.
Hobbes argues that in a pre-social state of nature it would be
rational for all to agree to authorize one person to exercise the
absolute political power needed to enforce norms necessary for social
cooperation. By contrast, Locke argued against absolute monarchy by
contending that no existing political constitution is legitimate or
just unless it could be contracted into starting from a
position of equal right within a (relatively peaceful) state of
nature, and without violating any natural rights or duties. For
Rousseau and perhaps Kant too, the idea of a social contract played a
different role: as part of their accounts of the General Will, the
social contract is a point of view that lawmakers and citizens should
adopt for assessing existing laws and deciding on measures that
achieve justice and citizens’ common good. Rawls generalizes on
Locke’s, Rousseau’s and Kant’s natural right
theories of the social contract (TJ vii/xviii): the purpose of his
original position is to yield principles to determine and assess the
justice of political constitutions and of economic and social
arrangements. To do so, he seeks in the original position “to
combine into one conception the totality of conditions which we are
ready upon due reflection to recognize as reasonable in our conduct
towards one another” (TJ 587/514).
Why does Rawls represent principles of justice as originating in a
kind of social contract? Rawls says that “justice as fairness
assigns a certain primacy to the social” (CP 339). Unlike
Kant’s categorical imperative procedure, the original position
is designed to represent the predominantly social bases of justice. To
say that justice is predominantly social does not mean that people do
not have “natural” moral rights and duties outside society
or in non-cooperative circumstances—Rawls clearly thinks there
are human rights (see LP sect.10) and natural duties (TJ sects. 19,
51) that apply to all human beings as such. But whatever our natural
or human rights and duties may be, they do not provide an adequate
basis for ascertaining the rights and duties of justice that we owe
one another as members of the same ongoing political society. It is in
large part due to “the profoundly social nature of human
relationships” (PL 259) that Rawls sees political and economic
justice as grounded in social cooperation and reciprocity. For this
reason Rawls eschews the idea of a state of nature wherein pre-social
but fully rational individuals agree to cooperative norms (as in
Hobbesian views), or where pre-political persons with antecedent
natural rights agree on the form of a political constitution (as in
Locke). We are social beings in the sense that in the absence of
society and social development we have but inchoate and unrealized
capacities, including our capacities for rationality, morality, even
language itself. As Rousseau says, outside society we are but
“stupid and shortsighted animals” (Rousseau, bk.I, ch.8,
par. 1). This undermines the main point of the idea of a state of
nature in many views, which is to distinguish the rights, claims,
duties, powers and competencies we have prior to membership in society
from those we acquire as members of society. Not being members of some
society is not an option for us. In so far as we are rational and
reasonable beings at all, we have developed as members of a society,
within its social framework and institutions. Accordingly Rawls says
that no sense can be made of the notion of that part of an
individual’s social benefits that exceed what would have been
that person’s situation in a state of nature (PL 278). The
traditional idea of pre-social or even pre-political rational moral
agents thus plays no role in Rawls’s account of justice and the
social contract; for him the state of nature is an idea without moral
significance (PL 278–280). The original position is set forth
largely as an alternative to the state of nature and is regarded by
Rawls as the appropriate initial situation for a social contract.
(Below we consider a further reason behind Rawls’s rejection of
the state of nature: it does not adequately allow for impartial
judgment and the equality of persons.)
Another way in which Rawls represents the “profoundly
social” bases of principles of justice is by focusing on
“the basic structure of society.” The “first subject
of justice,” Rawls says, is principles that regulate the basic
social institutions that constitute the “basic structure of
society” (TJ sect.2). These basic institutions include the
political constitution, which specifies procedures for legislating and
enforcing laws and the system of trials for adjudicating disputes; the
bases of the economic system, including the norms of property, its
transfer and distribution, contractual relations, etc. which are all
necessary for economic production, exchange, and consumption; and
finally norms that define and regulate permissible forms of the
family, which is needed to perpetuate society. It is the role of
principles of justice to specify and assess the system of rules that
constitute these basic institutions, and determine the fair
distribution of rights, duties, opportunities, powers and positions of
office to be realized within them. What makes these institutions and
their arrangement the first subject for principles of social justice
is that they are all necessary to social cooperation and have such
profound influences on our circumstances, aims, characters, and future
prospects. No stable, enduring society could exist without certain
rules of property, contract, and transfer of goods and resources, for
they make economic production, trade, and consumption possible. Nor
could a society long endure without some political mechanism for
resolving disputes and making, revising, interpreting, and enforcing
its economic and other cooperative norms; nor without some form of the
family, to reproduce, sustain, and nurture members of its future
generations. This is what distinguishes the social institutions
constituting the basic structure from other profoundly influential
social institutions, such as religion; religion and other social
institutions are not basic in Rawls’s sense because they are not
generally necessary to social cooperation among members of society.
(Even if certain religions have been ideologically necessary to
sustain the norms of particular societies, many societies can and do
exist without the involvement or support of religious institutions).
Another reason Rawls regards the original position as the appropriate
setting for a social contract is implicit in his stated aim in A
Theory of Justice: it is to discover the most appropriate moral
conception of justice for a democratic society wherein persons regard
themselves as free and equal citizens (TJ viii/xviii). Here he assumes
an ideal of citizens as “moral persons” who regard
themselves as free and equal, have a conception of their rational
good, and also have a “sense of justice.” “Moral
persons” (an 18th century term) are not necessarily
morally good persons. Instead moral persons are persons who are
capable of being rational since they have the capacities to form,
revise and pursue a conception of the good; moreover, moral persons
also are capable of being reasonable since they have a moral capacity
for a sense of justice—to cooperate with others on terms that
are fair and to understand, apply, and act upon principles of justice
and their requirements. Because people have these capacities, or
“moral powers,” we hold them responsible for their
actions, and they are regarded as capable of pursuing their interests
and engaging in social cooperation. Rawls’s idea is that, being
reasonable and rational, persons (like us) who regard ourselves as
free and equal should be in a position to accept and endorse as
morally justifiable the principles of justice regulating our basic
social institutions and individual conduct. Otherwise our conduct is
coerced for reasons we cannot (reasonably or rationally) accept and we
are not fundamentally free persons. Starting from these assumptions,
Rawls construes the moral point of view from which to decide moral
principles of justice as a social contract in which
(representatives of) free and equal persons are given the task of
coming to an agreement on principles of justice that are to regulate
their social and political relations in perpetuity. How otherwise,
Rawls contends, should we represent the justification of principles of
justice for free and equal persons who have different conceptions of
their good, as well as different religious, philosophical, and moral
views? There is no commonly accepted moral or religious authority or
doctrine to which they could appeal in order to discover principles of
justice that all could agree to and accept. Rawls contends that, since
his aim is to discover a conception of justice appropriate for a
democratic society, it should be justifiable to free and equal persons
in their capacity as citizens on terms which all can endorse and
accept. The role of the social contract is to represent this idea,
that the basic principles of social cooperation are justifiable hence
acceptable to all members of society, and that they are principles
which all can commit themselves to support and comply with. 
How is this social contract to be conceived? It is not an historical
event that must actually take place at some point in time (TJ
120/104). It is rather a hypothetical situation, a kind of
“thought experiment” (JF 17), that is designed to uncover
the most reasonable principles of justice. Rawls maintains (in LHPP,
cf. p.15) that the major advocates of social contract
doctrine—Hobbes, Locke, Rousseau, and Kant—all regarded
the social contract, as a hypothetical event. Hobbes and Locke thus
posited a hypothetical state of nature in which there is no political
authority, and where people are regarded as rational and (for Locke)
also reasonable. The purpose of this hypothetical social contract is
to demonstrate what types of governments are politically legitimate,
and determine the nature of individuals’ political obligations
(ibid. p.16). The presumption is that if a government could
or would be agreed to by all rational persons subject to it in an
appropriately described pre-political situation, then it is acceptable
to rational persons generally, including you and me, and hence is
legitimate and is the source of our political obligations. Thus Hobbes
argues that all rational persons in a state of nature would agree to
authorize an absolute sovereign, while Locke comes to the opposite
conclusion, contending that absolutism would be rejected in favor of
constitutional monarchy. Similarly, in Rousseau and Kant, the social
contract is a way to reason about the General Will, or the laws that
hypothetical moral agents would all agree to in order to promote the
common good and realize the freedom and equality of citizens.
Rawls employs the idea of a hypothetical social contract for more
general purposes than his predecessors. He aims to provide principles
of justice that can be applied to determine not only the justice of
political constitutions and the laws, but also the justice of the
institution of property and of social and economic arrangements for
the production and distribution of income and wealth, as well as the
distribution of educational and work opportunities, and of powers and
positions of office and responsibility.
Some have objected that hypothetical agreements cannot bind or
obligate people; only actual contracts or agreements can impose
obligations and commitments (Dworkin, 1977, 150ff). But the original
position is not intended to impose new obligations on us; rather it is
a device for discovery and is to be used, as Rawls says, “to
help us work out what we now think” (CP 402); it incorporates
“conditions…we do in fact accept” (TJ 587/514) and
is a kind of “thought experiment for the purpose of public- and
self-clarification” (JF, p.17). Hypothetical agreement in the
original position does not then bind anyone to duties or commitments
he/she does not already have. Its point rather is to help discover and
explicate the requirements of our moral concepts of justice and enable
us to draw the consequences of considered moral convictions of justice
that we all presumably share. Whether we in turn consciously accept or
agree to these consequences and the principles and duties they
implicate once brought to our awareness is irrelevant to their
justification. The point rather of conjecturing the outcome of a
hypothetical agreement is that, assuming that the premises underlying
the original position correctly represent our most deeply held
considered moral convictions and concepts of justice, then we are
committed to endorsing the resulting principles and duties whether or
not we actually accept or agree to them. Not to do so implies a
failure to accept and live up to the consequences of our own moral
convictions about justice.
Rawls calls his conception “justice as fairness.” His aim
in designing the original position is to describe an agreement
situation that is fair among all the parties to the hypothetical
social contract. He assumes that if the parties to the social contract
are fairly situated and take all relevant information into account,
then the principles they would agree to are also fair. The fairness of
the original agreement situation transfers to the principles everyone
agrees to; furthermore, whatever laws or institutions are required by
the principles of justice are also fair. The principles of justice
chosen in the original position are in this way the result of a choice
procedure designed to “incorporate pure procedural justice at
the highest level” (CP, 310, cf. TJ 120/104). This feature of
Rawls’s original position is closely related to his
constructivism, and his subsequent understanding of the original
position as a “procedure of construction” (see below,
§9).
There are different ways to define a fair agreement situation
depending on the purpose of the agreement and the description of the
parties to it. For example, certain facts are relevant to entering
into a fair employment contract – a prospective employee’s
talents, skills, prior training, experience, motivation, and
reliability, for example – that may not be relevant to other
fair agreements. What is a fair agreement situation among free and
equal persons when the purpose of the agreement is fundamental
principles of justice for the basic structure of society? What sort of
facts should the parties to such a fundamental social contract know,
and what sort of facts are irrelevant or even prejudicial to a fair
agreement? Here it is helpful to compare Rawls’s and
Locke’s social contracts. A feature of Locke’s social
contract is that it transpires in a state of nature among free and
equal persons who know everything about themselves that you and I know
about ourselves and each other. Thus Locke’s parties know their
natural talents, skills, education, and other personal
characteristics; their racial and ethnic group, gender, social class,
and occupations; their level of wealth and income, their religious and
moral beliefs, an so on. Given this knowledge, Locke assumes that,
while starting from a position of equal political right, the great
majority of free and equal persons in a state of nature –
including all women and racial minorities, and all other men who do
not meet a rigid property qualification – could and most likely
would rationally agree to alienate their natural rights of equal
political jurisdiction in order to gain the benefits of political
society. Thus Locke envisions as legitimate a constitutional monarchy
that is in effect a gender-and-racially biased class state, a state
wherein a small class of amply propertied white males exercise
political rights to vote, hold office, exercise political and social
influence, and enjoy other important benefits and responsibilities to
the exclusion of everyone else (see Rawls, LHPP, 138–139).
The problem with this arrangement, of course, is that gender and
racial classifications, social class, wealth and lack thereof, are,
like absence of religious belief, not good reasons for depriving
people of their equal political rights or opportunities to occupy
social and political positions. Knowledge of these and other facts are
not morally relevant for deciding who should qualify to vote, hold
office, and actively participate in governing and administering
society. Rawls suggests that the reason Locke’s social contract
results in this unjust outcome is that it transpires (hypothetically)
under unfair conditions of a state of nature, where the parties have
complete knowledge of their circumstances, characteristics and social
situations. Socially powerful and wealthy parties then have access to
and are able to take advantage of their knowledge of their
“favorable position and exercise their threat advantage”
to extract favorable terms of cooperation for themselves from those in
less favorable positions (JF 16). Consequently the parties’
judgments regarding constitutional provisions are biased by their
knowledge of their particular circumstances and their decisions are
insufficiently impartial. 
The remedy for such biases of judgment is to redefine the initial
situation. Rather than a state of nature Rawls situates the parties to
his social contract so that they do not have access to factual
knowledge that can distort their judgments and result in unfair
principles. Rawls’s original position is an initial agreement
situation wherein the parties are without information that enables
them to tailor principles of justice favorable to their personal
circumstances. Among the essential features of the original position
is that no one knows his or her place in society, class position or
social status, nor does any one know his or her race or gender,
fortune in the distribution of natural assets and abilities, level of
intelligence, strength, education, and the like. Rawls even assumes
that the parties do not know their values or “conceptions of the
good,” their religious or philosophical convictions, or their
special psychological propensities. The principles of justice are
chosen behind a “veil of ignorance” (TJ 12/11). This veil
of ignorance deprives the parties of all knowledge of particular facts
about themselves, about one another, and even about their society and
its history. 
The parties are not however completely ignorant of facts. They know
all kinds of general facts about persons and societies, including
knowledge of relatively uncontroversial scientific laws and
generalizations accepted within the natural and social sciences
– economics, psychology, political science, biology and other
natural sciences (including applications of Darwinian evolutionary
theory that are generally accepted by scientists, however
controversial they may be among religious fundamentalists). They know
then about the general tendencies of human behavior and psychological
development, about neuropsychology and biological evolution, and about
how economic markets work, including neo-classical price theory of
supply and demand. As discussed below, they also know about the
circumstances of justice—moderate scarcity and limited
altruism—as well as the desirability of the “primary
social goods” that are needed by anyone to live a good life and
to develop their “moral powers” and other capacities. What
the parties lack however is knowledge of any particular facts about
their own and other persons’ lives, as well as knowledge of any
historical facts about their society and its population, its level of
wealth and resources, religious institutions, etc.. Rawls thinks that
since the parties are required to come to an agreement on objective
principles that supply universal standards of justice applying across
all societies, knowledge of particular and historical facts about any
person or society is morally irrelevant and potentially prejudicial to
their decision.
Another reason Rawls gives for such a “thick” veil of
ignorance is that it is designed to be a strict “position of
equality” (TJ 12/11) that represents persons purely in their
capacity as free and equal moral persons. The parties in the original
position do not know any particular facts about themselves or society;
they all have the same general information made available to them.
They are then situated equally in a very strong way,
“symmetrically” (JF 18) and purely as free and equal moral
persons. They know only characteristics and interests they share in
common in their capacity as free and equal moral persons—their
“higher-order interests” in developing the moral powers of
justice and rationality, their need for the primary social goods, and
so on. The moral powers, Rawls contends, are the “basis of
equality, the features of human beings in virtue of which they are to
be treated in accordance with the principles of justice” (TJ,
504/441). Knowledge of the moral powers and their essential role in
social cooperation, along with knowledge of other general facts, is
all that is morally relevant, Rawls believes, to a decision on
principles of justice that are to reflect people’s status as
free and equal moral persons. A thick veil of ignorance thus is
designed to represent the equality of persons purely as moral persons,
and not in any other contingent capacity or social role. In this
regard the veil interprets the Kantian idea of equality as equal
respect for moral persons (cf. CP 255).
Many criticisms have been leveled against Rawls’s veil of
ignorance. Among the most frequent is that choice in the original
position is indeterminate (Sen, 2009, 11–12, 56–58). Among
other reasons for this, it is said that the parties are deprived of so
much information about themselves that they are psychologically
incapable of making a choice, or they are incapable of making a
rational choice. For how can we make any rational choice without
knowing our primary ends, or fundamental values and commitments?
(MacIntyre, 1981; Sandel 1982) 
One answer is that we do not need to know everything about ourselves,
including our primary purposes, to make rational decisions about the
background social conditions needed to pursue those primary purposes.
For example, whatever our ends, we know that personal security and an
absence of social chaos are conditions of most anyone’s living a
good life (as Hobbes contends). Similarly, though Rawls’s
parties do not know their particular values and commitments, they do
know that they require an adequate share of primary social goods
(rights and liberties, powers and opportunities, income and wealth,
and the social bases of self-respect) to effectively pursue their
purposes, whatever they may be. They also know they have a
“higher-order interest” in adequately developing and
exercising their “moral powers” – the capacities to
be rational and reasonable – which are conditions of responsible
agency and social cooperation. Rawls contends that knowledge of these
basic social needs (he also calls them “essential goods”)
is sufficient for a rational choice on principles of justice by the
parties in the original position. To resolve this controversy, critics
need to examine the details of Rawls’s argument and be more
specific about where it is claimed to fail. 
To the objection that choice behind the veil of ignorance is
psychologically impossible, Rawls says that it is important not to get
too caught up in the theoretical fiction of the original position, as
if it were some historical event among real people who are being asked
to do something impossible. The original position is not supposed to
be realistic, but is a “device of representation” (PL 27),
or a “thought experiment,” (JF, 83), that is designed to
organize our considered convictions of justice and clarify their
implications. The parties in it are not real but are “artificial
persons” who have a role to play in this thought experiment.
They represent an ideal of free and equal reasonable and rational
moral persons that Rawls assumes is implicit in our reasoning about
justice. The veil of ignorance is a representation of the kinds of
reasons and information that are relevant to a decision on principles
of justice for the basic structure of a society of free and equal
moral persons (TJ 17/16). Many different kinds of reasons and facts
are not morally relevant to that kind of decision (e.g., information
about people’s race, gender, religious affiliation, wealth, and
even, Rawls says more controversially, their conceptions of their
good), just as many different kinds of reasons and facts are
irrelevant to mathematicians’ ability to work out the formal
proof of a theorem. As a mathematician, scientist, or musician
exercise their expertise by ignoring their knowledge of particular
facts about themselves, presumably we can do so too in reasoning about
principles of justice. Rawls says we can “enter the original
position at any time simply by reasoning in accordance with the
enumerated restrictions on information,” (PL 27) and taking into
account general facts about persons, their needs, and social and
economic cooperation that are provided to the parties (TJ 120/104,
587/514).
A related criticism of Rawls’s “thick” veil of
ignorance is that even if the parties can make certain rational
decisions in their interest without knowledge of their final ends,
still they cannot come to a decision about principles of justice. For
justice consists, allegedly, of the measures that effectively promote
good consequences. Without knowledge what is ultimately good (however
that is to be defined) the parties cannot discover the principles of
justice that best promote it. This criticism is mirrored in
utilitarian versions of the moral point of view, which incorporate a
“thin” veil of ignorance that represents a different idea
of impartiality. The impartial sympathetic spectator found in David
Hume and Adam Smith, or the self-interested rational chooser in John
Harsanyi’s average utilitarian account, all have complete
knowledge of everyone’s desires, interests and purposes as well
as knowledge of particular facts about people and their historical
situations. Impartiality is achieved by depriving the impartial
observer or rational chooser of any knowledge of its own identity.
This leads it to give equal consideration to everyone’s desires
and interests, and impartially take everyone’s desires and
interests into account. Since rationality is presumed to involve
maximizing something – or taking the most effective means to
promote the greatest realization of one’s ends – the
impartial observer/chooser rationally chooses the rule or course of
action that maximizes the satisfaction of desires, or utility
(aggregate or average), summed across all persons. 
Rawls’s original position with its “thick” veil of
ignorance represents a different conception of impartiality than the
utilitarian requirement that equal consideration be given to
everyone’s desires. The original position abstracts from all
information about current circumstances and the status quo, including
everyone’s desires and particular interests. Utilitarians take
peoples’ desires and interests as given and seek to maximize
their satisfaction; in so doing utilitarians suspend judgment
regarding the moral permissibility of peoples’ desires and
preferences and of the social circumstances and institutions within
which desires and preferences are formed. For Rawls, a primary reason
for a thick veil of ignorance is to enable an unbiased assessment of
the justice of existing social and political institutions and of
existing desires, preferences and conceptions of the good. If the
parties to Rawls’s original position had knowledge of
peoples’ beliefs and desires, as well as knowledge of the laws,
institutions and circumstances of their society, then this knowledge
would influence their decisions on principles of justice. The
principles agreed to would then not be sufficiently detached from the
very desires, circumstances, and institutions these principles are to
critically assess. Since utilitarians take peoples’ desires and
preferences as given under existing circumstances, any principles,
laws or institutions chosen behind their thin veil of ignorance will
reflect and be biased by the status quo. To take an obvious
counterexample, there is little if any justice in laws approved from a
utilitarian impartial perspective when these laws take into account
racially prejudiced preferences which are cultivated by grossly
unequal, racially discriminatory and segregated social conditions. To
impartially give equal consideration to everyone’s desires
formed under such under unjust conditions is hardly sufficient to meet
requirements of justice. This illustrates some of the reasons for a
“thick” as opposed to a “thin” veil of
ignorance. 
Rawls says that in the original position, “the Reasonable frames
the Rational” (CP 319). He means the OP is a situation where
rational choice of the parties is made subject to reasonable (or
moral) constraints. In what sense are the parties and their choice and
agreement rational? Philosophers have different understandings of
practical rationality. Rawls seeks to incorporate a relatively
uncontroversial account of rationality into the original position, one
that he thinks most any account of practical rationality would endorse
as at least necessary for rational decision. The parties are then
described as rational in a formal or “thin” sense that is
characteristic of the theories of rational and social choice. They are
resourceful, take effective means to their ends, and seek to make
their preferences consistent. They also take the course of action that
is more likely to achieve their ends (other things being equal). And
they choose courses of action that satisfy more rather than fewer of
their purposes. Rawls calls these principles of rational choice the
“counting principles” (TJ sect. 25, JF 87). 
More generally, for Rawls rational persons upon reflection can
formulate a conception of their good, or of their primary
values and purposes and the best way of life for themselves to live
given their purposes. This conception incorporates their primary aims,
ambitions, and commitments to others, and is informed by the
conscientious moral, religious, and philosophical convictions that
give meaning for them to their lives. Ideally, rational persons have
carefully thought about these things and their relative importance,
and they can coherently order their purposes and commitments into a
“rational plan of life,” which extends over their
lifetimes (TJ sect. 63). For Rawls, rational persons regard life as a
whole, and do not give preference to any particular period of it.
Rather in drawing up their rational plans, they are equally concerned
with their (future) good at each part of their lives. In this regard,
rational persons are prudent—they care for their future
good, and while they may discount the importance of future purposes
based on probability assessments, they do not discount the achievement
of their future purposes simply because they are in the future (TJ,
sect. 45). 
These primary aims, convictions, ambitions, and commitments are among
the primary motivations of the parties in the original position. The
parties want to provide favorable conditions for the pursuit of the
various elements of the rational plan of life that defines a good life
for them. This is ultimately what the parties are trying to accomplish
in their choice of principles of justice. In this sense they are
rational. 
Rawls says the parties in the original position are “mutually
disinterested,” in the sense that they take no interest in one
another’s interests. This does not mean that they are generally
self-interested or selfish persons, indifferent to the welfare of
others. Most people are concerned, not just with their own happiness
or welfare, but with that of others as well, and have all kinds of
commitments to others, including other-regarding and beneficent
purposes, that are part of their conceptions of the good. But in the
original position itself the parties are not altruistically motivated
to benefit each other, in their capacity as contracting
parties. They try to do as best as they can for themselves and
for those persons and causes that they care for. Their situation is
comparable, Rawls says, to that of trustees acting to promote
the interests of the beneficiaries they represent. Trustees cannot
sacrifice the well-being of the beneficiaries they represent to
benefit other trustees or individuals. If they did, they would be
derelict in their duties. It is perhaps to address the common
criticism that the parties to the original position are
self-interested that Rawls in his later writings increasingly says
that we should imagine that the parties are representatives or
trustees of other individuals’ interests, and seek to do as best
as they can for the particular individuals that each trustee
represents. In either case, Rawls believes this account of the
parties’ motivations promotes greater clarity, and that to
attribute to the parties moral motivations or benevolence towards each
other would not result in definite choice of a conception of justice
(TJ, 148–9/128–9; 584/512). (For example, how much
benevolence should they have towards one another? Surely not impartial
benevolence towards everyone, for then we might as well dispense with
the social contract and rely on an impartial spectator point of view.
But if not equal concern for all parties, then how much?)
Mutual disinterest of the parties also means they are not moved by
envy or rancor towards each other or others generally. This implies
that the parties do not strive to be wealthier or better off than
others for its own sake, and thus do not sacrifice advantages to
prevent others from having more than they do. Instead, each party in
the original position is motivated to do as well as he/she can in
absolute terms in promoting the optimal achievement of the many
purposes that make up a conception of the good, without regard to how
much or how little others may have. For this reason they strive to
guarantee themselves a share of primary social goods sufficient to
enable them to pursue their (unknown) conception of the good.
Though the parties are not motivated by beneficence or even a concern
for justice, still they have a capacity for reasonableness
and a sense of justice (TJ, 145/125 rev.). Rawls
distinguishes between the requirements of rationality and
reasonableness; both are part of practical reasoning about what we
ought to do (JF 6–7; 81–2). The concept of “the
Rational” concerns a person’s good—hence
Rawls refers to his account of the good as “goodness as
rationality.” A person’s good for Rawls is the rational
plan of life he/she would choose under hypothetical conditions of
“deliberative rationality,” where there is full knowledge
of one’s circumstances, capacities, and interests, as well as
knowledge of the likelihoods of succeeding at alternative life plans
one may be attracted to (TJ, sect. 64). “The Reasonable”
on the other hand has to do with the concept of right, which
includes individual moral duties and moral requirements of right and
justice applying to institutions and society. Both rationality and
reasonableness are independent aspects of practical reason for Rawls.
They are independent in that Rawls, unlike Hobbes, does not regard
justice and the reasonable as simply the principles of prudence that
are beneficial for a person to comply with in order to successfully
pursue his or her purposes in social contexts. Unlike Hobbes, Rawls
does not claim that an immoral person is irrational, or that morality
is necessarily required by rationality. However, a rational person who
violates reasonable demands of justice is unreasonable in that he or
she infringes upon moral requirements of practical reasoning. Being
reasonable, even if not required by rationality, is still an
independent aspect of practical reason. Rawls resembles Kant in this
regard (PL 25n); his distinction between the reasonable and rational
parallels Kant’s distinction between categorical and
hypothetical imperatives. 
Essential to being reasonable is having a sense of justice.
The sense of justice is a normally effective desire to comply with
duties and obligations required by justice; it includes a willingness
to cooperate with others on terms that are fair and that reasonable
persons can accept and endorse. Rawls sees a sense of justice as an
attribute people normally have; it “would appear to be a
condition for human sociability” (TJ, 495/433 rev.). He rejects
the idea that people are motivated only by self-interest in
all that they do; he also rejects the Hobbesian assumption that a
willingness to do justice must be grounded in self-interest. It is
essential to Rawls’s argument for the feasibility and stability
of justice as fairness that the parties upon entering society have an
effective sense of justice, and that, as members of society, they are
capable of doing what justice requires of them, either for its own
sake, or because the believe this is what morality requires of them.
An amoralist, Rawls believes, is largely a philosophical construct;
the amoralists who actually exist Rawls sees as sociopaths.
Subsequent to A Theory of Justice, in Kantian and Political
Constructivism, Rawls says that the parties to the original position
have a “higher-order interest” in the exercise and
development of their capacity for a sense of justice (as well as in
their capacity to be rational), and that fulfilling this interest is
one of the main aims behind their agreement on principles of justice.
The parties’ interest in developing these two “moral
powers” is a substantive feature of Rawls’s account of the
rationality of free and equal persons. (In this regard, his account of
goodness as rationality is not as “thin” as in social
theory; cf. TJ 143/124.) Here is it is important to see that Rawls is
still not attributing specifically moral motives—a desire to be
reasonable and do what is right and just for their own sake—to
the parties in the original position. The idea behind the
parties’ rationality in cultivating their sense of justice is
that, since reasonableness is a condition of human sociability and
social cooperation, then it is in people’s rational
interest—part of their good—that they normally
develop their capacities for justice under social conditions.
Otherwise they will not be in a position to cooperate with others and
benefit from social life. A person who is without a sense of justice
is wholly unreasonable and as a result is normally eschewed by others,
for he or she is not trustworthy or reliable or even safe to interact
with. Since having a sense of justice is a condition of taking part in
social cooperation, the parties have a “higher-order
interest” in establishing conditions for the full development
and effective exercise of their capacity for a sense of justice. The
parties’ interest in developing their capacity for a sense of
justice is then a rational interest in being reasonable; justice is
then regarded by the parties as instrumental to their
realizing their conception of the good. (Here again, it is important
to distinguish the purely rational motivation of the parties or their
trustees in the original position from that of free and equal citizens
in a well-ordered society, who are normally morally motivated by their
sense of justice to do what is right and just for its own sake.)
Three factors then play a role in motivating the parties in the
original position: (1) First, they aim to advance their determinate
conception of the good, or rational plan of life, even though they do
not know what that conception is. Moreover, they also seek conditions
that enable them to exercise and develop their “moral
powers,” namely (2) their rational capacities to form, revise
and rationally pursue a conception of their good, and (3) their
capacity to be reasonable and to have an effective sense of justice.
These are the three “higher-order interests” the parties
to Rawls’s original position aim to promote in their agreement
on principles of justice. 
The three higher-order interests provide the basis for Rawls’s
account of primary social goods. The primary goods are the
all-purpose social means that are necessary to the exercise and
development of the moral powers and to pursue a wide variety of
conceptions of the good. Rawls describes them initially in
Theory as goods that any rational person should want,
whatever his or her rational plan of life. The primary social goods
are: rights and liberties; powers and diverse opportunities; income
and wealth; and the social bases of self-respect. ‘Powers’
refer not simply to a capacity to effect outcomes or influence
others’ behavior. Rawls rather uses the term
‘powers’ to refer to the legal and institutional abilities
and prerogatives that attend offices and social positions. Hence, he
sometimes refers to the primary goods of “powers and
prerogatives of offices and positions of authority and
responsibility” (JF 58). Members of various professions and
trades have institutional powers and prerogatives that are
characteristic of their position and which are necessary if they are
to carry out their respective roles and responsibilities. By income
and wealth Rawls says he intends “all-purpose means” that
have an exchange value, which are generally needed to achieve a wide
range of ends (JF 58–59). Finally, “the social bases of
self-respect” are features of institutions that are needed to
enable people to have the confidence that they and their position in
society are respected and that their conception of the good is worth
pursuing and achievable by themselves. These features depend upon
history and culture. Primary among these social bases of self respect
in a democratic society, Rawls will contend, are equal recognition of
persons as citizens, and hence the institutional conditions needed for
equal citizenship, including equality of basic rights and liberties
with equal political rights; fair equality of opportunities; and
personal independence guaranteed by adequate material means for
achieving it. The social bases of self-respect are crucial to
Rawls’s argument for equal basic liberties, especially
political equality and equal rights of political participation. 
The parties to the original position are motivated to achieve a fully
adequate share of primary goods so they can achieve their higher-order
interests in pursuing their rational plans of life and exercising
their moral powers. “They assume that they normally prefer more
primary social goods rather than less” (TJ, 142/123 rev.). This
too is part of being rational. Because they are not envious, their
concern is with the absolute level of primary goods, not their share
relative to other persons. 
To sum up, the parties in the original position are formally rational
in that they are assumed to have and to effectively pursue a rational
plan of life with a schedule of coherent purposes and commitments that
give their lives meaning. As part of their rational plans, they have a
substantive interest in the development and exercise of their
capacities to be rational and to be reasonable. These
“higher-order interests” together with their rational life
plans provide them with reason to procure for themselves in their
choice of principles of justice an adequate share of the primary
social goods that enable them to achieve these higher-order ends and
effectively pursue their conceptions of the good.
A final feature of Rawls’s account of rationality is a normal
human tendency he calls “the Aristotelian principle” (TJ
sect.65). This “deep psychological fact” says that, other
things equal, people normally find activities that call upon the
exercise of their developed capacities to be more interesting and
preferable to engaging in simpler tasks, and their enjoyment increases
the more the capacity is developed and realized and the greater the
complexity of activities (TJ, 426/374). Moreover Rawls believes that
development of our “higher capacities” (J.S. Mill’s
term) is important to our sense of self-respect. These general facts
imply that rational people should incorporate into their life plans
activities that call upon the exercise and development of their
talents and skills and distinctly human capacities (TJ 432/379). This
motivation is especially relevant to Rawls’s argument for the
stability of justice as fairness and the good of justice (see below,
§5.3). The important point here is that the Aristotelian
principle is taken into account by the parties in their decision on
principles of justice. They want to choose principles that maintain
their self-respect and enable them to freely develop their human
capacities and pursue a wide range of activities, as well as engage
their capacities for a sense of justice. 
The veil of ignorance is the primary condition that constrains the
rational choice of the parties in the original position. There are
several other conditions imposed on their agreement
Among the general facts the parties know are “the circumstances
of justice.” Rawls says these are “conditions under which
human cooperation is both possible and necessary” (TJ 126/109
rev.). Following Hume, Rawls distinguishes two general kinds: the
objective and subjective circumstances of justice. The former include
physical facts about human beings, such as their rough similarity in
mental and physical faculties, and vulnerability to the united force
of others. Objective circumstances also include conditions of moderate
scarcity of resources: there are not enough resources to satisfy
everyone’s demands, but there are enough to provide all with
adequate satisfaction of their basic needs; unlike conditions of
extreme scarcity (e.g. famine) cooperation then seems productive and
worthwhile for people.
Among the subjective circumstances of justice is the parties’
mutual disinterestedness, which reflects the “limited
altruism” (TJ 146/127) of persons in society.. Free and equal
persons have their own plans of life and special commitments to
others, as well as different philosophical and religious beliefs and
moral doctrines (TJ 127/110). Hume says that if humans were
impartially benevolent, equally concerned with everyone’s
welfare, then justice would be unnecessary. People then would
willingly sacrifice their interests for the greater advantage of
other. They would not be concerned about their personal rights or
possessions, and property would be unnecessary (Hume 1777 [1970,
185–186]). But we are more concerned with our own aims and
interests—which include our interests in the interests of those
nearer and dearer to us—than we are with the interests of
strangers with whom we have few if any interactions. This implies a
potential conflict of human interests. Rawls adds that concern for our
interests and plans of life does not mean we are selfish or have
interests only in ourselves—interests of a self should
not be confused with interests in oneself; we have interests
in others and in all kinds of causes and ends (TJ 127/110). But, as
history shows, our benevolent interests in others and in religious and
philosophical doctrines are as often the cause of conflict as is
self-interest. 
The subjective circumstances of justice also include limitations on
human knowledge, thought, and judgment, as well as emotional
influences and great diversity of experiences. These lead to biases
and inevitable disagreements in factual and other judgments, as well
as to differences in religious, philosophical, and moral convictions.
In Political Liberalism, Rawls highlights these subjective
circumstances, calling them “the burdens of judgment” (PL
54–58). They imply, significantly, that regardless how impartial
and altruistic people are, they still will disagree in their factual
judgments and in religious, philosophical and moral doctrines.
Disagreements in these matters are inevitable even among rational and
reasonable people. This is “the fact of reasonable
pluralism” (PL 36), which is another general fact known to the
parties in the original position. Reasonable pluralism of doctrines
lends significant support to Rawls’s arguments for the first
principle of justice, especially to equal basic liberties of
conscience, expression, and association.
There are five “formal constraints” associated with the
concept of right that Rawls says the parties must take into account in
coming to agreement. The more a conception of justice satisfies these
formal constraints of right, the more reason the parties have to
choose that conception. The formal constraints of right are:
generality, universality in application, ordering of conflicting
claims, publicity, and finality. The ordering condition says
that a conception of justice should aspire to completeness: it should
be able to resolve conflicting claims and order their priority.
Ordering implies a systematicity requirement: principles of justice
should provide a determinate resolution to problems of justice that
arise under them; and in so far as a conception of justice is not able
to order conflicting claims and resolve problems of justice, that is a
reason against choosing it in the original position. The ordering
condition is important in Rawls’s argument against pluralist
moral doctrines he calls “Intuitionism.” 
Sidgwick attaches a great deal of importance to the ordering
condition, and contends that “Universal Hedonism” is the
only reasonable moral doctrine that can satisfy it (Sidgwick 1907
[1981], 406). Rawls would have to concede that justice as fairness
does not possess the same degree of systematicity as hedonistic
utilitarianism. For example, while Rawls’s priority principles
can resolve conflicting claims regarding the priority of basic
liberties over fair equality of opportunity and the difference
principle, there is no priority principle to resolve many conflicts
between basic liberties themselves (e.g. conflicts between freedom of
speech vs. rights of security and integrity of persons in hate speech
cases; or the conflict between free speech and the fair value of equal
political liberties in restrictions on campaign finance
contributions). Often in such conflicts we have to weigh competing
considerations and come to a decision about where the greater balance
of reasons lies, much like intuitionist views. The lack of an ordering
principle does not mean the balance of reasons in such conflicts
regarding basic liberties is indeterminate but rather that reasonable
individuals will often disagree, and that final decisions will have to
be made through the appropriate democratic, judicial, or other
procedures. But for Rawls a moral conception’s capacity to
clearly order conflicting claims in a way that all reasonable persons
can agree is but one among several formal and substantive moral
conditions that a conception of justice should satisfy (ultimately in
reflective equilibrium).
The publicity condition says that the parties are to
assume that the principles of justice they choose will be publicly
known to members of society and recognized by them as the bases
for their social cooperation. This implies that people will not be
uninformed or have false beliefs about the bases of their social and
political relations. There are to be no “noble lies”,
false ideologies, or “fake news” obscuring a
society’s principles of justice. The publicity of principles of
justice is ultimately for Rawls a condition of respect for persons as
free and equal moral persons. Rawls believes that individuals in a
democratic society should know the bases of their social and political
relations and not have to be deceived about them in order to cooperate
and live together on fair terms. This condition plays an important
role in Rawls’s arguments against utilitarianism and other
consequentialist conceptions. The idea of publicity is further
developed in Political Liberalism through the ideas of public
justification and the role of public reason in political deliberation.
Related to publicity is that principles should be universal in
application. This implies not simply that “they hold for
everyone in virtue of their being moral persons” (TJ 132/114
rev.). It also means that everyone can understand the principles of
justice and use them in their deliberations. Universality in
application then imposes a limit on how complex principles of justice
can be—they must be understandable to common moral sense, and
not so complicated that only experts can apply them in deliberations.
For among other things, these principles are to guide democratic
citizens in their judgments and shared deliberations about just laws
and policies. 
Both publicity and universality in application (as Rawls defines it)
are controversial conditions. Utilitarians, for example, have argued
that the truth about morality and justice is so complicated and
controversial that it might be necessary to keep it hidden from most
individuals’ awareness. For morality often requires much that is
contrary to their personal interests. Also sometimes it’s just
too complicated for people to understand why their moral duties
require of them what they do. So long as they understand their
individual duties, it may be better if they do not understand the
principles and reasons behind them. So Sidgwick argues that the aims
of utilitarianism might better be achieved if it remains an
“esoteric morality,” knowledge of which is confined to
“an enlightened few” (Sidgwick 1907 [1981], 489–90).
The reason Rawls sees publicity and universality as necessary relates
to the conception of the person implicit in justice as fairness. If we
conceive of persons as free and equal moral persons capable of
rational and moral autonomy, then they should not be under any
illusions about the bases of their social relations, but should be
able to understand, accept, and apply these principles in their
deliberations about justice. These are important conditions for the
freedom and autonomy (moral and political) of democratic citizens.
Rawls says, “An important feature of a conception of justice is
that it should generate its own support. Its principles should be such
that when they are embodied in the basic structure of society, people
tend to acquire the corresponding sense of justice and develop a
desire to act in accordance with its principles. In this case a
conception of justice is stable” (TJ, 138/119). The parties in
the original position are to take into account the “relative
stability” of a conception of justice and the society that
institutes it. The stability of a just society does not mean that it
must be unchanging. It means rather that in the face of inevitable
change members of a society should be able to maintain their
allegiance to principles of justice and the institutions they support.
When disruptions to society do occur (via economic crises, war,
natural catastrophes, etc.) and/or society departs from justice,
citizens’ commitments to principles of justice are sufficiently
robust that just institutions are eventually restored. The role of the
stability requirement for Rawls is twofold: first, to test whether
potential principles of justice are compatible with human natural
propensities, or our moral psychology and general facts about social
and economic institutions; and second, to determine whether principles
are conducive to realizing the human good.
To be stable principles of justice should be realizable in a
feasible and enduring social world. They need to be
practicably possible given the limitations of the human condition.
Moreover, this feasible social world must be one that can endure over
time, not by just any means, but by gaining the willing support of
people who live in it. People should knowingly want to uphold and
maintain society’s just institutions not just because they
benefit from them, but on grounds of their sense of justice.
In choosing principles of justice, the parties in the original
position must take into account their “relative
stability.” They have to consider the degree to which a
conception (in comparison with other conceptions) describes an
achievable and sustainable system of social cooperation, and whether
the institutions and demands of such a society will attract
people’s willing compliance and generally engage their sense of
justice.
For example, suppose principles of justice were to impose a duty to
practice impartial benevolence towards all people, and thus a duty to
show no greater concern for the welfare of ourselves and loved ones
than we do towards millions if not billions of others. This principle
demands too much of human nature and would not be sustainable or even
feasible—people simply would reject its onerous demands. But
Rawls’s stability requirement implies more than just
‘ought implies can.’ It says that principles of justice
and the scheme of social cooperation they describe should evince
“stability for the right reasons” (PL xliii, CP 589).
Recall here the higher-order interests of the parties in development
and exercise of their capacities for justice. A just society should be
able to endure not simply as a modus vivendi, by coercive
enforcement of its provisions and its promoting the majority of
peoples’ interests. Stability “for the right
reasons” requires that people support society for moral
reasons of justice; society’s basic principles must respond
to reasonable persons’ capacities for justice and engage their
sense of justice. Rawls regards our moral capacities for justice as an
integral part of our nature as sociable beings. He believes that one
role of a conception of justice is to accommodate human capacities for
sociability, the capacities for justice that enable us to be
cooperative social beings. So not only should a conception of justice
advance human interests, but it should also answer to our moral
psychology by enabling us to knowingly and willingly exercise our
moral capacities and sensibilities, which are among the moral powers
to be reasonable. This is one way that Rawls’s conception of
justice is “ideal-based” (CP 400–401 n.): it is based in
an ideal of human beings as free and equal moral persons and an ideal
of their social relations as generally acceptable and justifiable to
all reasonable persons whatever their circumstances (the ideal of a
well-ordered society). 
This relates to the second ground for the stability condition, which
can only be mentioned here: it is that principles of justice should be
compatible with, and even conducive to, the human good. It
speaks strongly in favor of a conception of justice that it is
compatible with and promotes the human good. First, if a conception of
justice requires of many reasonable people that they change their
conscientious philosophical or religious convictions for the sake of
satisfying a majority’s beliefs, or abandon their pursuit of the
important interests that constitute their plan of life, this
conception could not gain their support and would not be stable over
sustained periods of time. Moreover, Rawls assumes that a conception
of justice should enable citizens to adequately exercise and fully
develop their moral powers. It must then engage their sense of
justice; ideally, they should not regard justice as a burden but
should come to experience that acting on and from principles of
justice is worth doing for its own sake. For Rawls, it speaks strongly
in favor of a conception of justice that acting for the sake of its
principles is experienced as an activity that is good in itself. For
then justice and exercise of the sense of justice are for those
persons intrinsic goods and a precondition for their living a good
life.
Now turn to the arguments for the principles of justice in the
original position.
The original position is not a bargaining situation where the parties
make proposals and counterproposals and negotiate over different
principles of justice. Nor is it a wide ranging discussion where the
parties deliberate and design their own conception of justice (unlike,
for example, Habermas’ discourse ethics; see Habermas, 1995).
Instead, the parties’ deliberations are much more constrained.
They are presented with a list of conceptions of justice taken from
the tradition of western political philosophy. These include different
versions of utilitarianism, perfectionism, and intuitionism (or
pluralist views), rational egoism, justice as fairness, and a group of
“mixed conceptions” that combine elements of these (For
Rawls’s initial list see TJ 124/107) (Rawls later says
libertarianism should also be added to the list, and the principles of
justice would still be agreed to [JF 83]; Nozick [1974, 198ff] agrees
and says the OP is incapable of yielding entitlement principles due to
the self-interest of the parties.). The parties’ deliberations
are confined to discussing and agreeing upon the conception that each
finds most rational, given their specified interests. In a series of
pairwise comparisons, they consider all the conceptions of justice
made available to them and ultimately agree unanimously to accept the
conception that survives this winnowing process. In this regard, the
original position is best seen as a kind of selection process wherein
the parties’ deliberations are constrained by the background
conditions imposed by the original position as well as the list of
conceptions of justice provided to them. They are assigned the task of
agreeing on principles for designing the basic structure of a
self-contained society under the circumstances of justice. 
In making their decision, the parties are motivated only by their own
rational interests. They do not take moral considerations of justice
into account except in so far as these considerations bear on their
achieving their interests. Their interests again are defined in terms
of their each acquiring an adequate share of primary social goods
(rights and liberties, powers and opportunities, income and wealth,
etc.) and achieving the background social conditions enabling them to
effectively pursue their conception of the good and realize their
higher-order interests in developing and exercising their moral
powers. Since the parties are ignorant of their particular conceptions
of the good and of all other particular facts about their society,
they are not in a position to engage in bargaining. In effect they all
have the same general information and are motivated by the same
interests. 
Rawls makes four arguments in Theory, Part I for the
principles of justice. The main argument for the difference principle
is made later in section 49, and is substantially amended and
clarified in Justice as Fairness: A Restatement. The common
theme throughout the original position arguments is that it is more
rational for the parties to choose the principles of justice over any
other alternative. Rawls devotes most of his attention to the
comparison of justice as fairness with classical and average
utilitarianism, with briefer discussions of perfectionism (TJ, sect.
50) and intuitionism. Here I’ll focus discussion on
Rawls’s comparison between justice as fairness and
utilitarianism.
Describing the parties’ choice as a rational choice subject to
the reasonable constraints imposed by the original position allows
Rawls to invoke the theory of rational choice and decision under
conditions of uncertainty. In rational choice theory there are a
number of potential “strategies” or rules of choice that
are more or less reliably used depending on the circumstances. One
rule of choice—called “maximin”—directs that
we play it as safe as possible by choosing the alternative whose worst
outcome leaves us better off than the worst outcome of all other
alternatives. The aim is to “maximize the minimum” regret
or loss to well-being. To follow this strategy, Rawls says you should
choose as if your enemy were to assign your social position in
whatever kind of society you end up in. By contrast another strategy
leads us to focus on the most advantaged position and says we should
“maximize the maximum” potential
gain—“maximax”—and choose the alternative
whose best outcome leaves us better off than all other alternatives.
Which, if either, of these strategies is more sensible to use depends
on the circumstances and many other factors.
A third strategy advocated by orthodox Bayesian decision theory, says
we should always choose to directly maximize expected
utility. To do so under conditions of uncertainty of outcomes,
the degree of uncertainty should be factored into one’s utility
function, with probability estimates assigned to alternatives based on
the limited knowledge that one has. Given these subjective estimates
of probability incorporated into one’s utility function, one can
always choose the alternative that maximizes expected
utility. Since it simplifies matters to apply the same rule of choice
to all decisions this is a highly attractive idea, so long as
one can accept that it is always safe to assume that that the
maximization of expected utility leads over time to
maximizing actual utility.
What about those extremely rare instances where there is absolutely
no basis upon which to make probability estimates? Suppose
you don’t even have a hunch regarding the greater likelihood of
one alternative over another. According to orthodox Bayesian decision
theory, the “principle of insufficient reason” then should
be observed; it says that when there is no reason to assign a greater
likelihood to one alternative rather than another, then an equal
probability is to be assigned to each potential outcome. This
makes sense on the assumption that if you have no more premonition of
the likelihood of one option rather than another, they are for all
you know equally likely to occur. By observing this rule of
choice consistently over time, a rational chooser presumably should
maximize his or her individual expected utility, and hopefully actual
utility as well.
What now is the appropriate decision rule to be used to choose
principles of justice under conditions of complete uncertainty of
probabilities in Rawls’s original position? Rawls argues that,
given the enormous gravity of choice in the original position, plus
the fact that the choice is not repeatable, it is rational for the
parties to follow the maximin strategy when choosing between the
principles of justice and principles of average or aggregate utility
(or most any other principle). Not surprisingly, following the maximin
rule of choice results in choice of the principles of justice over the
principles of utility (average or aggregate); for unlike
utilitarianism, justice as fairness guarantees equal basic liberties,
fair equal opportunities, and an adequate social minimum for all
citizens. 
Why does Rawls think maximin is the rational choice rule? Recall what
is at stake in choice from the original position. The decision is not
an ordinary choice. It is rather a unique and irrevocable choice where
the parties decide the basic structure of their society, or the kind
of social world they will live in and the background conditions
against which they will develop and pursue their aims. It is a kind of
superchoice—an inimitable choice of the background conditions
for all one’s future choices. Rawls argues that because of the
unique importance of the choice in the original
position—including the gravity of the choice, the fact that it
is not renegotiable or repeatable, and the fact that it determines all
one’s future prospects—it is rational to follow the
maximin rule and choose the principles of justice. For should even the
worst transpire, the principles of justice provide an adequate share
of primary goods enabling one to maintain one’s conscientious
convictions and sincerest affections and pursue a wide range of
permissible ends by protecting equal basic liberties and fair equal
opportunities and guaranteeing a social minimum of income and wealth.
The principles of utility, by contrast, provide no guarantee of any of
these benefits.
Rawls says that in general there are three conditions that must be met
in order to make it rational to follow the maximin rule (TJ
154–55/134). First, there should be no basis or at most a very
insecure basis upon which to make estimates of probabilities. Second,
the choice singled out by observing the maximin rule is an acceptable
alternative we can live with, so that one cares relatively little by
comparison for what is to be gained above the minimum conditions
secured by the maximin choice. When this condition is satisfied, then
no matter what position one eventually ends up in, it is at least
acceptable. The third condition for applying the maximin rule is that
all the other alternatives have (worse) outcomes that we could not
accept and live with. Of these three conditions Rawls later says that
the first plays a minor role, and that it is the second and third
conditions that are crucial to the maximin argument for justice as
fairness (JF 99). This seems to suggest that, even if the veil of
ignorance were not as thick and parties did have some degree of
knowledge of the likelihood of ending up in one social position rather
than another, still it would be more rational to choose the principles
of justice over the principle of utility. 
Rawls contends all three conditions for the maximin strategy are
satisfied in the original position when choice is made between the
principles of justice and the principle of utility (average and
aggregate). Because all one’s values, commitments, and future
prospects are at stake in the original position, and there is no hope
of renegotiating the outcome, a rational person would agree to the
principles of justice instead of the principle of utility. For the
principles of justice imply that no matter what position you occupy in
society, you will have the rights and resources needed to maintain
your valued commitments and purposes, to effectively exercise your
capacities for rational and moral deliberation and action, and to
maintain your sense of self-respect as an equal citizen. With the
principle of utility there is no such guarantee; everything is
“up for grabs” (so to speak) and subject to loss if
required by the greater sum of utilities. Conditions (2) and (3) for
applying maximin are then satisfied in the comparison of justice as
fairness with the principle of (average or aggregate) utility.
It is often claimed that Rawls’s parties are
“risk-averse;” otherwise they would never follow the
maximin rule but would take a chance on riskier but more rewarding
outcomes provided by the principle of utility. Thus, John Harsanyi
contends that it is more rational under conditions of complete
uncertainty always to choose according to the principle of
insufficient reason and assume an equal probability of occupying any
position in society. When the equiprobability assumption is made, the
parties in the original position would choose the principle of average
utility instead of the principles of justice (Harsanyi 1975).
Rawls denies that the parties have a psychological disposition to
risk-aversion. He argues however that it is rational to choose as
if one were risk averse under the highly exceptional
circumstances of the original position. His point is that, while there
is nothing rational about a fixed disposition to risk aversion, it is
nonetheless rational in some circumstances to choose conservatively to
protect certain fundamental interests against loss or compromise. It
does not make one a risk averse person, but instead normally it is
entirely rational to purchase auto liability, health, home, and life
insurance against accident or calamity. The original position is such
a situation writ large. Even if one knew in the original position that
the citizen one represents enjoys taking risks, this would still not
be a reason to gamble with his or her rights, liberties and starting
position in society. For if the risktaker were born into a
traditional, repressive, or fundamentalist society, she might well
have little opportunity for taking the kinds of risks, such as
gambling, that she normally enjoys. It is rational then even for
risktakers to choose conservatively in the original position and
guarantee their future opportunities to gamble or otherwise take
risks.
Harsanyi and other orthodox Bayesians contend that maximin is an
irrational decision rule, and provide ample examples. But examples do
not suffice here; simply because maximin is under many circumstances
irrational does not mean that it is never rational. No doubt
maximin is an irrational strategy under most circumstances of
choice uncertainty, particularly under circumstances where we will
have future opportunities to recoup our potential losses and choose
again. But these are not the circumstances of the original position;
once the rules of justice are decided, they apply in perpetuity, and
there is no opportunity to renegotiate or escape the situation. One
who relies on the equiprobability assumption in choosing principles of
justice in the original position is being foolishly reckless given the
gravity of choice at stake. It is not being risk-averse, but rather
entirely rational to refuse to gamble with one’s basic
liberties, fair equal opportunities and adequate resources needed to
pursue one’s most cherished ends and commitments, simply for the
sake of gaining the marginally greater social powers, income and
wealth that might be available to some in a society governed entirely
by the principle of utility.
Rawls exhibits the force of the maximin argument in discussing liberty
of conscience. He says (TJ, sect. 33) that a person who is willing to
jeopardize the right to hold and practice his or her conscientious
religious, philosophical and moral convictions, all for the sake of
gaining uncertain added benefits via the principle of utility, does
not know what it means to have conscientious beliefs, or at least does
not take such beliefs seriously (TJ 207–08/181–82). A
rational person with convictions about what gives life meaning is not
willing to negotiate with and gamble away the right to hold and
express those convictions and the freedom to act on them. After all
what could be the basis for negotiation, for what could matter more
than the objects of one’s most sincere convictions and
commitments? Some people (e.g. some nihilists) may not have
any conscientious convictions, and are simply willing to act
on impulse or on whatever thoughts and desires they happen to have at
the moment. But behind the veil of ignorance no one knows whether he
or she is such a person, and there are no grounds for making this
assumption. Knowing general facts about human propensities and
sociability, the parties must take into account that they may well
have convictions and values and commitments they are unwilling to
compromise. (Besides, the nihilist should want to protect his or her
freedom to be a nihilist, to protect against ending up in an
intolerant religious society.) Thus it remains irrational to
jeopardize basic liberties by choosing the principle of utility
instead of the principles of justice.
None of this is to say that maximin is normally a rational choice
strategy. Rawls himself says it “is not, in general, a suitable
guide for choices under uncertainty” (TJ 153). As we see below
in Section 6.4, it is not even a rational strategy in the original
position when the alternatives for choice guarantee basic liberties,
equal opportunities, and a social minimum, unlike the principle of
utility. Rawls relies upon the maximin argument mainly to argue for
the first principle of justice and a guaranteed social minimum. Other
arguments are needed to justify the difference principle.
There are three additional arguments Rawls makes to support justice as
fairness (all in TJ, sect. 29). Each of these depends on the concept
of a “well-ordered society.” The ideal of a
well-ordered society is Rawls’s development of social
contract doctrine. It is a society in which (1) everyone willingly
accepts and affirms the same principles of justice; (2) these
principles are successfully realized in basic social institutions,
including laws and conventions, and are generally complied with by
citizens; and (3) reasonable persons are morally motivated to comply
by their sense of justice – they want to do what justice
requires of them (TJ 4–5, §69). Rawls says at various
points that a well-ordered society is a “perfectly just
society.” (TJ 9) The parties in the original position choose
principles that are to govern a perfectly just well-ordered society
where everyone agrees, complies with, and wants to comply with its
principles of justice. There are then two sides to Rawls’s
social contract. The parties in the original position have the task of
agreeing to principles that all rationally can accept under the
circumstances of the original position. But their rational choice is
partially determined by the principles that free and equal moral
persons in a well ordered society reasonably can accept and agree to
as the basic principles governing their social and political
relations.
The assumption of reasonable persons’ “strict
compliance” with principles of justice within a well-ordered
society is part of what Rawls calls “ideal theory,” which
is characteristic of social contract views. (Kant’s ideal of a
Kingdom of Ends involves a similar assumption in ideal theory.) To
determine the most appropriate principles of justice to govern
relations among ourselves, we are discover the principles that would
be generally accepted and endorsed among free and equal reasonable and
rational persons with a sense of justice in an ideal society where
these principles were fully realized and generally complied with. The
assumption of strict compliance is made within contract views to
insure the integrity of the agreement: it means the parties will not
renege but can rely on each other to act according to the principles
agreed to and that their agreement is not in vain (TJ 145). More
generally, Rawls says the same principles chosen for an ideal society
are to be applied to assess the justice of institutions and laws in
our own non-ideal world where societies and individuals only partially
comply with them (if at all). Principles of justice that apply to an
ideal society lay bare how much our current circumstances depart from
ideal justice; injustices are to be “identified by the extent of
the deviation from perfect justice.” (TJ 216). Moreover, ideal
theory provides a target for non-ideal theory; the principles of
justice “define then a perfectly just scheme [and] set up an aim
to guide the course of social reform.” (TJ 215) Finally, ideal
theory provides a way to discover universal principles that apply to
all social worlds and circumstances. By determining the principles of
justice that would apply in an ideal society, we can claim to have
discovered objective universal principles that can be applied to every
society to ascertain the degree of injustice and to guide reform.
Rawls’s and other ideal theories recently have been criticized
as unnecessary to address injustice (Sen 2009, Appiah 2017), or as
unrealistic, unduly demanding, and not relevant to the kinds of
persons we really are or to our non-ideal circumstances (Gaus 2016,
Schmidtz 2018); or ideal theory is said to be distracting,
ideological, irrelevant to, or incapable of addressing past and
enduring racial and other injustices in our society (Mills 2016).
Some of these arguments are motivated by political conservatism or
pessimism about human capacities for change (Gaus 2016, Schmidtz
2018). Others are motivated by an alternative account of the impartial
point of view that involves consequentialist ranking of the justice of
states of affairs instead of agreement on general principles of
justice for the basic structure (Sen 2009); and some arguments against
ideal theory are accompanied by claims of Rawls’s purported
indifference and refusal to seriously address questions of corrective
justice for past and continuing injustices against racial and other
minorities (Mills 2016). These are complex criticisms and the debate
over ideal theory warrants far more discussion than can be given here.
(See Simmons 2010 on Rawls, and Stemplowska & Swift 2012 more
generally for helpful discussions of ideal theory.)
Now to return to Rawls’s arguments for his principles of
justice. The first of Rawls’s three arguments highlights the
idea that choice in the original position is an agreement,
and involves certain “strains of commitment,”
assumed by all to comply with the principles they agree to (TJ
176f./153f. and CP 250ff). Knowing that they are required to choose
principles for a well-ordered society, the parties must choose
principles that they sincerely believe they will be able to accept,
endorse and willingly comply with under conditions where these
principles are generally enforced. For reasons to be discussed
shortly, Rawls says this condition favors agreement on the principles
of justice over utilitarianism and other alternatives.
But first, consider the frequent objection that there is no genuine
agreement at all in the original position, for the thick veil of
ignorance deprives the parties of all bases for bargaining (cf. TJ,
139–40/120–21 rev.). In the absence of bargaining, it is
said, there can be no contract. For contracts must involve a quid
pro quo—something given for something received (called
‘consideration’ at common law). The parties in the OP
cannot bargain without knowing what they have to offer or to gain in
exchange. So (the objection continues) Rawls’s original position
does not involve a real contract; rather, since the parties are all
“described in the same way,” it is simply the rational
choice of one person (see Hampton, 1980, 334; see also Gauthier, 1985,
203).
In response, not all contracts involve bargaining or are of the nature
of economic transactions. Some involve a mutual pledge and commitment
to shared purposes and principles. Marriage contracts, or agreements
among friends or the members of a religious, benevolent, or political
association are often of this nature. For example, the Mayflower
Compact was a “covenant” to “combine ourselves
together into a civil body politic” charged with making and
administering “just and equal laws…for the general
good.” The agreement in Rawls’s original position is more
of this nature. Even though ignorant of particular facts about
themselves, the parties in fact do give something in exchange for
something received: they all exchange their mutual commitment to
accept and abide by the principles of justice and to uphold just
institutions once they enter their well-ordered society. Each agrees
only on condition others do too, and all tie themselves into social
and political relations in perpetuity. Their agreement is final, and
they will not permit its renegotiation should circumstances turn out
to be different than some hoped for. Their mutual commitment to
justice is reflected by the fact that once these principles become
embodied in institutions there are no legal means that permit anyone
to depart from the terms of their agreement. As a result, the parties
have to take seriously the legal obligations and social sanctions they
will incur as a result of their agreement, for there is no going back
to the initial situation. So if they do not sincerely believe that
they can accept the requirements of a conception of justice and
conform their actions and life plans accordingly, then these are
strong reasons to avoid choosing those principles. It would not be
rational for a party to take risks, falsely assuming that if he ends
up badly, he can violate at will the terms of agreement or later
regain his initial situation and renegotiate terms of cooperation (see
Freeman, 1990; Freeman, 2007b, 180–182).
Rawls gives special poignancy to this mutual commitment of the parties
by making it a condition that the parties cannot choose and agree to
principles in bad faith; they have to be able, not simply to live with
and grudgingly accept, but instead to willingly endorse the principles
of justice as members of society. Essential to Rawls’s argument
for stability is the assumption of everyone’s willing
compliance with requirements of justice. This is a feature of a
well-ordered society. The parties are assumed to have a sense of
justice; indeed the development and exercise of it is one of their
fundamental interests. Hence they must choose principles that that
they can not only accept and live with, but which are responsive to
their sense of justice and they can unreservedly endorse. Given these
conditions on choice, a party cannot take risks with principles he
knows he will have difficulty complying with voluntarily. He would be
making an agreement in bad faith, and this is ruled out by the
conditions of the original position. 
Rawls contends that these “strains of commitment” created
by the parties’ agreement strongly favor the principles of
justice over the principles of utility and other teleological views.
For everyone’s freedom and basic needs are met by the principles
of justice because of their egalitarian nature. Given the lack of
these guarantees under the principle of utility, it is much more
difficult for those who end up worse off in a utilitarian society to
willingly accept their situation and commit themselves to the utility
principle. It is a rare person indeed who can freely and without
resentment sacrifice his or her life prospects so that those who are
better off can have even greater comforts, privileges, and powers.
This is too much to demand of our capacities for human benevolence. It
requires a kind of commitment that people cannot make in good faith,
for who could willingly support laws that are so detrimental to
oneself and the people one cares about most that they must sacrifice
their fundamental interests for the sake of those more advantaged?
Besides, why should we encourage such subservient dispositions and the
accompanying lack of self-respect? The principles of justice, by
contrast, conform better with everyone’s interests, their desire
for self-respect and their natural moral capabilities to reciprocally
recognize and respect others’ legitimate interests while freely
promoting their own good. The strains of commitment incurred by
agreement in the original position provide strong reasons for the
parties to choose the principles of justice and reject the risks
involved in choosing the principles of average or aggregate utility.
Rawls’s strains-of-commitment argument explicitly relies upon a
rarely noted feature of his argument: it involves in effect two
social contracts. First, hypothetical agents situated equally in
the original position unanimously agree to principles of justice. This
agreement has attracted the most attention from Rawls’s critics.
But the parties’ hypothetical agreement in the original position
is patterned on the general acceptability of a conception of justice
by free and equal persons in a well-ordered society. Rawls says,
“The reason for invoking the concept of a contract in the
original position lies in its correspondence with the features of a
well-ordered society [which] require…that everyone accepts, and
knows that the others accept, the same principles of justice”
(CP 250). In order for the hypothetical parties in the original
position to agree on principles of justice, there must be a high
likelihood that real persons, given human nature and general facts
about social and economic cooperation, can also agree and act on the
same principles, and that a society structured by these principles is
feasible and can endure. This is the stability requirement
referred to earlier. One conception of justice is relatively more
stable than another the more willing people are to observe its
requirements under conditions of a well-ordered society. Assuming that
each conception of justice has a corresponding society that is as
well-ordered as can be according to its terms, the stability question
raised in Theory is: Which conception of justice is more
likely to engage the moral sensibilities and sense of justice of free
and equal persons as well as affirm their good? This requires an
inquiry into moral psychology and the human good, which takes up most
of Part III of A Theory of Justice.
Rawls makes two arguments from the original position that invoke the
stability requirement, the arguments (1) from publicity and (2) from
self-respect.
(1) The argument from publicity: Rawls contends that utilitarianism,
perfectionism, and other “teleological” conceptions are
not likely to be freely acceptable to many citizens when made fully
public under the conditions of a well-ordered society. Recall the
publicity condition discussed earlier: A feature of a
well-ordered society is that its regulative principles of justice are
publicly known and appealed to as a basis for deciding laws and
justifying basic institutions. A conception of justice that cannot
maintain the stability of a well-ordered society that satisfies the
publicity condition is to be rejected by the parties in the original
position. Rawls contends that under the publicity condition justice as
fairness generally engages citizens’ sense of justice and
remains more stable than utilitarianism (TJ 177f./154f.). For public
knowledge that reasons of maximum average (or aggregate) utility
determine the distribution of benefits and burdens would lead those
worse-off to object to and resent their situation, and reject the
principle of utility as the basic principle governing social
institutions. After all, the well-being and interests of the least
advantaged, perhaps even their basic liberties, are being sacrificed
for the greater happiness of those who are already more fortunate and
have a greater share of primary social goods. It is too much to expect
of human nature that people should freely acquiesce in and embrace
such terms of cooperation. By contrast, the principles of justice are
designed to advance reciprocally everyone’s position; those who
are better off do not achieve their gains at the expense of the less
advantaged. “Since everyone’s good is affirmed, all
acquire inclinations to uphold the scheme” (TJ, 177/155). It is
a feature of our moral psychology, Rawls contends, that we normally
come to form attachments to people and institutions that are concerned
with our good; moreover we tend to resent those persons and
institutions that take unfair advantage of us and act contrary to our
good. Rawls argues at length in chapter 8 of Theory,
§§70–75, that justice as fairness accords better than
alternative principles with the reciprocity principles of moral
psychology that are characteristic of human beings’ moral
development. 
(2) The argument from the social bases of self-respect: The publicity
condition is also crucial to Rawls’ fourth argument for the
principles of justice, from the social bases of self-respect (TJ,
178–82/155–59 rev.). These principles, when publicly
known, give greater support to citizens’ sense of
self-respect than do utilitarian and perfectionist principles.
Rawls says self-respect is “perhaps the most important primary
good,” (TJ, 440/386 rev.) since few things seem worth doing if a
person has little sense of his or her own worth or no confidence in
his or her abilities to execute a worthwhile life plan. The parties in
the original position will then aim to choose principles that best
secure their sense of self-respect. Now being regarded by others as a
free and independent person of equal status with others is crucial to
the self-respect of persons who regard themselves as free and equal
members of a democratic society. Justice as fairness, by affording and
protecting the priority of equal basic liberties and fair equal
opportunities for all, secures the status of each as free and equal
citizens. For example, because of equal political liberties, there are
no “passive citizens” who must depend on others to
politically protect their rights and interests; and with fair equal
opportunities no one has grounds to experience the resentment that
inevitably arises in societies where social positions are effectively
closed off to those less advantaged or less powerful. Moreover, the
second principle secures adequate social powers and economic resources
for all so that they find the exercise of their equal basic liberties
to be worthwhile. The second principle has the effect of making
citizens socially and economically independent, so that no one need be
subservient to the will of another. Citizens then can regard and
respect one another as equals, and not as masters or subordinates.
(“Non-domination,” an idea central to contemporary
Republicanism, is then essential to citizens’ sense of
self-respect in Rawls’s sense. See Pettit 1997.) Equal basic
liberties, fair equal opportunities, and political and economic
independence are primary among the social bases of self-respect in a
democratic society. The parties in the original position should then
choose the principles of justice over utilitarianism and other
teleological views both to secure their sense of self-respect, and to
procure the same for others, thereby guaranteeing greater overall
stability. 
Rawls substantially relies on the publicity condition to argue against
utilitarianism and perfectionism. He says publicity “arises
naturally from a contractarian standpoint” (TJ, 133/115 rev.).
In Theory he puts great weight on publicity ultimately
because he thinks that giving people knowledge of the moral bases of
coercive laws and the principles governing society is a condition of
fully acknowledging and respecting them as free and responsible
rational moral agents. With publicity of first principles, people have
knowledge of the real reasons for their social and political relations
and the formative influences of the basic structure on their
characters, plans and prospects. In a well-ordered society with a
public conception of justice, there is no need for an “esoteric
morality” that must be confined “to an enlightened
few” (as Sidgwick says of utilitarianism, Sidgwick 1907 [1981],
490). Moreover, public principles of justice can serve agents in their
practical reasoning and provide democratic citizens a common basis for
political argument and justification. These considerations underlie
Rawls’s later contention that having knowledge of the principles
that determine the bases of social relations is a precondition of
individuals’ freedom.( CP 325f.) Rawls means in part that
publicity of society’s fundamental principles is a condition of
citizens’ exercise of the powers and abilities that enable them
to take full responsibility for their lives. Full publicity is then a
condition of the political, rational, and moral autonomy of persons,
which are all significant values according to justice as fairness.
Rawls’s second principle of justice says:
The difference principle (the first part of the second principle,
through (a)), addresses differences or inequalities in the
distribution of the primary goods of income and wealth and powers and
positions of office and responsibility. It basically requires that a
society is to institute the economic system that would make the least
advantaged class better off than they would be in any other feasible
economic system, compatible with maintaining citizens equal basic
liberties and fair equality of opportunity. Rawls defines “least
advantaged” as those with the least share of the primary goods
of income and wealth, and powers and positions of office. He also
assumes the least advantaged are “fully cooperating” (JF
179), and “full and active participants in society” (CP,
259) who do their fair share in contributing to economic activity and
the social product. Rawls thus regards “distributive
shares” under the difference principle as the benefits that
accrue to persons for doing their part in socially productive
cooperation. The class of unskilled workers receiving minimum income
satisfies his definition of least advantaged (TJ 98/84 rev.). Those
who are able but unwilling to work “must somehow support
themselves” (JF 179; cf. PL 182n). Disability payments to meet
the needs of severely handicapped citizens who are permanently unable
to work are not ascertained by reference to the difference principle
for Rawls, but instead are to be determined by principles of
assistance, which he leaves unspecified (PL 272n). As a principle for
structuring basic economic institutions on grounds of reciprocity, the
difference principle itself is not an appropriate principle for
compensating mental and physical handicaps and other disabilities.
Rawls contends it is an empirical question which economic system
satisfies the difference principle. He claims however that under ideal
conditions of a well-ordered society, where the principles of justice
are generally accepted, either a “property-owning
democracy” or liberal (market) socialism are most likely to
satisfy the difference principle, to the exclusion of laissez-faire
capitalism, command economy communism, and even the modern capitalist
welfare state. Property-owning democracy (POD) differs from the
capitalist welfare state mainly in that it is not marked by such broad
discrepancies in income and wealth, but instead provides for
widespread private ownership of productive wealth and means of
production, including opportunities for greater freedom and control in
the workplace. Thus, akin to market socialism, POD is not marked by
sharp divisions between capital and labor but manifests broad
distribution of economic powers and positions, as well as a more equal
distribution of income and wealth (see JF 135–140,
158–162, 178). For these reasons, and since a property-owning
democracy also secures the fair value of equal political liberties and
fair equality of opportunities, a property-owning democracy provides a
more secure basis for citizens’ sense of self-respect (the
remaining primary social good covered by the difference principle in
part) than does welfare-state capitalism (see Freeman 2007b,
219–235; Freeman 2013).
Rawls relies on the maximin rule of choice to argue against the
principle of utility. Since the maximin rule and the difference
principle both require maximizing the minimum position, it seems
natural to assume that the maximin choice rule leads directly to
choice of the difference principle in the original position. Though
Rawls might have conveyed this impression in Theory
(§26), he later says that in fact the maximin rule alone cannot
be used to justify the difference principle (JF, 43n, 94–95).
For when the difference principle is compared with those “mixed
conceptions” of economic justice that protect basic liberties
and provide some form of equal opportunities and a social minimum,
then the third condition for applying maximin is not satisfied (see
above, sect. VI,A). The third condition for the maximin rule implies
that there can only be one acceptable alternative for choice.
If there is a second alternative the consequences of which rational
persons can live with and accept if they end up in the least
advantaged position (for example it protects basic liberties and
opportunities, and guarantees a social safety net), then the maximin
rule is not a rational rule of decision. For then there is no
likelihood of grave risks to one’s future prospects. 
“Mixed conceptions” of justice (see TJ §49) protect
the basic liberties, and in most cases provide equal opportunities and
guarantee a social minimum of income and wealth sufficient to meet
basic needs. But they determine the social minimum in some way other
than the difference principle. For example, the social minimum may be
determined by balancing citizens’ moral intuitions regarding a
decent minimum; or according the rule that the adequate social minimum
is one-third of the median market income in society; or that it is
whatever amount that is needed to maintain social stability and avoid
disruption by the less advantaged. Once the social minimum is
satisfied mixed conceptions might then rely upon the principle of
average utility (or some alternative) to decide economic policies and
distributions. Rawls calls this the “principle of restricted
utility,” (JF 120, 126) since the pursuit of social utility is
restricted by the basic liberties, fair opportunities, and a fixed
social minimum. This is one of several possible mixed conceptions that
combine the first principle of justice with a principle of
distributive justice with a social minimum other than the difference
principle (TJ, 124/107 rev.). Rawls apparently regards the capitalist
welfare state as based in mixed conceptions that incorporate such a
principle of restricted utility (JF 120–130, 139–140).
Rawls concedes that “mixed conceptions are much more difficult
to argue against than the principle of utility,” since
“the strong arguments from liberty cannot be used as
before” (TJ, 316/278 rev.). He discusses mixed conceptions in
Theory, §49, and devotes more attention to them later in
Justice as Fairness: A Restatement (§§34–38).
Rawls provides several considerations or “grounds” that
should lead the parties in the original position to agree on the
difference principle – publicity, stability, and reciprocity
– and he adds several more specific arguments that speak against
choice of the principle of restricted utility (TJ sect.49; JF
sect.38). Mention has already been made of his argument (TJ sect.29)
that the difference principle affirms the self-respect of the least
advantaged since, unlike the principle of utility, it treats them as
ends in themselves and not as means to the greater well-being of the
more advantaged. Though still relevant, the force of this argument
from self-respect is not as strong when the difference principle is
compared with a principle of restricted utility that guarantees a
social minimum.
The main argument in favor of the difference principle seems to depend
on a strong idea of reciprocity (JF §36). In a society
structured by the difference principle gains to those more advantaged
are never made at the expense of those less advantaged; instead, any
gains to the more advantaged always benefit also the least advantaged,
and do so more than any other alternative measure. By contrast
restricted utility, even if it provides a social minimum, still
permits disadvantages and losses to the worst off so that those better
off may prosper; any degree of inequality is allowed in the name of
maximizing utility so long as it does not violate the social minimum.
Such a situation, Rawls contends, would be morally unacceptable to
free and equal persons in a well-ordered society, and is rationally
unacceptable to the parties in the original position.
There are different ways to conceive of an economic system based in
reciprocity. Even a laissez-faire entitlement system of free transfer
and exchange that satisfies Pareto efficiency satisfies reciprocity in
a weak sense (assuming the absence of negative externalities) since
everyone is presumably made better off by the exchanges and transfers
they make. But the Pareto principle and laissez-faire entitlement
principles are compatible with enormous gains to the more advantaged
while the least advantaged gain only minimally, if at all. This is
“trickle-down,” where the poor in effect cannot advance
unless the rich maximally benefit, and where benefits to the rich need
not benefit the poor at all. The kind of reciprocity provided by the
principle of restricted utility is more robust than laissez-faire and
the Pareto principle since it guarantees a social minimum. Everyone
has a stake in the economic system at least to the degree that it
meets the basic economic needs of all. But, beyond this point wealth
and income are generated and distributed so as to maximize overall
wealth and therewith (presumably) overall utility. Further gains to
those better off need not advance the position of the least
advantaged, and indeed sometimes may come at their expense so long as
the social minimum is maintained.
The “deeper idea of reciprocity” (JF 124) implicit in the
difference principle has just the opposite tendencies: the more
advantaged may not gain at any point unless their gains benefit the
least advantaged and benefit them maximally, better than any
alternative arrangement of institutions. The best way to understand
the deeper idea of reciprocity Rawls incorporates into the difference
principle is by referring to figure 6 in Theory (sect. 13)
and figure 1 in Justice as Fairness (p.62). The difference
principle requires the distribution of powers, prerogatives, and
economic resources that put the least advantage on the highest point
on the efficient production curve, D, which is the point that is
closest to an equal distribution. At D and all prior points on the
curve, improvements to the most advantaged are always accompanied by
improvements to the least advantaged and vice versa. Hence with all
increments to social output, no one gains at any point at the expense
of the other. This relationship of reciprocity does not hold at points
to the right of D, where further gains to the more advantaged may
increase aggregate wealth and utility, but come at the expense of the
less advantaged.
What bearing does this have on choice in the original position? Even
if the deeper reciprocity achieved by the difference principle seems
morally appealing to us, the parties are not similarly motivated by
moral intuitions of fairness. They must be moved to agree on the
difference principle for rational considerations alone. So why should
the parties in the original position care about the deeper reciprocity
achieved by the difference principle? Why wouldn’t it be
rational for them to agree to a more superficial reciprocity, as
allowed by restricted utility, thereby taking a chance that they might
be among the affluent in the capitalist welfare state? After all, if
they end up among the least advantaged, they may only be moderately
worse off than they would have been under the difference
principle.
The reasons that speak in favor of the parties’ rational choice
of the difference principle are their higher-order interest in
developing their capacities for justice, their concern for their
self-respect, their concern for stability, and the strains of
commitment. Compare the difference principle with the principle of
restricted utility: Once the social minimum is met, restricted utility
does not guarantee that the worse off will benefit in any way from
further gains to those better off. Quite the contrary, further gains
to more advantaged may even disadvantage the less advantaged—for
example, a falling minimal wage rate in the face of an increased
supply of labor results in a greater share going to capital, which may
benefit owners and middle class consumers but not the less advantaged
workers. With restricted utility there is no consistent and continuing
tendency toward reciprocity of benefits, for once the social minimum
is satisfied the less advantaged are as likely to gain nothing as to
benefit from further gains to those better off. 
Rawls’s conjecture is that in the capitalist welfare state
structured by restricted utility, the less advantaged are likely to
become dispirited, resentful, and frustrated with their situation, for
they know that their well-being is neglected and often intentionally
sacrificed so that the majority of citizens may prosper. While
stability is maintained among the less advantaged as a modus
vivendi, still they are likely to withdraw from active
participation in politics and public life; for they justifiably feel
left behind by society and no longer see themselves as having a stake
in increasing social prosperity or as enjoying a respected position in
public life. This all-too-familiar phenomenon in the modern capitalist
welfare-state is evident from the striking lack of political
participation by the poorest members of our society. It may be that
welfare-state capitalism is stable, but it is the stability of
indifference or hopelessness among the less advantaged, not
stability for the right reasons, which is grounded in equal
citizens’ affirmation of social institutions out of their sense
of justice (PL xlii, 391). Due to their lack of self-respect, and the
excessive demands the capitalist welfare-state places on their moral
sensibilities and capacities for justice, the least advantaged are
unable to willingly affirm the organizing principles of society on
grounds of their sense of justice. The principle of restricted utility
then places excessive strains of commitment on the worse off, and
undermines their sense of self-respect, causing them to be resentful
of their situation. Moreover, restricted utility invites continuing
disagreement over the size of the social minimum, since there is no
criterion other than citizens’ differing views regarding what is
needed to satisfy the basic needs of the least advantaged. So, as is
characteristic of the capitalist welfare state, there will be
continual disagreement on a decent minimum and continual efforts by
the more advantaged to reduce the social minimum. The difference
principle by contrast provides a definite standard for determining the
social minimum. Finally, citizens’ higher-order interest in the
full development and effective exercise of their capacities for a
sense of justice are not well served by restricted utility, since it
fails to achieve economic reciprocity and the social bases of
self-respect to a significant degree for all citizens. Because of
their interests in fully exercising their moral and rational
capacities, their sense of self-respect, and their concern for
stability, the parties in the original position cannot in good faith
rationally affirm restricted utility and the capitalist welfare state
when they have the alternative of choosing the difference principle
(cf. JF, 128–129). This seems to be Rawls’s main argument
for the difference principle from the original position.
Now that the arguments for the principles of justice have been
outlined, this is a good place to consider the objection that the
original position is not necessary or even morally relevant. There are
at least two notable versions of this argument; the more common one
that was initially set forth by Hume will be discussed in the final
section. Here I outline a more sympathetic version of the objection by
a fellow contractualist, T.M. Scanlon.
As discussed earlier, Rawls depicts two social contracts: rational
agreement among interested parties in the original position
corresponds to reasonable agreement among members of a well-ordered
society motivated by their sense of justice. This correspondence
suggests, T.M. Scanlon says, that, rather than the original position,
“the point of view which the theory takes as fundamental is
actually that of a person in society” (Scanlon, 1975, 177).
Scanlon contends that since the arguments in the original position
except maximin depend upon general acceptance of the principles of
justice among reasonable persons in a well-ordered society, the
original position is not necessary. Moreover, the idea of
self-interested agreement behind the veil of ignorance distracts from
the real justification for the principles of justice—that they
are reasonably acceptable and could be justified to persons with a
sense of justice in a well-ordered society (Scanlon, 1982, 127).
Scanlon’s own contractualism relies upon a similar idea of
morally motivated persons’ agreement on a system of rules for
the regulation of behavior that no one could reasonably reject (1982,
110). He abjures the idea of rational choice and agreement by
interested parties from an original position or other impartial
perspective. 
Rawls says that one reason for denying the parties information about
themselves and imposing the veil of ignorance is that for a contract
theory to rely only on an informal idea of reasonable acceptability
and agreement among persons situated in society is less precise and
its results less definite. If full information of particular facts
were allowed the parties, “only a few rather obvious cases could
be decided. A conception of justice based on unanimity in these
circumstances would indeed be weak and trivial” (TJ 141). Here
one might reply that Rawls is shortchanging the force of his own
arguments, from the strains of commitment, publicity, self-respect,
and reciprocity, all of which depend on the point of view of
reasonable persons in a well-ordered society. Perhaps Rawls thought
the maximin argument was needed to complement these arguments. In any
case the main objection Scanlon raises seems to be that purely
rational choice and agreement based in individuals’ interests is
not representative of or relevant to moral justification of
principles. The (self-) interested choice of rational individuals,
even if behind the veil of ignorance, bears little resemblance or
relationship to moral judgment and justification among reasonable
persons in society. Joshua Cohen has raised similar objections (J.
Cohen 2015). 
The answer to this objection (if there is one) is too complex to deal
with here. It might begin with Rawls’s assumption of the
circumstances of justice, his assumption that questions of social
justice arise due to the conflict of individuals’ legitimate
pursuit of their individual interests. Since justice for Rawls
concerns the fair terms of social cooperation among persons with
different interests and conceptions of their good, he evidently thinks
their “essential interests,” – those essential to
the rational pursuit of their good, including the moral powers and
primary social goods – should be represented in the agreement on
principles of justice that structure their social relations. These
interests are especially relevant to agreement on principles of
justice for the basic structure, for the primary goods are what these
principles distribute. 
Second, like Kant, Rawls regards moral principles as the imposition of
reasonable constraints on individuals’ rational deliberations
and choices in pursuit of their interests. This is the “priority
of right” over the good (TJ 31f./27f.), which for Rawls
represents the structure of practical reasoning of moral persons. As
Kant (according to Rawls, LHMP and CP 497ff.) seeks to model the
structure of practical reasoning in the categorical imperative
procedure, so Rawls seeks to model the priority of right over the good
in the original position by the reasonable constraints imposed on
rational individuals’ choice of principles that equitably
promote their good. 
Third, Rawls is deeply concerned (again like Kant) with demonstrating
that the Right and the Good are “congruent.” Congruence in
Theory means, first, that, assuming the most reasonable
principles are established, justice and the corresponding sense of
justice are compatible with our rational pursuit of our individual
interests. Moreover, justice and the exercise of their capacities for
justice can be a fundamental good for moral persons, worth pursuing
and incorporating into their life plans for their own sake (TJ 398/350
rev.; 567–75/496–505 rev.). (See also, Freeman, 2003,
277–315.) These considerations are all relevant to Rawls’s
reasons for “modeling” reasonable agreement on principles
among members of a well-ordered society by the original position and
the parties’ rational agreement behind the veil of
ignorance.
In The Law of Peoples, his essay on international justice,
Rawls appeals to the original position a second time, to argue for
principles of justice that hold among different political societies,
or “peoples.” Rawls contends that a theory of social and
political justice requires principles of justice to regulate the
foreign relations of well-ordered societies with one another. He calls
these principles “the Law of Peoples.” Since he conceives
of the Law of Peoples as regulating relationships between political
societies, he imagines an agreement, not among all the individuals in
the world’s population, but, first, among the representatives of
liberal democratic well-ordered societies. In this agreement among
(liberal) peoples, each political society is to be regarded as equal,
with equal rights of participation in this agreement; they each have
the same number of representatives, no matter the size of their
population. To represent the equality of peoples and guarantee
fairness of the agreement, Rawls once again utilizes the original
position as a hypothetical situation from which representatives of
well-ordered liberal peoples decide principles of international
justice. The parties to this agreement are once again to be regarded
as ignorant of particular facts about their societies, including the
size of their population, their natural resources and level of
produced wealth, their social and ethnic cultures, and other
particular facts, knowledge of which might result in unfair bargaining
advantages and lead to an unfair agreement. The representatives of
each society are motivated by their fundamental interest in
maintaining the justice of their own societies, as this is defined by
justice as fairness or some other liberal conception.
Rawls contends that the Law of Peoples that would be agreed to among
representatives of “free and democratic peoples” from the
original position consists of (at least) eight principles (LP 38).
These principles, except for the last requiring a duty of assistance
owed to “burdened peoples,” are familiar: They require
respect for peoples’ freedom and independence; the obligation to
observe treaties and undertakings; the equality of peoples; a duty of
non-intervention; a right of self-defense and no right to instigate
war except in self-defense; a duty to honor human rights; a duty to
observe restrictions on the conduct of wars; and finally the duty to
assist people living under unfavorable conditions that prevent their
having a just or decent political and social regime (LP, 37). Rawls
further maintains that non-liberal but “decent” peoples
would also agree to these same principles in an original position.
Decent peoples, though normally hierarchical and non-democratic, still
respect human rights of everyone, and have a common good idea of
justice that benefits all members of society. Rawls’s list of
human rights include a right to life, including rights to means of
subsistence and security; to liberty, including freedom from servitude
and forced occupation and a certain degree of freedom of conscience to
insure freedom of religion and of thought; a right to hold personal
property; and to formal equality, that similar cases be treated
similarly (LP, 65). Liberal peoples have a duty to observe the Law of
Peoples in relations with decent peoples, even though decent peoples
are not democratic or otherwise wholly just in a liberal sense in
their internal organization and towards their members. But the Law of
Peoples, including the duty of non-intervention, does not entirely
apply in interactions with “outlaw regimes,” those which
do not respect the human rights or good of their own people or of
non-members. Liberal and decent societies may intervene in their
internal affairs in order to protect the human rights of their members
and others. 
Rawls’s Law of Peoples has been widely criticized since it does
not allow for an original position agreement among all the
world’s members but only among their societies’
representatives. Nor (a related criticism) does Rawls envision
agreement upon a global principle of distributive justice, such as a
global difference principle, nor even a global tax on more advantaged
societies’ wealth or natural resources, to be redistributed to
less advantaged societies (see, e.g., Beitz, 1999; Pogge 1989, 2007).
These are complicated issues that cannot be addressed here. (For a
defense of Rawls, see Freeman 2007a, ch. 8–9 and 2007b ch.10.)
In general, Rawls’s positions on these issues are grounded on an
assumption of the political and institutional bases of distributive
justice, and the fundamental role of society and its basic social
institutions in the development of our natural and moral capacities
and in determining our characters, aims, and future prospects.
In A Theory of Justice Rawls provides a “Kantian
Interpretation” of the original position and the principles of
justice (TJ §§ 40, 78). The Kantian interpretation is a
precursor to Rawls’s Kantian constructivism (CP, ch. 16), and
his later political constructivism (PL, ch.3). Rawls says that for
Kant, “a person is acting autonomously when the principles of
his action are chosen by him as the most adequate possible expression
of his nature as a free and equal rational being” (TJ 252/222).
What is missing from Kant, Rawls says, is an attempt to show how moral
principles express our nature. “This defect is made good [by]
the original position” (TJ 255 /224). The original position can
be interpreted as a “procedural interpretation” of our
nature as free and equal rational beings, and therewith of
Kant’s conception of autonomy and the categorical imperative (TJ
256 /226). For in the original position, because of the veil of
ignorance and other moral constraints, the parties’ choice is
made “independent of natural contingencies and accidental social
circumstances” (TJ 515/451); thus the principles of justice are
not chosen “heteronomously,” on the basis of our social
position, natural endowments, particular wants, or the particular kind
of society we live in (TJ 252/222). Instead, the parties are all
represented in the same way, as free and equal rational persons with a
capacity for a sense of justice who choose principles of justice
subject to all relevant moral conditions. Rawls says that the original
position might thus be regarded as incorporating “conditions
that best express their nature as free and equal rational
beings.” On a Kantian view, our moral nature is defined by the
moral powers, our capacities for practical reasoning, to be rational
and reasonable. The moral powers are the relevant capacities of
practical reasoning that relate to justice. “Acting autonomously
is acting from principles that we would consent to as free and equal
rational beings” (TJ 516/453). The description of the original
position expresses “what it means to be a free and equal
rational being,” and even “resembles the point of view of
noumenal selves” (TJ 255–256/225).
In addition to expressing our autonomy, the original position is also
objective (TJ 587/514). For it requires that the parties adopt a
common impartial standpoint and make a considered rational choice and
agree under conditions that require them to abstract from their
particular interests and circumstances. Moreover, all are motivated by
higher-order interests in their moral powers, which represent their
“nature as free and equal rational beings.” Finally, the
OP is designed to incorporate all the relevant reasons and
restrictions on arguments for principles of social and political
justice (TJ 18/16). In so far as the OP is an appropriately defined
objective point of view incorporating all relevant moral reasons and
conditions on rational choice of principles of justice, and the
parties therein come to a unanimous agreement, then, Rawls says, the
principles agreed to are also objective (TJ 516–517/453).
Together with the universality requirement, we can infer from the
objectivity of the principles of justice that they apply to and are
binding on persons in all societies. As Rawls says of the original
position in concluding TJ, “to see our place in society from the
perspective of this position is to see it sub specie
aeternitatis: it is to regard the human situation not only from
all social but also all temporal points of view” (TJ 587/514).
Rawls affirms the objectivity and “correctness” of the
principles of justice, and he says they are the “most
reasonable” principles. But he does not say at any point that
the principles of justice are “true.” He does however say
that judgments based upon the principles of justice are true, and this
applies to both particular judgments and to the moral rules of justice
that are required by the principles of justice (CP 355). These claims
are implicit in Rawls’s Kantian constructivism. (It is
noteworthy that Kant himself did not say that the categorical
imperative is true; instead he said it is “universally
valid.”) In general, constructivism in moral philosophy is a
view about the possibility of the correctness of moral principles and
judgment. “Realism” says that the correctness of moral
judgments resides in their truth, and that truth of most fundamental
moral principles consists in their corresponding to a moral order (of
moral facts or objects) that is antecedent to reason and to principles
of practical reasoning. Objectivity of moral judgment is then defined
by realists as judgment made from a perspective of reasoning that is
likely to lead to discernment of these antecedent objects of truth. In
“Kantian Constructivism in Moral Theory” (Lecture III, CP
340ff.), Rawls discusses a version of realism found in Henry Sidgwick
and G.E. Moore, “rational intuitionism,” which he
contrasts with moral constructivism. 
Kantian constructivism inverts the relationship realists see between
objectivity and truth; rather than objective judgments being grounded
in the discernment of antecedent objects of truth, objectivity (of
judgment) precedes the object (of truth). This means that at the level
of fundamental moral principles the correctness of these principles
depends, not on their correspondence to a prior moral order, but on
their following from (or being among) the fundamental principles of
practical reasoning. The objectivity of judgment that is involved in
reasoning from an objective perspective according to relevant
principles of practical reasoning results in objective moral
principles that are the bases for judgments of moral truth. The moral
facts that are the objects of these moral truths are not then prior
to, but are the facts that are singled out as relevant by moral
principles and principles of practical reasoning (CP 516). 
Among other advantages, moral constructivism relieves moral theory of
the burden of having to account for the correctness of moral judgments
in terms of their correspondence to a mysterious domain of moral facts
(natural or non-natural) that must exist prior to practical reasoning.
Constructivism also enables Rawls to provide an account of the
objectivity of moral judgment and correctness of moral principles that
is consistent with a Kantian idea of autonomy, In setting forth in
detail the manner in which the principles of justice are justified on
the basis of certain conceptions and principles that originate in
practical reasoning itself, Rawls sees himself as having carried
through with the Kantian aspiration of showing how moral principles of
justice are the result of “reason giving principles to itself,
out of its own resources.” 
The original position plays a crucial role in Kantian constructivism.
Rawls says the original position is a “procedure of
construction” that specifies an objective point of view from
which to derive objective principles of justice. Principles of justice
are “constructed” on the basis of ideal conceptions of the
person and of society (‘ideas of reason’, in Kant’s
sense). In Kantian constructivism (CP ch.16), Rawls alters the Kantian
interpretation’s idea of “our nature as free and equal
rational beings,” into an ideal “conception of the
person,” regarded as a “free and equal moral
person,” with the two moral powers of practical reasoning. It is
this conception of the person, along with the ideal of social
cooperation represented by a well-ordered society, that is
“modeled” or “mirrored” by the original
position. In “Kantian Constructivism,” Lecture II, Rawls
explains how each of the relevant features of the original position
(including the veil of ignorance and the description of the parties as
“rational agents of construction”) “represent”
in some fashion the ideal conception of the person and of society that
underwrite Kantian constructivism. Since the original position
presumably represents all the relevant ideas and principles of
practical reason, Rawls contends that whatever principles chosen
therein are objectively correct, as a matter of “pure procedural
justice at the highest level” of practical reasoning. (See below
on the role of the original position in reflective equilibrium.)
Subsequently, in Political Liberalism, Rawls
“brackets” (he neither affirms nor denies) claims about
the nature and possibility of moral truth and universal objectivity of
moral judgments. Still, Rawls affirms “for political
purposes” the objectivity of the original position and therewith
of the principles of justice. Once again, the original position is set
up to represent and model an ideal of persons and society. But Rawls
detaches the ideal of free and equal moral persons from the Kantian
Interpretation, and now regards it as a purely “political
ideal” of citizens that is implicit in the political culture of
a democratic society. The political ideals of citizens and of society
as well-ordered provide the basis for “political
constructivism” where the original position again plays its role
as a procedure of construction for political principles of justice.
Rawls contends that the original position bestows “political
objectivity” on principles of justice. Political objectivity is
a kind of objectivity that presumably even the moral skeptic can
accept, so long as he/she is “reasonable”, or has an
effective sense of justice. It does not imply that the principles of
justice apply universally across all social and temporal conditions.
Instead, principles of justice are objective in so far as they apply
to all reasonable and rational persons who conceive of themselves as
free and equal citizens, have a sense of justice, and want to
cooperate with others on terms that reasonable persons call all
accept.
If we see the original position as a procedure of construction, then
perhaps we can gain a clearer idea of the role of the idea a social
contract in Rawls’s and other arguments for principles of
justice. A frequent criticism of social contract doctrines, dating
back to David Hume, is that the idea of agreement (hypothetical or
actual) does no real work in justifying principles of justice. The
justification of principles is said rather to reside in the
reasons for the parties’ agreement; the social contract
itself does not add to but only obscures the force of these reasons.
Thus Hume argued that Locke’s social contract argument is an
unnecessary shuffle, and that political obligations and the duty of
allegiance cannot be based simply on a promise or agreement. For why
should we honor our promises and agreements? It can only be because of
their public utility, Hume says. But political obligation is also
grounded in the public utility of people respecting political
authority and obeying its laws. Hence there is no need to refer to any
social contract to ground political obligations, since all have their
justification in public utility (Hume 1748 [1777]; Rawls, LHPP,
169–173).
To respond: It is certainly true that the reasons motivating the
parties in the original position (their freedom to pursue their good,
their higher-order interests in developing the moral powers, acquiring
an adequate share of primary goods, etc.) as well as the reasons and
ideals modeled by the original position itself (the freedom and
equality of moral persons, fairness, publicity, the ideal of a
well-ordered society, and so on) are fundamental to the justification
of the principles of justice agreed to. But this does not mean that
the agreement from the original position plays no essential role in
the justification of these principles. For the original position
itself is designed to be a representation and summary of all the moral
reasons and rational interests relevant to justifying principles of
justice. Even if it be conceded that rational choice and agreement in
the original position, or reasonable agreement in a well-ordered
society, do not provide independent reasons for principles of justice,
still they serve the crucial, perhaps necessary role of organizing the
reasons that the original position incorporates and authorizing
inference to the principles of justice.
Consider a parallel argument to the contention that agreement in the
original position provides no reasons for and plays no role in
justifying principles of justice. We would surely think it peculiar if
someone said of a formal proof: “The reasons for the proven
theorem are provided by the axioms it presupposes and not by the rules
of inference enabling proof.” For rules of inference are
indispensable for proof of any deductive conclusion. Agreement in the
original position stands in a similar relationship to the principles
of justice. Agreement in the original position is not itself a proof
from prior premises according to rules of deductive inference. But
like rules of deductive inference, agreement in the original position
establishes the justifying connection between relevant moral and
practical reasons (incorporated into the original position itself) and
principles of justice. 
Rawls conjectures in Theory that the argument in the OP
“aims eventually to be strictly deductive….a kind of
moral geometry” (TJ 121/104–5; see also JF 17, 83). This
is not a concession to Hume’s argument, since Rawls envisions
the parties’ selection of the principles of justice as part of
this conjectured deduction (JF 133). Moreover, even assuming there is
a very complicated deductive proof (not what Hume envisioned) of the
principles of justice that does not rely on a hypothetical contract.
Rawls’s attitude would be that the original position argument
still serves as a useful heuristic for public reason that enables
citizens to understand the enormous complexities of this conjectured
proof. Finally, Rawls later qualifies his claim of deductive proof and
says that in fact the argument from the original position cannot
“fully attain” an ideal of rigorous deductive reasoning;
for there are indefinitely many considerations to be appealed to in
the original position, and deciding the balance of reasons in favor of
the principles of justice depends, not on deduction, but “on
judgment informed and guided by reasoning” (JF 133–4).
Finally, what is the relationship between the original position and
Rawls’s non-foundationalist method of justification,
“reflective equilibrium”? Rawls distinguishes three points
of view; that of the artificial parties in the original position; of
the idealized members of a well-ordered society; and “that of
you and me” (PL 28), which is the position from which any
conception of justice is to be assessed in reflective equilibrium.
Reflective equilibrium begins with our shared “considered
convictions” of justice at all levels of generality, from
particular to our most general judgments. It then seeks to discover
the principles of justice that best “fit” with these
considered convictions in a “wide reflective equilibrium,”
after considering all the reasonable alternative conceptions of
justice (see TJ § 9; JF § 10).
Rawls said at one point that “reflective equilibrium works
through the original position.” The suggestion is that
the original position itself supplies, in large part, the relevant
sense of “best fit” of considered moral convictions with
principles of justice. The principles of justice that best fit with
our considered convictions of justice are those that would be chosen
by rational persons within this hypothetical-choice “procedure
of construction,” which itself “represents” our
considered convictions regarding all the relevant reasons for
arguments about principles of social justice. Rawls says in concluding
A Theory of Justice, “Each aspect of the original
position can be given a supporting explanation. Thus what we are doing
is to combine into one conception the totality of conditions which we
are ready upon due reflection to recognize as reasonable in our
conduct towards one another” (TJ 587/514). Thus, in response to
the Humean argument that social contract doctrine is superfluous:
Until opponents of Rawls’s contract doctrine present an an
alternative argument for the principles of justice that is more
persuasive and inclusive of all the relevant reasons bearing on
justice, Rawls’s original position argument should be regarded
as essential to justification of the principles of justice (in so far
as they are justifiable).