The Greek name Origenes signifies “born of Horus,” an
Egyptian falcon-headed deity. The Christian scholar of this name was a
native of Alexandria (Eusebius, Church History 6.1), though
it is only his detractor Epiphanius who says that he was also by race
a Copt (Panarion 1.1). Eusebius records the jibe of the
Neoplatonist Porphyry that Origen, though a Greek by education, became
a Christian, whereas his philosophy teacher Ammonius, having once been
a Christian, converted to a more lawful way of life (Church
History 6.19.7). Although most scholars assume that this is
Ammonius Saccas, the teacher of Plotinus, there was another
philosopher of the same name, who is credited with “unequalled
polymathy” by the philosopher Longinus at Porphyry, Life of
Plotinus 20.49–50. (For further information see Edwards
1993: 179.) Eusebius, moreover, asserts that that both Origen and his
teacher were Christians throughout their lives (6.19.10); as evidence
of the latter’s Christianity in his youth, he records that his father
Leontius died as a martyr in 202, and that Origen himself, then 17,
not only exhorted Leontius to persevere but thirsted for the same
death (6.2.7). His mother could curb his enthusiasm only by hiding his
clothes so that he was ashamed to leave the house (6.2.6). Eusebius
also tells us that his sexual diffidence or his ascetic temper induced
Origen to make himself literally a eunuch for the kingdom of heaven
(6.8.2); the act is not unparalleled (Markschies 2007: 15–34),
but Epiphanius was unable to verify the story (Panarion
64.2).
After his father’s death, Origen devoted himself to scholarship and
became a notable teacher, perhaps succeeding Clement as head of the
catechetical school in Alexandria (Eusebius, Church History
6.3.1 and 6.7–8.1; but cf. Osborn 2008: 19–21). He appears
to have studied Hebrew with a converted Jew (First Principles
1.3.4 etc.), and one of his letters alludes to his studies in
philosophy with an unnamed teacher (Eusebius, Church History
6.19.13). Among the works Eusebius says that he composed at this time,
dictating to “more than seven stenographers” (6.23.2),
were the first five books of his Commentary on John, eight
books of a Commentary on Genesis, two books On the
Resurrection and his major surviving work, a synthesis of
scriptural teaching under the name First Principles
(6.24). Of these the last survives entire, but only in the Latin of
Rufinus. A few books of the Commentary on John survive in
Greek, while portions of the work on the resurrection were preserved
in a rejoinder by Methodius of Olympia, which itself survives only in
the excerpts and epitomes of later authors (see Dechow 1977). It was
also in Alexandria, in imitation of the Homeric scholars of the
Hellenistic era, that Origen addressed himself to the preparation of
his great Hexapla, in which a corrected edition of the Septuagint, the
original, allegedly inspired translation of the Hebrew scriptures
(3rd c. BC?), stood in parallel to the Hebrew and the
renderings of other Greek translators (Eusebius, Church
History 6.16. See further Neuschäfer 1987; Dorival 2013).
According to Eusebius, his talents excited the jealousy of Demetrius,
the Bishop of Alexandria, who cited his self-castration as a reason
for refusing to ordain him as a presbyter (Eusebius, Church
History 6.8.4–5). Nevertheless, when Origen left Alexandria
in 216 to escape the ferocity of the Emperor Caracalla, Demetrius
recalled him from Caesarea, where he had already begun to increase his
reputation (6.19.16–19). On a subsequent visit to Caesarea he
was ordained a presbyter, and took up residence in the city (6.8.5;
6.23.4). Having commenced a commentary on the Song of Songs in the
course of a sojourn in Athens (6.32.2), he completed this in Caesarea,
together with his Commentary on Matthew and his refutation of
the True Logos, a pagan satire on Christianity written around
170 by an otherwise unknown Celsus (6.36.2). Never rising above the
rank of presbyter, he was often employed, according to the custom of
the times, as a mouthpiece of orthodoxy in trials of heretics before
an episcopal synod. Eusebius commends his refutation of Beryllus of
Bostra (6.33), adding that he was summoned to play a similar role in
Arabia (6.37), and that in his books he tore the mask from heresies
old and new. To this period of his life we should also date
the Dialogue with Heraclides, discovered at Tura in 1951
(Chadwick 1959). Yet even at the height of his career, his orthodoxy
was impugned. Jerome knows of a letter in which he rebuts the
accusation that he had prophesied the salvation of the devil (Crouzel
1973); the same letter indicates, according to Jerome, that his
teachings had given offence to Heraclas, his former student who had
now succeeded Demetrius as bishop of Alexandria. It is clear at least
that no censure was extended to Dionysius, the successor of Heraclas
and another of Origen’s pupils. In Caesarea the ageing theologian
suffered tortures under Decius in 251 (Eusebius, Church
History 6.39.5) and, according to Eusebius, died as Gallus came
to the throne in 253 (7.1.1).  His assertion that Origen was then in
his seventieth year is inconsistent with the date implied for his
birth (185). Most scholars have elected to postpone the death of
Origen to 254 or 255, without explaining why they think the biographer
more likely to have erred with regard to the year of his subject’s
birth than that of his death. 
His library in Caesarea was inherited by his admirer Pamphilus, then
by Eusebius as a disciple of Pamphilus and bishop of that city. It
also fell to Eusebius to finish the Apology which Pamphilus
had begun to write against Origen’s first detractors. From this work
and the philippics of such enemies of Origen as Jerome, Theophilus of
Alexandria, Epiphanius of Salamis, and the Emperor Justinian, we can
cull fragments of writings that have otherwise perished (see further
Clark 1992). We also possess an anthology of choice excerpts from his
writings the Philokalia (McLynn 2004), and two short
texts On Prayer and To the Martyrs. Much had already
been lost by attrition in the time of Eusebius (died c.339); more may
have perished after Origen was anathematized in or around the year
553. Many of Origen’s Commentaries and Homilies, like the First
Principles, survive only in the Latin of Rufinus, who translated
him in the fourth century with reverence but not always with fidelity
(see further Pace 1990). The following synopsis of Origen’s thought is
based primarily on the extant corpus in Greek and Latin, making use of
polemical matter only with the caution that is now enjoined by the
most learned scholars.
Scholars are apt to speak casually of Origen’s Platonism, more
technically of his “middle” Platonism, most commonly, and
not often with conscious paradox, of his Christian Platonism. The
Lutheran theologian Anders Nygren (1953), who protested that a
Christian Platonist is not a Christian, differed only in his judgment
of the facts, not in his reading of them, from his critics J.M. Rist
(1964) and Catherine Osborne (1994), who maintained that Platonism in
Origen’s hands was not so much an adulteration as a salutary
refinement of the gospel.  Nevertheless, whatever the merits of
Nygren’s theology, Origen would have agreed with him in the matter of
nomenclature. The majority of his explicit references to Plato are to
be found in the work Against Celsus, a reply to a dead
polemicist who is nowadays characterized as a middle Platonist, though
Origen hints that he may have been an Epicurean (Against
Celsus] 1.8; see further Bergjan 2001). Origen undertakes to show
that the simplest disciple of God’s word knows him better than the
philosophers who seek him by their own methods (Against
Celsus 7.42), that Plato misrepresents the fall and diminishes
the Creator, that if his myths are deep, the biblical allegories are
deeper and less perverse, and that Numenius, the foremost Platonist of
recent times, has spoken of both Moses and Jesus with esteem
(Against Celsus 4.51 etc.).
The Bible (consisting for Origen only of the New Testament and the
Septuagint) is the matrix of every argument in this as in all his
writings; while it would be naive, and a contradiction of his own
practice, to deny that that his exegesis was conditioned by
philosophical assumptions; the propaedeutic to biblical study in his
school at Caesarea was not Platonism but a professedly unprejudiced
survey of all the Greek schools. We learn this from his pupil Gregory
Thaumaturgus (Panegyric 13.151–152), to whom he also
wrote a letter assigning to Greek thought an ancillary role in the
elucidation of the scriptures; while he was less inclined than his
predecessors to accuse the Greeks of plagiarizing their philosophical
views from the books of Moses, he held that, since every exercise of
reason is inspired by Christ the Logos, a Christian has as much right
to the tools of pagan philosophy as the Israelites had to reimburse
their labour from the “spoils of the Egyptians”
(Philokalia 13; see further Martens 2012:
29–33). Theologians have at last begun to take Origen
at his word as an interpreter of the scriptures; this is not to say
that all other influences are ignored, but that he is thought to
deserve the same courtesy that Classicists show to Plotinus when they
acknowledge that even doctrines which he consciously shares with the
Stoics or Aristotle can be derived without subterfuge from the text of
Plato.
The epithet “Platonist” will of course be warranted if
Origen the Christian is identified with the Origen whom Porphyry
represents as one of the privileged disciples of Ammonius Saccas, the
Alexandrian teacher of Plotinus. According to Porphyry (Life of
Plotinus, 3.20–38) this Origen swore an oath with Plotinus
and a third disciple, Herennius, not to reveal the esoteric doctrines
of Ammonius after the latter’s death in 243 A.D. This story implies
both personal intimacy and geographical proximity, yet Origen the
Christian was at this time almost sixty (twenty years senior to
Plotinus), had left Alexandria for Caesarea some years before, and
already had a multitude of books to his name as a Christian teacher.
Porphyry does not allude to these lucubrations in his Life of
Plotinus, but says that the Origen he refers to breached the pact
by issuing first a treatise On Daemons, then another, with
the title That the King is the Only Maker, in the reign of
Gallienus (253–268). He includes in the Life a letter,
written in 262 or 263 by his former tutor Longinus, which ascribes to
Origen only the work On Daemons (Porphyry, Life of
Plotinus, 20.36–45). All scholars agree that Origen the
Christian could not have written anything in the last years of
Gallienus; if we can trust Eusebius, he did not live to see this reign
at all, but died in that of Gallienus’ predecessor Gallus
(251–253).  So, if this Origen is our author, Porphyry must at
least have misstated the period at which he violated the
agreement. Those who contend that there was only one Origen reply that
it is the chronology of Eusebius that must be flawed because, although
his account of Origen’s youth implies that he was born in 185, he
asserts that his death occurred in his seventieth year, and hence not
earlier than 254, the first year of Gallienus. The same apologists
argue that Porphyry fails to mention his Christian writings either
because he despised them or (more cogently) because the publication of
them did not violate the oath (cf. Ramelli 2009). If this argument is
to prevail, a reason must also be furnished for the silence of
Longinus on this part of Origen’s work, the Christian works of Origen
must be regarded as aids (in some degree) to the reconstruction of the
teaching of Ammonius, and something must be said to explain the
failure of Origen’s Christian detractors in late antiquity to cite the
two works—still extant, according to Proclus—which he
added to the Neoplatonic canon. For these reasons, while theologians
have often maintained, or simply assumed, the identity of the two
Origens, the author of the article on Origen in the Oxford
Classical Dictionary asserts that the contrary position is
nowadays the more widely held (Smith 2012; see further Edwards 1993).
The opening chapter of Origen’s First Principles is a
paradigmatic instance of his application of philosophic reasoning to
biblical exegesis. He assumes here what he asserts elsewhere, that the
nature of God is known to us only by his own revelation in the sacred
text. The scriptures tell us both that God is fire and that God is
spirit, but Origen warns us not to deduce, from a literal construction
of these terms, that he is a body (Princ. 1.1.1). It is
possible but not certain, that he has in mind the Stoicizing theology
of Tertullian: the Bible speaks more plainly on this matter than any
Stoic, and few of Origen’s contemporaries would have doubted the
corporeality of fire or spirit. In urging the contrary position, that
God is incorporeal. Origen speaks not only for the Platonists but for
all the Greek apologists of the church: the prevalent thought of his
time (and perhaps of ours) required that if God is to be invisible,
immutable, eternal, omnipresent, and irresistible in power he must not
be confined to one place or composed of labile matter. The
philosophical sympathies of Origen become evident when he goes on to
equate this bodiless god with nous or intellect. In
Plato, nous had been an occasional synonym for the Demiurge,
while Numenius of Apamea, half a century before Origen, had
subordinated the Demiurge, as a second nous, to the
“first nous”, which is Plato’s form of the
Good. Although the Good in Plato is superior to ousia or
being, Numenius like the majority of Platonists before Origen, appears
to have posited nothing higher than intellect; Origen too—in
this respect a good Platonist—is less inclined to apophatic
theology than Philo the Alexandrian Jew or his Christian predecessors
in Egypt, Clement and Basilides. To explain the selective use of the
definite article in John 1.1, he characterizes the Father (ho
theos) as autotheos, very God, in contrast to the Son who
is merely theos (CommJohn 2.7.16–18); when he
suggests, however, that the Father is higher than nous
(Against Celsus 7.45), he does not develop a metaphysical
theory, any more than he develops his hint in the same work that God
may be the Aristotelian “thought of thoughts” (see further
Whittaker 1969). Tobias Böhm’s ingenious suggestion (2002) that for
Origen the being of God is his nous, and his unity that which
is higher than nous, assumes that he was acquainted with the
first and second hypotheses of the Parmenides, a dialogue of
which he evinces little knowledge in his extant works.  
Whether he is noetic or supranoetic, Origen’s God cannot be known to
us in his essence, nor is it by his ousia, or essence, but by
his dunamis, or power, that he acts upon other beings (On
Prayer 25.3). His dunamis, which is infinite and
mediated by the second person of the Trinity, is the source of
every dunamis that is exercised by his creatures, even by
those who have fallen into apostasy and rebellion (CommJohn
1.39.291). On the other hand nothing, not even the second person,
proceeds directly from the immutable ousia of God
(CommJohn 13.25.153 and 20.18.157: see below). Yet, while he
asserts that God is by nature impassible—in the sense that he is
the agent, not the patient, in every transaction and cannot be moved
by any external force—Origen is one of the first theologians to
assert that he can suffer, in a sense, as God, and not only by virtue
of the incarnation (Homilies on Ezekiel 6.1; see Osborn 1994:
164–184). This suffering takes the form of commiseration for the
plight of his sinful creatures, never of sorrow on his own
account. Compassion supposes knowledge, and Origen appears to have
been untroubled by the difficulties that arise from the ascription of
contingent knowledge to an eternal being. That God transcends the
temporal order is evident from his answer to those who ask what God
was doing before he created the world: the question, he argues,
presupposes a time before the beginning of the world, but reflection
teaches us that time and the revolutions of the cosmos are coeval
(Princ. 3.5.3). This is a Platonic doctrine, but it had now
become common for Platonists to argue, in submission to Aristotle,
that the temporal world has neither end nor beginning and is
“generated” only in the sense that it is a theatre of
vicissitude, in which all that exists has come into being and will
pass away. 
           
The agent whom we call the Second Person of the Trinity is
“another god” at Dialogue with Heraclides 2 and a
“second god” on two occasions in his work Against
Celsus (5.39, 5.61). This appellation is not attested in earlier
Christian prose, though it is anticipated in Philo and Numenius. It
does not occur in works addressed by Origen to Christians of sound
faith, not even in those which show no fear of subordinating the Son
to the Father—an indication perhaps that it was avoided because
it savoured of polytheism and not because it belied the equality of
the divine persons (Edwards 2006). It seems that in Numenius it is the
contemplation of the first intellect by the second that gives rise to
the forms, or Platonic ideas; Origen, as a Christian, holds that the
contemplation is mutual, since “no-one knows the Son but the
Father and no-one knows the Father but the Son” (Matthew 11.27).
Thus he maintains, on the one hand, that the Son, as truth (John
14.6), knows all that is in the mind of the Father; the infamous
proviso that the Son does not see the Father signifies only that
within the Godhead vision is not mediated by our physical organs
(Princ. 1.1.8).  On the other hand, when we read that the Son
is the wisdom and power of the Father (1 Corinthians 1.24) and that
the world was created through him (Hebrews 1.2), we are to understand
that he is that divine helpmate who declares at Proverbs 8.22 that the
Lord created her in the beginning of his ways, and at Wisdom7.26 that
she is the mirror of his unspotted majesty. The verb
“created” in this text (which Origen prefers to the alternative reading
“possessed”) does not imply that the Son has a temporal
beginning, but that, having no other substrate than the Father’s will,
he expresses that will more perfectly than the things that are
“made” from matter. It is inconceivable that the Father
could ever have lacked wisdom, and equally inconceivable to Origen
that this wisdom could ever have taken a different form from the one
that it now possesses as the second person or hypostasis of the
Trinity (Princ. 1.2.2). He is the first theologian to state
unequivocally that the “three hypostases” which constitute
the Trinity are eternal not only in nature, but in their hypostatic
character; there was never a time when wisdom was the latent thought
of the Father and had not yet come forth as speech.
Though Origen rejects it, this was in fact the prevailing thesis of
most Christian writing in the second century when it undertook to
explain the Fourth Evangelist’s assertion that the one who became
incarnate was the Logos who had been with the Father as theos
(god) if not ho theos (God) from the beginning (John 1.1).
Since it was this speech or word that created the world, it was
argued, there would have been no reason for it to exist before the
creation as a distinct hypostasis. If he existed at all, it was as
the logos endiathetos, the word within, which had not yet
emerged from the mind as logos prophorikos, or verbal
utterance. In this latent phase he could be identified (as Philo had
already argued) with the paradigm, or world of forms, which supplies
the Platonic demiurge with his pattern for the creation. Clement of
Alexandria accepts this equation, albeit perhaps without denying the
hypostatic eternity of the Logos (Edwards 2000). Origen, however,
resists the interpretation of Logos as “speech” because
there are some who take this to imply that the second person is merely
a function or epiphenomenon of the first (CommJohn 1.24.151;
Orbe 1991). Logos, in his view, is one of the numerous designations
(epinoiai) which are conferred on the second person to define
his relation, not to the Father (as “Son” and
“Wisdom” do) but to his creatures (CommJohn
2.9.66 etc.): he is Logos as the paradigm and parent of all
the logikai, or rational beings, who exercise reason only by
participation in him. He cannot be identified with the world of forms,
or Platonic ideas, because to Origen these ideas are imaginary
entities which the Greeks absurdly suppose to be independent of the
Creator (Princ. 2.3.6). It appears then that he endorsed the
older and more literal reading of the Timaeus, according to
which the Demiurge, the forms and matter are three autonomous
principles of being. Before him Philo, Alcinous, and Clement of
Alexandria had construed the forms as thoughts in the mind of the
Demiurge, while Alexander of Aphrodisias held that they gave content
to God’s eternal contemplation of himself (Armstrong 1960). Origen
himself opines that all genera, all species and even the archetypes of
all particular things are eternally present in the mind of God
(Princ. 1.4.5), but he holds this as a Christian antidote to
difficulties which arise from the temporality of the world.
These difficulties, as Origen perceived, had not been fully resolved
by the argument that since the world is coeval with time we need not
ask what God was doing before he created it (see further Tzamalikos
2006: 179–271). From Genesis 1.1 we learn that God created the
world in the beginning, and from John 1.1 that the Logos was with him
in the beginning; but as we are also told that God created all things
in wisdom, Origen takes this beginning to be not a temporal origin but
the eternal desideratum of existence who is also the second person of
the Trinity (CommJohn 1.39.289). It follows, however, that if
this temporal world is the only one, an infinite cause has exhausted
itself in a finite effect. Perhaps it was in the hope of evading this
paradox that Origen interpreted Solomon’s dictum, “there is
nothing new under the sun” (Ecclesiastes 1.10) to mean that
worlds have existed before the present one (Princ. 3.1.6).
This manoeuvre, however, will bring no escape unless one posits an
infinite succession of worlds before and after the present one, and
even Origen’s enemies do not say that he went so far. An endless
series, after all, would be sempiternal rather than eternal, and the
Stoics might have replied that their belief in the perpetual
reduplication of the same cosmos—a belief disowned by
Origen (Cels. 4. 68)—comes closer to matching timeless
activity with a timeless product. A better solution than either of
these, in Origen’s view, was to posit a noetic realm, created but
eternal, populated by logika, or rational entities, under the
hegemony of the logos, and preceding ours in the ontological hierarchy
rather than in the temporal continuum (Princ.
2.9.4). Evidence for this conceit could be found in the creation of a
heaven and earth at Genesis 1.1 before the creation of the visible
firmament (Genesis Homilies 1.5). To the modern mind this is
forced exegesis, representing the triumph of philosophy over
philology; the philosophy, however, is not that of any Greek school,
but of a Christian who has set himself a conundrum by his fidelity to
Moses. It is a striking observation, however we explain it, that the
forms of particular things which coexist in the mind of Origen’s God
with the genera and species are not attested in any pagan Platonist
before Plotinus, his younger contemporary and (as most believe) a
fellow-pupil of Ammonius Saccas (cf. Plotinus, Enneads
5.7).
As the absolute and transcendent dunamis of the Father
(Cels. 1.66; CommJohn 1.18.107 etc.), the second
person is properly the lord of every dunamis in heaven and
earth (Cels. 5.45). At the same time, it can be said that he
is the food of the celestial dunameis who have remained true
to the Creator, while Satan is the food of those who have fallen
(On Prayer 27.12). It is the angelic dunameis who
keep watch over his cradle at the time of his nativity (Cels.
1.61), and who sometimes form a retinue at the scenes where he
performs those works of power which we call miracles
(CommJohn 2.4.40).  This polysemic usage of the term, which
mirrors that of the New Testament, presents no difficulty so long as
every other dunamis is conceived as a lower or local
manifestation of the undivided power which appertains to him as
Logos. As we have seen, this term defines his hegemonic relation to
the created order; Wisdom is another of his biblical appellations, yet
this Wisdom is the beginning in which the Logos was with God
(CommJohn 1.39.289; see further Tzamalikos 2006:
119–178). However one accounts for these obscurities, it seems
unlikely that Origen could have signed the Nicene Creed of 325, in
which the Son is declared to be from the ousia of the Father,
and therefore homoousios (of one essence, substance or
nature) with him (cf. CommJohn 20.18.157). A community of
nature between the two is asserted, however, at CommJohn
2.10.76); and in his Commentary on Hebrews, he deduces from
Wisdom 7.26, where Wisdom is styled an aporroia or emanation
of the Father, that the relation between the two persons of the
Trinity is analogous to that which holds between an ointment and the
exhalation which is homoousios with it
(Pamphilus, Apology 99–104; see Edwards 1998). Thus he
can make oblique use of a term which he cannot predicate directly of
incorporeals; Plotinus, who could have done so, could not have said
that nous was homoousios with the One because the
latter is superior to ousia.which can be posited only at the
level of nous.  
Although the Son is not “from the ousia” of the
Father, he is said in the Latin translation of Origen’s Commentary
on Hebrews to be ex substantia patris, from
the hypostasis of the Father. That hypostasis,
not ousia, was the original noun in Greek can be deduced from
the text of Hebrews 1.3, where the Son is described as an impression
of his [the Father’s] hypostasis. Here
hypostasis appears
to signify the reality disclosed by a phenomenon; the formula ex
substantia patris was already axiomatic for Origen’s African
contemporary Tertullian (Against Praxeas 7.9). In Latin of
this period substantia was used indifferently to represent
both hypostasis and ousia; these Greek terms are not
explicitly distinguished in Origen’s writings, though he refrains from
attributing either one ousia or three to the Godhead.  Some
difference in concreteness is implied by his strictures on those who
fail to qualify the ousia of the Son and thus deny him
a hypostasis altogether (CommJoh 1.24.152): it seems, then
that the hypostasis is a specific determination of the more
generic ousia. Origen stipulates in his treatise On
Prayer (15.1) that the Son should not receive the prayer of
adoration which is offered to the Father because he differs from the
Father in ousia and in substrate (hupokeimenon); the
latter word is best understood with reference to the body that he
assumed in the incarnation, and we cannot therefore be sure whether
the ousia of which Origen speaks is that of the exalted
Christ in his eternal or his human character. It is generally true
that he takes fewer pains than later Christian authors to winnow what
is said of the Son as second person of the Trinity from what is said
of him as Jesus of Nazareth. When he compares the Father to a statue
of infinite magnitude and the Son to a smaller statue accommodated to
our perceptions, he begins as though the visible were a metaphor for
the invisible, but ends by quoting Philippians 2.7 on the
manifestation of Christ in the form of a slave (Princ.
1.2.6).
Origen strongly affirms the ontological dependence of the Spirit, or
third hypostasis of the Trinity, on the second. To say otherwise would
be to deny that he was brought into being, since the author of all
that was brought into being, according to John 1.3, is the Son or
Logos. It would be truer, however, to say that the Spirit did not come
into being without the Son than that he came into being through him
(CommJohn 2.12.17–19). The Spirit,
as hypostasis, is not only eternal but incorporeal in the
strictest sense: this follows from First Principles 1.6.4,
where Origen finds it impossible to imagine that any being apart from
the members of the Trinity can subsist without a body. If these
persons were incorporeal only in the looser sense that Origen
recognises in First Principles, proem 10, he could not have
drawn such an antithesis between the Godhead and the angelic
creation. The powers and operations of the Spirit are not so clearly
delineated in his writings, as those of the other two persons; the
same could be said of almost any writer before Nicaea, and the cause,
no doubt, is the absence of unanimity in the scriptures. It is the
Spirit who moves (or broods) on the face of the waters before creation
at Genesis 1.2; at John 1.3 the Logos supplants the Spirit, which is
now said at John 7.39 to have been given only when Jesus was glorified
at the end of his ministry. Origen follows John when he writes that
the Father is at work in the entire creation, the Son in those beings
who possess logos or reason, and the Spirit in the elect
(Justinian, To Menas; cf. Princ. 1.3.5). It may be
that this restriction of the Son’s office implies a Greek rather than
a biblical understanding of the term logos, but Greek thought
knows of no supernal being who acts in the realm assigned by Origen to
the Spirit (pace Dillon 1982). This Trinitarian hierarchy has
been compared with that of the noetic principles being, life and mind
in the system of Proclus, for whom being encompasses all that exists,
life the more limited sphere of living creatures and mind the still
more limited sphere of the rational. The correspondence, however, is
far from exact, and, as Proclus wrote two centuries after Origen and
under later influences, more compelling arguments will be required
before we assign to a Platonic source the doctrine that Origen draws
so effortlessly from the scriptures. No evidence has been produced to
show that the Spirit functions in Origen as the soul of the world; he
surmises on one occasion that the Logos is the soul of God
(Princ. 2.8.5), but only because he needs to account for an
anthropomorphic metaphor at Psalm 84.6.  .
That the Godhead is incorporeal—and therefore, in Origen’s
lexicon, immaterial—is, as we have seen, an unassailable premiss
of his theology. If the second person has any substrate—any
matter, as we might say—it is the will of God the Father. The
significance of this doctrine becomes apparent when we recall that
Christ is wisdom and that in the myth attributed to the Gnostic
Ptolemaeus, the error of wisdom lies in her acting without the assent
of her consort Thelema, or Will (Irenaeus, Against Heresies
1.1–4). The Father’s will, on the other hand, is not the substrate but
the cause of the material universe, which Origen held, with every
orthodox Christian of his day, to have been created out of
nothing. For most Christians this did not entail that God creates
without matter, but that the matter from which he shaped the world was
the first of his creations. Matter had seldom been defined in
Christian prose before Origen, but for him, as for Aristotle, as he
has often been interpreted, it is the unqualified receptacle of all
qualities, a mere potentiality for existence in contradistinction to
essence, of which nothing can be predicated until it is actualised as
determinate being. But then follows Bishop Berkeley’s question: if
matter is not something, why not conclude that it is nothing? Origen
is perhaps the first extant writer who informs us that this question
had been posed in his time, though in his accustomed manner he neither
affirms it at First Principles 4.4.7 nor names its
proponents. We must say “perhaps”, because the
Philokalia, a florilegium of his writings, contains a short
dialogue in which the redundancy of matter is established by Socratic
interrogation (Philokalia 24). In view of his diffidence in
First Principles, it seems more likely that this text is the
work of Maximus, a second-century author to whom it is also attributed
in our manuscripts.
It is clear at least that Origen’s God creates the world from nothing
and without toil or opposition (Princ.2.1.5). Because he
asserts that such a world will inevitably be finite, as God himself
cannot comprehend the infinite, Origen was later accused of slighting
the omnipotence of the Creator. His meaning, however, is not that
there are limits to the power of God, but that any particular exercise
of it must logically have some limit. The infinite is by nature
incomprehensible; hence it is no shortcoming in God that he cannot
comprehend it, and he remains omnipotent in the sense that there is no
finite enterprise that lies beyond his power. In contrast to the
Gnostics, therefore, who held that our world is the residue of a
rupture or fall within the Godhead, Origen maintains that a singe God
is the creator of both the intellectual and the material cosmos. He
also purports to demonstrate the priority of the intellectual Adam to
the material Adam, first by giving an allegorical sense to the
firmament which divides the waters at Genesis 1.7, then by a literal
reading of Genesis 1.26–2.22. In this text the creation of
humanity as male and female in the image of God, as the crown of his
handiwork, is succeeded by a narrative of quite a different tenor, in
which God fashions the body of the first man from the soil and then,
after populating the garden with beasts and plants and infusing the
spirit into his nostrils, derives the body of the first woman from his
rib (Genesis 2.1–7; 2.21–25). It is not clear whether a
temporal, as well as an ontological, priority is accorded to the inner
man, or whether the protoplasts owe their creation to his fall.
That the denizens of the present world have sinned, and will sin
again, is a ubiquitous premiss of Origen’s theodicy.  Misadventures
which the world ascribes to fortune, fate or the malice of our
superhuman guardians will always in fact be trials of virtue,
chastisements for sin (perhaps forgotten) or correctives to hidden
injustice. If the ways of providence remain elusive—if we cannot
divine why God loved Jacob and hated Esau—the explanation must
lie in causes prior to the birth of Jacob or the entry of his brother
into the womb. These are the most positive intimations in Origen’s
extant works of a doctrine freely ascribed to him by his ancient
critics, according to which all rational beings were once pure
intellects in the presence of God, and would have remained so for ever
had they not fallen away through koros or satiety. Each of
the delinquents, we are told, received a body corresponding to the
gravity of the original sin: those who fell least became angels, those
who fell most became demons, and human souls constitute order in
keeping with the mediocrity of their transgressions (Antipater of
Bostra at Patrologia Graeca 96.504–505). This account
of Origen’s teaching was already known to Augustine, who perceived its
incoherence, since it implies that the bodies of demons, who inhabit
the air above us, are grosser than ours. In the form that is now
canonical, it is a bricolage of Platonic myths recounting the fall of
the soul from the “supercelestial place”, the peculiarly
Christian and anti-Platonic concept of the demons as fallen angels,
and Philo’s opinion that koros is the cause of the soul’s
estrangement from its maker (Heir of Divine Things 240). If Origen
held such a theory, it was not on the Platonic ground that soul, as
the cause of motion, cannot be brought into being and hence must be
immortal; his object, typically Christian, is to vindicate biblical
teaching and at the same time to show that it cannot be used to
support any Gnostic or pagan animadversion on divine
justice. Accordingly (though some of his ancient critics pretended
otherwise), his writings are unequivocal in their rejection of Plato’s
theory of transmigration, whether from human to human or from human to
beast; although these theories (hesitantly accepted even by Platonists
in the third century), gain some colour from Jewish traditions about
Elijah and from punishments meted out to animals under the Levitical
law, Origen bows to the wisdom of the church, which declares them
inadmissible (CommJohn 1.11.66; Princ. 1.8.5).
Certainly at First Principles 1.4.1 he writes that satiety is
the commonest cause of falling, but the soul of which he speaks may be
an embodied one, as it is when it repents a few lines later
(Princ. 1.4.1). At First Principles 3.5.6, and again
in his fragmentary commentary on Ephesians, he interprets the
noun katabolê at Ephesians 1.4 as an allusion to the
soul’s descent to a body from the hand of God; but this descent, which
is not a fall, is not said to coincide with the creation. We read that
the soul of Christ adhered to the word with indissoluble love ab
initio creationis, but these words could signify either
“from the beginning of the creation” or “from the
beginning of its creation”
(Princ. 2.6.3–4). At First Principles 1.7.1 we
are said to be properly identical with our rational element; but
Gregory of Nyssa and Augustine said the same without being understood
to mean that we have ever existed as disembodied souls. When Origen
surmises that Esau was expiating the sins of his former life, we
cannot assume that he was ignorant of rabbinic speculations on the
sins that Esau committed in the womb; when he refers elsewhere to
causes preceding Esau’s entry into the womb, these causes may not
include any act on the part of Esau’s soul
(Princ. 3.1.22). That merit can be ascribed to a human being
in the foetal state is evident from the leaping of John the Baptist in
Elizabeth’s womb when he recognises the child in the womb of Mary
(Princ. 1.7.4). In his exegesis of John 1.31, Origen suggests
that the Baptist deplores his failure to recognise Jesus at the River
Jordan because he has already known him in a previous life; since,
however, he was prepared to entertain the theory that the Baptist was
an angel embodied for our sake, we cannot deduce that Origen credited
all souls with a sentient existence before their entry into this world
(CommJohn 2.31.186). That the elements are ensouled can be
inferred from Isaiah 1.2, where God calls heaven and earth to witness;
and Job’s exclamation, “the stars are not clean in his
sight” is applied by Origen to the sun and moon, who have been
made “subject to vanity” for the sake of those who inhabit
the physical cosmos (Princ. 1.7.2). Here it may be true that
he borrows a tenet from the Platonists, but not without biblical
warrant, and the uncleanness of the sun and moon is a consequence of
their voluntary enthralment, not its cause (see further Scott
1994).
In Origen’s extant writings, then, the doctrine of the soul’s fall
through satiety, after centuries of beatitude as a “pure
intellect”, is never so clearly stated as in later indictments
of his heterodoxy. Many hold none the less that the charges are true,
and that Origen’s advocacy of these doctrines is concealed from us by
the loss or mutilation of the incriminating texts.  Others, relying
chiefly on the texts that have been preserved, maintain that for
Origen the fall of souls was a tentative and occasional speculation or
a myth, in Plato’s sense, that was later mistaken for a dogma (Harl
1987). It has also been argued that his preserved words testify only
to Origen’s belief in the fall of angels (Princ. 1.5.3) and
to the creation of the soul before its descent into the body; on this
view, readers who came to his work with formulaic expectations mingled
his own opinions with the Platonic tenets to which they bore a
calculated but incomplete resemblance. No hypothesis has yet accounted
for all that is said in the surviving corpus of Origen’s works.  If,
as Origen seems to hold(Princ. 3.6.1), the likeness of God
was not yet conferred on the intellectual man who was created in the
image of God, should we infer that Adam’s body was given to him as a
means of acquiring the likeness, just as the Neoplatonist Porphyry,
fifty years later, taught that souls are implanted in bodies in order
to cultivate virtue through the struggle against temptation?  On the
other hand, if our initial state was in some respects unlike the
present one, we may find it hard to interpret Origen’s dictum that the
end, or consummation (apokatastasis), is “the same as
the beginning” (Princ. 1.6.2). The provenance of the
noun apokatastasis is more easily established than its
meaning, for even in the New Testament it may signify not so much the
restoration of that which was once the case as the realisation of that
which ought to be (see further Tzamalikos 2007: 237–356; Ramelli
2013: 129–221).
At First Principles 4.4.1 Origen scoffs that only a fool would suppose
that God had really planted a garden in Eden, as the second chapter of
Genesis records. This has been taken to mean that he regards Eden not
as a physical locality but as the state in which all souls enjoy the
presence of God before they descend to bodies (Martens, 2013). Yet
Origen’s chief concern here is to forestall the literal reading of the
verb “planted”, which, like other anthropomorphisms in scripture, is
likely to mislead a recent convert from idolatry unless he hears this
caveat. No critic infers, from Origen’s denial that God descended in a
bodily sense to destroy the tower of Babel (Against Celsus
4.15–21), that he believes the tower itself to be fictitious; we
should therefore not be too ready to assume, with the malignant
Epiphanius, that he denies the historicity of the when he adopts a
metaphorical construction of God’s sewing of coats of skin for Adam
and Eve at Genesis 3.21 (Epiphanius, Panarion 64.4.1; cf Heidl, 2003:
138).In a fragment preserved in a Greek catena, he cites Adam’s
exclamation “This is bone of my bone and flesh of my flesh at Genesis
2.24 as proof that even before the fall he possessed a body”
(Commentary on Genesis, Fr. 22, p. 190 Metzler); from the
sequel, as from Homilies on Leviticus 6.2, we may conclude
that he held this body to be a different texture from ours, but in his
own parlance this would be an instance of “homonymy”, the use of a
scriptural term in different senses which are equally literal. While
the sin of Adam is a for all subsequent transgressions in his
Commentary on Romans, his argument does not preclude, and has
even been thought to presuppose, the physical descent of all human
beings from this one ancestor (Bammel, 1989); at Against
Celsus 7.39 the protoplasts fall from a state of immediate
knowledge of God to one in which the mind is blinded by the senses but
nothing is said to imply that they then became corporeal agents for
the first time. Of course many ambiguities remain, and grammar alone
will not determine whether the phrase “all saints who have lived since
the foundation of the world” (Martens, 2013: 532)implies that every
soul has existed from the beginning or only that from the beginning to
the present new souls are coming into existence with their
bodies. 
 However the soul’s detention in the present world is accounted for,
its freedom to choose its own goods, and its own god, is an
indefeasible premiss of Origen’s philosophy. Astrologers who pretend
to read our fates from the stars can be answered with a quip from
Epicurus: if all that comes to pass is predestined, so is the belief
in predestination, and we therefore have no reason to think it true
(Philokalia 25.4). Even if they vouchsafe some premonitions
of the future to the saints, we are not to suppose that they are the
causes of what they signify, or that God, who inscribes his own
knowledge in the stars, is the author of everything that he
foresees. Because he is exempt from time, our future lies open to him
as the past and present lie open; he knows, in the words of Paul,
whether each of his creatures is to be a vessel of honour or a vessel
of dishonour. It is we, however, who make his knowledge true by our
own choice of good or evil; the Gnostics misconstrue the apostle’s
statement that God “makes” us vessels of honour or
dishonour when they argue that the damned and the elect are of
different natures. None of us is born virtuous but each of us (as
Aristotle says and common experience goes on telling us) has the power
to advance in virtue by performing virtuous acts (Princ.
3.1).
Nevertheless, since the fall has darkened our minds and subjected our
bodies to corruption, we cannot effect our own salvation without the
assistance of God’s word made flesh. For Origen the virgin birth is a
datable event, an appropriation by the Word of full humanity in body,
soul and spirit. The union can be described as an anakrasis
or mixture (Cels. 3.41), a voluntary cleaving of the flesh or
soul to the Word, and (in defiance of chemical facts) as the
sublimation of the humanity by the divinity, as iron loses its form
when held in an incandescent flame (Princ.  2.6.4) The
humanity, for all that, is not annihilated, and Christ can speak at
times as man and at others with God without being guilty of
dissimulation (CommJohn 19.2.6). His own words “my soul
is sorrowful unto death” reveals his possession of a soul, which
mediates between the flesh and the divinity which would otherwise
destroy it. While the soul (for Christ as for us) is invariably the
seat of passion, some of his passions originate in his spirit, which,
though human, is divinely irradiated by the Word. By virtue of this
irradiation, he foresees his own death, and his prescience gives rise
not to a commotion of the spirit but to a
commotion in the spirit, which is experienced as a
passion of the soul (CommJohn
32.18.221–224). The body which clothes him before the
crucifixion is as palpable as ours, and equally vulnerable to physical
affections. After his resurrection, he does not show himself to
Caiaphas and Pilate because he is visible only to the eye of faith
(Cels. 2.60–65). This means not, however, that his body
is no real body, but that it no longer suffers the consequences of the
fall.
The blood of Christ, first in his circumcision and then on the Cross,
is a ransom paid to Satan (Commentary on Romans 2.13.29;
cf. 1Corinthians 6.23), whose prisoners we become, willingly if
unwittingly, when we allow his image to oust that of god in our souls
(Genesis Homilies 1.13). Yet Satan is never master of our
wills: if he enters the soul of a Judas Iscariot, it is because the
thought that he plants there has received assent and ripened into a
sinful disposition (CommJohn 32.281–285; see further
Layton 2004: 129–131.) We are taught to suppress such thoughts
and to refrain from sin, by the teaching of Christ, the chief of his
bounties during his earthly sojourn, which we now receive in even
greater measure through the scriptures. As the primordial Word of God,
he is present in every word from God that the church has canonised
under the direction of the Spirit; the many words of scripture, in
fact, are one (Philokalia 5.4). When we are instructed to eat
the flesh and drink the blood of the Son of Man, it is clear that the
words cannot be taken literally; while Origen does not deny the
allusion to the eucharist, he argues that the higher sense—but
also the quotidian sense—of the saying is that believers must
draw nourishment from the scriptures in which Christ “as it
were, takes flesh and speaks with a literal voice” in order to
draw us on to the invisible mysteries (Cels. 4.15; On
Prayer 27.10–14). The scriptures, then, are the daily bread
for which Christians are taught to pray; to accept eating as a
metaphor for reading is to acknowledge that whenever the scriptures
speak of tasting, hearing or seeing God, they are not only imparting
what we might call a spiritual sense to these words, but appealing to
our own spiritual senses (Princ. 1.1.9), the loftier
faculties which were freely exercised by Adam and Eve before the fall
(Cels.  7.39; see further Rahner 1979).
To distinguish only two senses of scripture is to forget that Christ,
the true Word, became incarnate in a threefold human
nature. At First Principles 4.2.4, Origen asserts that the
body, the soul and the spirit in the human reader find their
respective analogues in the text of scripture. The body is the plain
text, whether narrative or didactic, construed according to common
grammatical or semantic norms.  The spirit, which must generally be
sought beneath the surface, acquaints us with the work of Christ and
the mysteries of faith, and thus corresponds to the typological sense
in mediaeval and modern exegesis. The soul of scripture is illustrated
by Paul’s translation of the Mosaic precept, “thou shalt not
muzzle the ox which treadeth the corn”, to ministers of the
church (Princ. 4.2.6). For this reason, and because the
church is the bride of Christ in Origen’s psychic reading of the Song
of Songs, the term “ecclesiastical” has been applied to
this intermediate plane of reference. In works which survive in Latin
certain passages are said to be amenable to a literal, a moral and a
spiritual exposition, but we cannot say whether Origen would have
commended this translation. It is possible that he offers us a further
clue to the content of the psychic sense in the prologue to
his Commentary on the Song of Songs (ed. Baehrens 1925: 75),
where he argues that each of the three books ascribed to Solomon in
the Hebrew canon corresponds to a branch of Greek philosophy, and also
to one stage in the believer’s progress from the foothills to the
summit of understanding. Ethics is represented in this itinerary by
Proverbs, physics by Ecclesiastics, the science of contemplation
(theorics, epoptics or enoptics) by the Song). The first of these
texts is phrased and may be understood somatically; the third, in
which Solomon forgoes his own name and becomes the bridegroom, lifts
the veil between the enlightened soul and her Redeemer (see further
King 2005: 222–263). If we pursue this seductive analogy, the
second book of Solomon, which reveals our place in the cosmos, is a
mine of cosmological or sapiential teaching which may be said to
represent the soul of scripture.
This pattern would appear to have been suggested not by the usual
division of philosophy into ethics, physics and logic, but by a
passage in the Stromateis of Clement of Alexandria, where
three edifying senses are accorded to the scriptures, the last of
which is the epopteia, or discernment of the
mysteries. Origen may also have been aware that certain teachers had
sorted Plato’s dialogues into different categories, each suited to a
different level of aptitude in the pupil (Edwards 1997). In
attributing this taxonomy to the Hebrew king, however, he is making a
claim for the chronological primacy of the scriptures. No Platonist
before him had undertaken a sustained allegorical reading of any text,
as Porphyry confessed when he inaccurately charged him with forcing
Stoic techniques of exegesis on a barbarous text (Eusebius, Church
History 6.19).  Commenting line by line on a sacred text was not,
so far as our evidence goes, a typical enterprise for a Stoic.  Among
the Greeks the commentator who most resembles Origen is Alexander of
Aphrodisias; his concern, however, is to smooth the surface of
Aristotle, not to dig beneath it (see further Bendinelli
1997). Origen’s true predecessor is Philo of Alexandria, who had
teased moral and metaphysical profundities from the Torah, verse by
verse, in order to demonstrate that nothing taught among the Greeks
had been concealed from the Lawgiver of the Jews (see further Dawson
1992).
Philo is called a mystic because of passages which thirstily
anticipate the mind’s bacchanalian ecstasy in the presence of the
ineffable. For Origen the term mystikos denotes the most
arcane sense of the scriptures, and the encounter with the Bridegroom,
“which no-one can understand who has not experienced it”,
is described in his Homilies on the Song of Songs (I.7
[ed. Baehrens 1925: 39]). Whether it is a true ecstasy or a sense of
hermeneutic illumination (Louth 2000: 69), this transient rapture
foreshadows the culmination of the soul’s journey after death, when
God will at last be all in all. In answer to the jibes of Celsus,
Origen asserts that, while the church teaches the resurrection of the
body, the “spiritual body” of which Paul speaks will be of
a rarer and hence more durable texture than the gross flesh which now
ensheathes the soul (Cels. 5.18–5.23). In a dialogue
which now survives only in excerpts, the soul is said to retain
the eidos, or form, of the body, perhaps a counterpart to the
tenuous vehicle which the soul carries into the afterlife in the
eschatology of some Platonists (Methodius, On the
Resurrection 22 [ed. Bonwetsch 1899: 93]; see further Schibli
1992). Most souls, having failed to purge their sins in this life,
will be required to pass the flaming sword that bars the entrance to
the earthly paradise (see further Crouzel 1972).  Once its cleansing
there is complete, the soul will pass through the seven planetary
spheres, acquiring a more comprehensive knowledge of the cosmos and
our place in it than is vouchsafed to us in this world
(Princ. 1.11.6). Once again, kindred notions can be found in
Platonic and Hermetic literature; the posthumous itinerary mirrors the
transition from the ethical to the sapiential teachings of Solomon,
and we see here in an inchoate form the purgative and illuminative
ways of the western mystical tradition.  A body of some kind is
presupposed by this celestial topography; nevertheless, at the point
where God becomes all in all, we hear nothing of a body, but only that
soul will be entirely subsumed in spirit. Some scholars hold that a
body must be either retained or imparted to us, since only the persons
of the Trinity can subsist without one (e.g., Crouzel 1980); others,
invoking the maxim that the end will be like the beginning, argue that
we shall return to the incorporeal state in which we were first
created (e.g., Scott 2012). In any case, this union with God appears
to correspond to the last stage in the perusal of the Solomonic canon,
and to the “unitive way” of the mystic in later Christian
literature. 
This purgatory after death is not confined to those who have died at
peace with God; if any should fail to be saved, it is not because the
opportunity to repent has been withdrawn, but because the soul has
become so brutish that it is incapable of amendment (Princ.
1.5.5). This is the only truth that Origen thinks can be ascribed to
Plato’s doctrine of transmigration into beasts (Princ.
3.4.3), and it cannot be presumed that even the demons will remain
obdurate for ever. Commenting on Paul’s promise that “the last
enemy, death” will be vanquished, Origen surmises that death
will not be annihilated but will cease to molest the saints
(Princ. 3.6.5). It is generally assumed that the proper
subject of this passage is the devil, and the word diabolus
does indeed occur in a ninth-century quotation
(Eriugena, Periphyseon, Patrologia Latina 122, 930C). On the other hand,
in a letter to his friends in Alexandria, Origen is said to have
exclaimed that only a lunatic would prophesy the salvation of the
devil (Crouzel 1973). Perhaps he means only that Satan is not destined
for beatitude; this need not preclude his release from torment on the
last after his peaceful acquiescence in the victory of God (see
Edwards 2010).
By convention Origen is a “Christian Platonist of
Alexandria”. In fact, his native city was only intermittently
his place of residence; on the other hand, his intellectual home
throughout his life was one in which Plato was never his compatriot
but an honoured guest. There is no doubt that he knew the works of the
great Athenian intimately, and credited him at times with more than a
superficial grasp of the highest truths. Nevertheless, no Greek
philosopher possessed for him the authority that he accorded to the
scriptures; Plato was only the most prominent of the dead pagans who
assisted him in the exegesis and harmonisation of this infallible
text. The work in which Origen makes most frequent reference to Plato,
his reply to Celsus, as noted above, is also the one in which he
asserts that Christ takes flesh in the written word, disclosing
mysteries that no human intellect has fathomed without revelation
(Cels. 4.15), He was never troubled, as a mediaeval schoolman
might be, by a conflict between ecclesiastical dogma and the best
thought of the ancients, because the Word who taught the ancients from
afar is, for him, the daily shepherd of the Church.