Because modern “panentheism” developed under the influence
of German Idealism, Whiteheadian process philosophy, and current
scientific thought, panentheists employ a variety of terms with
meanings that have specialized content.
Theological terms as understood by panentheists:
Terms influenced by the German Idealism of Hegel and Schelling:
Terms influenced by Whiteheadian process philosophy:
Terms related to current scientific thought:
Although numerous meanings have been attributed to the
“in” in panentheism (Clayton 2004, 253), the more
significant meanings are:
In 1821, Karl Krause (1781–1832) used the explicit label of
“panentheism” for apparently the first time. (See Pfeifer
2020, 123, especially n. 1 for a brief discussion about the first
explicit use of the term “panentheism”.) However, various
advocates and critics of panentheism find evidence of incipient or
implicit forms of panentheism present in religious thought as early as
1300 BCE. Hartshorne discovers the first indication of panentheistic
themes in Ikhnaton (1375–1358 BCE), the Egyptian pharaoh often
considered the first monotheist. In his poetic description of the sun
god, Ikhnaton avoids both the separation of God from the world that
will characterize theism and the identification of God with the world
that will characterize pantheism (Hartshorne 1953, 29–30). Early
Vedantic thought implies panentheism in non-Advaita forms that
understand non-dualism as inclusive of differences. Although there are
texts referring to Brahman as contracted and identical to Brahman,
other texts speak of Brahman as expanded. In these texts, the perfect
includes and surpasses the total of imperfect things as an
appropriation of the imperfect. Although not the dominant
interpretation of the Upanishads, multiple intimations of
panentheism are present in the Upanishads (Whittemore 1988,
33, 41–44). Hartshorne finds additional religious concepts of
God that hold the unchanging and the changing together in a way that
allows for the development and significance of the non-divine in
Lao-Tse (fourth century BCE) and in the Judeo-Christian scriptures
(1953, 32–38).
In philosophical reflection, Plato (427/428–348/347 BCE) plays a
role in the development of implicit panentheism although there is
disagreement about the nature of that role. Hartshorne drew a dipolar
understanding of God that includes both immutability and mutability
from Plato. Hartshorne understood Plato’s concept of the divine
to include the Forms as pure and unchanging being and the World soul
as changing and in motion. Although he concluded that Plato never
reconciled these two elements in his understanding of the divine, both
aspects were present (1953, 54). J. Cooper, instead, maintains that
Plato retained an essential distinction between the Good and the other
beings that Plato called gods. According to J. Cooper, Plotinus
(204–270 CE) rather than Plato provided the basis for
panentheism with his description of the physical world as an emanation
of being from the One making the world part of the Ultimate (2006,
35–39). However, Baltzly finds evidence in the Timaeus
of a polytheistic view that can be identified as panentheistic
(2010).
From Plato to Schelling (1775–1854 CE), various theologians and
philosophers developed ideas that are similar to themes in
contemporary panentheism. These ideas developed as expressions of
theism. Proclus (412–485 CE) and Pseudo-Dionysus (late Fifth to
early Sixth century) drawing upon Plotinus developed perspectives in
which the world came from God and understood the relationship between
God and the world as a dialectical relationship in which the world
came from God and returned to God (J. Cooper 2006, 42–46). In
the Middle Ages, the influence of Neoplatonism continued in the
thought of Eriugena (815–877 CE), Eckhart (1260–1328 CE),
Nicholas of Cusa (1401–1464 CE), and Boehme (1575–1624
CE). Although accused of pantheism by their contemporaries, their
systems can be identified as panentheistic because they understood God
in various ways as including the world rather than being the world and
because they used a dialectical method. The dialectical method
involved the generation of opposites and then the reconciliation of
the opposition in God. This retained the distinct identity of God in
God’s influence of the world (J. Cooper 2006, 47–62).
During the early modern period, Bruno (1548–1600 CE) and Spinoza
(1631–1677 CE) responded to the dualism of classical theism by
emphasizing the relationship between God and the world to the point
that the nature of any ontological distinction between God and the
world became problematic. Later thinkers such as the Cambridge
Platonists (Seventeenth century), Jonathan Edwards (1703–1758
CE) (Crisp 2009), and Friedrich Schleiermacher (1768–1834 CE)
thought of the world as in some way in God or a development from God.
Although they did not stress the ontological distinction between God
and the world, they did emphasize the responsive relationship that
humans have to God. Human responsiveness assumed some degree of human
initiative if not freedom, which indicates some distinction between
God and humans. The assumption of some degree of human initiative was
a reaction against the loss of freedom due to Spinoza’s close
identification between God and the world (J. Cooper 2006,
64–90).
The nineteenth and twentieth centuries saw the development of
panentheism as a specific position regarding God’s relationship
to the world. The awareness of panentheism as an alternative to
classical theism and pantheism developed out of a complex of
approaches. Philosophical idealism and philosophical adaptation of the
scientific concept of evolution provided the basic sources of the
explicit position of panentheism. Philosophical approaches applying
the concept of development to God reached their most complete
expression in process philosophy’s understanding of God being
affected by the events of the world.
Hegel (1770–1831) and Schelling (1775–1854) sought to
retain the close relationship between God and the world that Spinoza
proposed without identifying God with the world. Their concept of God
as developing in and through the world provided the means for
accomplishing this. Prior to this time, God had been understood as
unchanging and the world as changing while existing in God (J. Cooper
2006, 90). Schelling’s understanding of God as personal provided
the basis for the unity of the diversity in the world in a manner that
was more open than Hegel’s understanding. Schelling emphasized
the freedom of the creatures in relation to the necessity of
God’s nature as love. For Schelling, God’s free unfolding
of God’s internal subjective necessity did not result in an
external empirical necessity determining the world (Clayton 2000,
474). This relationship resulted in vitality and on-going development.
Hartshorne classified this as a dipolar understanding of God in that
God is both necessary and developing (1953, 234). J. Cooper describes
Schelling’s thought as dynamic cooperative panentheism (2006,
95). Hegel found Schelling inadequate and sought a greater unity for
the diversity. He united Fichte’s subjective idealism and
Schelling’s objective idealism to provide a metaphysics of
subjectivity rather than substance (Clayton 2008a, 125). Hegel’s
unification of Fichte and Schelling resulted in a more comprehensive
and consistent system still based upon change in God. God as well as
nature is characterized by dialectical development. In his rejection
of pantheism, Hegel understood the infinite as including the finite by
absorbing the finite into its own fuller nature. This retained divine
transcendence in the sense of the divine surpassing its parts although
not separate from the parts (Whittemore 1960, 141–142). The
divine transcendence provided unity through the development of the
Absolute through history. Karl Krause (1781–1832) in 1828
labeled Schelling’s and Hegel’s positions as
“panentheism” in order to emphasize their differences from
Spinoza’s identification of God with the world (Atmanspacher
and von Sas 2017, 1032). J. Cooper describes Hegel’s panentheism
as dialectical historical panentheism (2006, 107).
As Darwin’s theory of evolution introduced history into the
conceptualization of biology, Samuel Alexander (1859–1938),
Henri Bergson (1859–1941), and C. Lloyd Morgan (1852–1936)
introduced development into the ways in which all of physical reality
was conceptualized. They then worked out positions that in a variety
of ways understood God and the world as growing in relationship to
each other. Although Hartshorne’s classification of
“panentheism” did not include Alexander in the category of
“panentheism,” only occasionally mentioned Bergson, and
made no reference to Morgan, Whitehead referred to all three of these
thinkers positively. It may be too strong to claim that they
influenced Whitehead (Emmett 1992), but they did provide the
background for Whitehead’s and then Hartshorne’s
systematic development of process philosophy as an expression of
panentheism. Hartshorne popularized the modern use of the term
“panentheism” and considered Whitehead to be the
outstanding panentheist (Hartshorne 1953, 273). Although Hartshorne
made several modifications to Whitehead’s understanding of God,
the basic structures of Whitehead’s thought were continued in
Hartshorne’s further development of Whitehead’s philosophy
(Ford 1973, Cobb 1965). God, for process philosophy, is necessary for
any actual world. Without God, the world would be nothing more than an
unchanging existence radically different from the actual world of
experience. God as both eternal and temporal provides possibilities
that call the world to change and develop. God as eternal provides an
actual source of those possibilities. However, if God is only eternal,
the possibilities would be unrelated to the actual world as it
presently exists. Thus, Whitehead and Hartshorne understand the world
to be present in God in order for the possibilities that lead to
development to be related to the world (Hartshorne 1953, 273). The
implication of God’s inclusion of the world is that God is
present to the world and the world influences God. Although the
presence of the world in God could be understood as a form of
pantheism, process philosophy avoids collapsing the world into God or
God into the world by maintaining a distinction between God and the
world. This distinction is manifest in the eternality of God and the
temporality of the world. It is also apparent in the freedom of the
events in the world. Although God presents possibilities to the events
in the world, each event “decides” how it will actualize
those possibilities. The freedom of each event, the absence of divine
determination, provides a way for process thought to avoid God being
the cause of evil or containing evil as evil. Since God includes the
events of the world, God will include the evil as well as the good
that occurs in the world and this evil will affect God since the world
affects God’s actualization. But, because God does not determine
the response of each event to the possibilities that God presents, any
event may reject God’s purpose of good through the
intensification of experience and actualize a less intense experience.
God does take this less intense, evil, experience into God’s
self, but redeems that evil by means of relating it to the ways in
which good has been actualized. Thus, God saves what can be saved from
the world rather than simply including each event in isolation from
other events (J. Cooper 2006, 174, 180).
Although recent developments of panentheism tend to continue the
German Idealist tradition or the tradition of process philosophy,
contemporary panentheism demonstrates great diversity (see Michael
Brierley 2004, 3). Many of these contemporary expressions of
panentheism involve scientists and protestant theologians or
philosophers. But, articulations of forms of panentheism have also
developed among feminists, in the Roman Catholic tradition, in the
Orthodox tradition, and in religions other than Christianity.
Utilizing resources from the tradition of German Idealism, Jürgen
Moltmann developed a form of panentheism in his early work, The
Crucified God in 1974 (1972 for the German original), where he
said that the suffering and renewal of all humanity are taken into the
life of the Triune God. He explicated his understanding of panentheism
more fully in The Trinity and the Kingdom in 1981.
Theological concerns motivate Moltmann’s concept of panentheism.
Panentheism avoids the arbitrary concept of creation held by classical
theism and the loss of creaturely freedom that occurs in Christian
pantheism (J. Cooper 2006, 248). Moltmann understands panentheism to
involve both God in the world and the world in God. The relationship
between God and the world is like the relationship among the members
of the Trinity in that it involves relationships and communities
(Molnar 1990, 674). Moltmann uses the concept of perichoresis to
describe this relationship of mutual interpenetration. By using the
concept of perichoresis, Moltmann moves away from a Hegelian
understanding of the trinity as a dialectical development in history
(J. Cooper 2006, 251). The relationship between God and the world
develops because of God’s nature as love that seeks the other
and the free response of the other (Molnar 1990, 677). Moltmann does
not consider creation necessary for God nor the result of any inner
divine compulsion. Instead creation is the result of God’s
essential activity as love rather than the result of God’s
self-determination (Molnar 1990, 679). This creation occurs in a
process of interaction between nothingness and creativity, contraction
and expansion, in God. Because there is no “outside” of
God due to God’s infinity, God must withdraw in order for
creation to exist. Kenosis, or God’s self-emptying, occurs in
creation as well as in the incarnation. The nothing in the doctrine of
“creation from nothing” is the primordial result of
God’s contraction of God’s essential infinity (J. Cooper
2006, 247). Moltmann finds that panentheism as mutual interpenetration
preserves unity and difference in a variety of differences in kind
such as God and human being, person and nature, and the spiritual and
the sensuous (Moltmann 1996, 307).
In his process panentheism, David Ray Griffin assumes that scientific
understandings of the world are crucial and recognizes the
implications of scientific understanding for theology. However, his
concept of panentheism builds on the principles of process philosophy
rather than scientific concepts directly. Griffin traces modern
atheism to the combination of understanding perception as exclusively
based on physical sensations, accepting a naturalistic explanation of
reality, and identifying matter as the only reality. But, the
emergence of mind challenges the adequacy of this contemporary
worldview (2004, 40–41). He claims that the supernaturalistic
form of theism with its emphasis upon the divine will does not provide
an adequate alternative to the atheism of the late modern worldview
because God becomes the source of evil. Griffin argues that
supernaturalistic theism makes God the source of evil because
God’s will establishes the general principles of the universe
(2004, 37). Process panentheism provides a way to avoid the problems
of both materialistic naturalism and classical theism (2004, 42).
Griffin’s panexperientialism bases sensory perception on a
non-sensory mode of perception in order to explain both the mind-body
interaction and the God-world interaction. God and the world are
different entities but both are actual. They are numerically distinct
but ontologically the same, in Griffin’s terms, avoiding dualism
and supernaturalism. God and events in the world interact through
non-sensory perception (2004, 44–45). Through this interaction,
God can influence but not determine the world, and the world can
influence God’s concrete states without changing God’s
essence. Process panentheism recognizes two aspects of the divine, an
abstract and unchanging essence and a concrete state that involves
change. Through this dipolar concept, God both influences and is
influenced by the world (2004, 43–44). Griffin understands God
as essentially the soul of the universe although distinct from the
world. The idea of God as the soul of the world stresses the intimacy
and direct relationship of God’s relationship to the world, not
the emergence of the soul from the world (2004, 44). Relationality is
part of the divine essence, but this does not mean that this specific
world is necessary to God. This world came into existence from
relative nothingness. This relative nothingness was a chaos that
lacked any individual that sustained specific characteristics over
time. However, even in the chaos prior to the creation of this world,
events had some degree of self-determination and causal influence upon
subsequent events. These fundamental causal principles along with God
exist naturally since these causal principles are inherent in things
that exist including the nature of God. The principles cannot be
broken because such an interruption would be a violation of
God’s nature. An important implication of the two basic causal
principles, a degree of self-determination and causal influence, is
that God influences but does not determine other events (2004, 43).
Griffin’s understanding of naturalism allows for divine action
that is formally the same in all events. But this divine action can
occur in a variable manner so that some acts are especially revelatory
of the divine character and purpose (2004, 45).
The context of the science and religion discussion responds to the
early modern concept of an unchanging natural order which posed a
challenge to understandings of divine action in the world. The current
discussion draws on the development of scientific information about the
natural world that can contribute to religious efforts to explain how
God acts in the world. Arthur Peacocke and Paul Davies have made
important contributions as scientists interested in, and knowledgeable
about, religion. Peacocke developed his understanding of panentheism
beginning in 1979 and continuing through works in 2001, 2004, and
2006. Peacocke starts with the shift in the scientific understanding
of the world from a mechanism to the current understandings of the
world as a unity composed of complex systems in a hierarchy of
different levels. These emergent levels do not become different types
of reality but instead compose a unity that can be understood
naturally as an emergentist monism. At the same time, the different
levels of complexity cannot be reduced to an explanation of one type
or level of complexity. The creative dynamic of the emergence of
complexity in hierarchies is immanent in the world rather than
external to the world (Peacocke 2004, 137–142). Similarly, Paul
Davies describes the universe by talking about complexity and higher
levels of organization in which participant observers bring about a
more precise order (2007). An important scientific aspect of this
concept of complexity and organization is the notion of entanglement
especially conceptual level entanglement (Davies 2006, 45–48).
Again, the organization, which makes life possible, is an internal, or
natural, order rather than an order imposed from outside of the
universe (Davies 2004). Peacocke draws upon this contemporary
scientific understanding of the universe to think about the
relationship between God and the natural world. He rejects any
understanding of God as external to nature whether it is a theistic
understanding where God intervenes in the natural world or a deistic
understanding where God initiates the natural world but does not
continue to be active in the world. For Peacocke, God continuously
creates through the processes of the natural order. God’s active
involvement is not an additional, external influence upon events.
However, God is not identified with the natural processes, which are
the action of God as Creator (Peacocke 2004, 143–144). Peacocke
identifies his understanding of God’s relation to the world as
panentheism because of its rejection of external interactions by God
in favor of God always working from inside the universe. At the same
time, God transcends the universe because God is more than the
universe in the sense of God being unlimited by the world. This
panentheistic model combines a stronger emphasis upon God’s
immanence with God’s ultimate transcendence over the universe by
using a model of personal agency (Peacocke 2004, 147–151).
Davies also refers to his understanding of the role of laws in nature
as panentheism rather than deism because God chose laws that give a
co-creative role to nature (2004, 104).
Philip Clayton begins with contemporary scientific understandings of
the world and combines them with theological concepts drawn from a
variety of sources including process theology. He describes
God’s relationship with the world as an internal rather than an
external relationship. Understanding God’s relationship as
internal to the world recognizes the validity of modern scientific
understandings that do not require any external source in order to
account for the order in the world. At the same time, God’s
internal presence provides the order and regularity that the world
manifests (2001, 208–210). Clayton agrees that the world is in
God and God is in the world. Panentheism, according to him, affirms
the interdependence of God and the world (2004a, 83). This affirmation
became possible as a result of the rejection of substantialistic
language in favor of personal language in thinking of God.
Substantialistic language excludes all other actualities from any one
actuality. Rejection of substantialistic language thus allows for the
interaction of beings. Clayton cites Hegel’s recognition that
the logic of the infinite requires the inclusion of the finite in the
infinite and points towards the presence of the world in God (Clayton
2004a, 78–79). Clayton, along with Joseph Bracken (1974, 2004),
identifies panentheism as Trinitarian and kenotic (Clayton 2005, 255).
It is Trinitarian because the world participates in God in a manner
analogous to the way that members of the Trinity participate in each
other although the world is not and does not become God. God freely
decides to limit God’s infinite power in an act of kenosis in
order to allow for the existence of non-divine reality. The divine
kenotic decision results in the actuality of the world that is taken
into God. But, for Clayton, God’s inclusion of finite being as
actual is contingent upon God’s decision rather than necessary
to God’s essence (2003, 214). Clayton affirms creation from
nothing as a description of creaturely existence prior to God’s
decision. The involvement of the world in an internal relationship
with God does not completely constitute the divine being for Clayton.
Instead, God is both primordial, or eternal, and responsive to the
world. The world does constitute God’s relational aspect but not
the totality of God (2005, 250–254). The best way to describe
the interdependence between God and the world for Clayton is through
the concept of emergence. Emergence may be explanatory,
epistemological, or ontological. Ontological understandings of
emergence, which Clayton supports, hold (1) monism but not
physicalism, (2) properties emerge in objects from the potentiality of
an object that cannot be previously identified in the object’s
parts or structure, (3) the emergence of new properties giving rise to
distinct levels of causal relations, and (4) downward causation of the
emergent level upon prior levels (2006a, 2–4). Emergence
recognizes that change is important to the nature of the world and
challenges views of God as unchanging (Clayton 2006b, 320).
A number of feminists advocate panentheism by critiquing traditional
understandings of transcendence for continuing dualistic ways of
thinking. Feminist panentheists conceive of the divine as continuous
with the world rather than being ontologically transcendent over the
world (Frankenberry 2011). Sallie McFague’s use of metaphors in
both theology and science led her to describe the world as God’s
body. McFague bases the metaphorical nature of all statements about
God upon panentheism (2001, 30). Furthermore, for McFague, panentheism
sees the world as in God which gives priority to God’s name but
includes each person’s name and preserves their distinctiveness
in the divine reality (2001, 5). God’s glory becomes manifest in
God’s total self-giving to the world so that transcendence
becomes immanence rather than being understood as God’s power
manifest in distant control of the world. Grace Jantzen also uses the
metaphor of the world as God’s body. Additionally, Jantzen
(1998) and Gloria Schaab (2007) have proposed metaphors about the womb
and midwifery to describe God’s relation to the world. Anna
Case-Winters challenges McFague’s metaphor of the world as
God’s body. Case-Winters acknowledges that this metaphor
maintains God’s personal nature, offers a coherent way to talk
about God’s knowledge of and action in the world, recognizes
God’s vulnerable suffering love, and revalues nature and
embodiment. But at least McFague’s early use of the
world-as-God’s-body metaphor tended towards pantheism and even
her later introduction of an agential role for the divine still
retains the possibility of the loss of the identity of the world.
Case-Winters uses Jay McDaniel’s (1989) distinction
between emanational, arising out of the being of the One, and
relational, present through relationship, understandings of
God’s immanence in the world to establish a form of panentheism
with a clearer distinction between God and the world. The world is an
“other” in relation to God rather than being a direct
expression of God’s own being through emanation for
Case-Winters (30–32). Nancy Frankenberry contrasts
McFague’s and Case-Winter’s two concepts of
transcendence to the traditional hierarchical concept of
transcendence. McFague’s concept is one of total immanence while
Case-Winters holds a dialectic between individual transcendence
and immanence (2011). Frankenberry suggests that pantheism may provide
a more direct repudiation of male domination than panentheism provides
(1993).
Although much of the development of panentheism takes place in the
context of the Christian tradition, connections between other world
religions and panentheism have been identified. These connections
range from explicitly panentheistic traditions, to similarities to
specific beliefs and practices of a tradition, to beliefs and
practices that could be developed into panentheistic positions.
Hartshorne in his discussion of panentheism included a section on
Hinduism (1953). Lorilai Biernacki considers Hinduism to be one of the
most panentheistic traditions (Biernacki 2014b). The concept of the
world as the body of the divine offers a strong similarity to Western
panentheism. The Gita identifies the whole world, including
all the gods and living creatures, as the Divine body. But the Divine
Being has its own body that contains the world while being more than
the world. While the Upanishads acknowledge the body of the Divine at
times, the body of the divine is never identified as the cosmos. Most
of the Tantrics hold a pantheistic view in which the practitioner is a
manifestation of the divine. Abhinavagupta, in the tenth century,
provided the first panentheistic understanding of the world as
God’s body. For him, differentiation is Shiva concealing his
wholeness. Abhinavagupta also insisted that Shiva transcends the
cosmos (Bilimoria and Stansell 2010, 244–258; Clayton 2010,
187–189; and Barua 2010, 1–30. See also Hardy 2016;
Silberstein 2017; and Stavig 2017). Other traditions where connections
to panentheism have been found include Judaism (Artson 2014 and
Langton 2016), Jainism (Chapple 2014), Confucianism (Lee 2014),
Buddhism (Samuel 2014), and Sufism (Sharify-Funk and Dickson
2014). While these connections might imply a universalistic theology,
panentheism affirms the importance of all religions and supports
inter-religions dialogue (Biernacki 2014a, 6, 10).
The use of metaphors to describe the relationship between God and the
world has been challenged in the broader panentheistic discussion
about how to describe the relationship between God and the world.
McFague argues that any attempt to do theology requires the use of
metaphor (2001, 30) and for Peacocke the limitation of language
requires the use of models and metaphors in describing both God and
the cosmos (Schaab 2008, 13). The primary
objection to the dominant metaphor in panentheism of the world as
God’s body is the substantialistic implications of the term
“body” that lead either to an ontological separation
between the world and God or to a loss of identity for God or the
world. Clayton proposes different levels of metaphor as the most
adequate way to reconcile the conflict between divine action and the
integrity of the created realm (2003, 208). Further, Bracken finds
that the soul–body metaphor lacks clarity about the freedom and
self-identity of the creatures in relations to God (1992,
211). Case-Winters faults the soul–body metaphor for tending to
see the soul as dominating the body and failing to recognize the world
as a unified organism (1995, 251, 254).
Further, describing the God–world relation by use of the term
“in” lacks precision in understanding the ontological
nature of the relation due to the variety of meanings of
“in”. Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph Schelling used the phrase
“Pan+en+theism” in his “Essay on Freedom” in
1809 where the “en” meant inherence as strong ontological
dependence and referred to participation as a relation to the divine
(Clayton 2008a, 169). Karl Krause (1781–1832) created the German
term translated as “panentheism” seeking to overcome the
split between humanity and nature that was expressed both in the
supernaturalist theism epitomized by Leibniz and the naturalism of
Spinoza’s pantheism (Gregersen 2004, 28). Metaphysical
understandings of God’s relation to the world have been proposed
that are more precise than metaphors or “in”.
Schelling’s German idealism understood God as freely unfolding
emanation by introducing subjectivity. Emanation avoids ontological
separation between God and the world because the world participates in
the infinite as its source (Clayton 2000, 477–481). Krause
understood the world’s participation in God both ontologically
and epistemically. The particularity of each existent being depends
upon the Absolute for its existence as what it is (Göcke 2013a,
372). Keller offers another metaphysical understanding by arguing for
creation out of chaos. She rejects substance metaphysics and describes
the relation between God and the world as a complex relationality
involving an active indeterminacy and past realities (2003, 219).
Finally the science and religion discussion provides another
metaphysical understanding by drawing upon scientific concepts of
supervenience, emergence, downward causation, and entanglement to
provide a ground for theological concepts of God’s relation to
the world.
The nature of a panentheistic mutual relationship between the infinite
and the finite is crucial to the claim by panentheism to be a creative
alternative to classical Christian theism and pantheism. Unlike
classical Christian theism which prioritizes transcendence by deriving
divine immanence from divine transcendence, panentheism balances
divine transcendence and immanence (Clayton 2020). In the classical
Christian understanding, divine transcendence is based on the
ontological difference in substance between God and the world making
interaction between the two distinct substances impossible (Schaab
2006, 547, 548). The panentheistic mutual relation also differs from
pantheism which prioritizes divine immanence by identifying the
infinite with the finite. The nature of this mutual relationship
basically depends upon the understanding of the ontology of each
member of the relationship. The issue is the nature of being for God
and for the world as the basis for mutual influence between God and
the world. A variety of attempts have sought to describe the nature of
God’s being and the world’s being in their relationship.
Thomistic thought utilizes a concept of analogy as it wrestles with
the nature of the being of God and the being of the world (Malloy
2014). Others in considering God’s action in the world posit the
necessity of ontological difference between God and finite reality (M.
Leidenhag 2014, 219). Process thought directly addresses the issue of
ontology by calling for an ontology that does not consider substance
as the basic type of existence because substance does not allow for
internal relations (Bracken 2014, 10). According to Wesley Wildman the
relations between entities are ontologically more fundamental than the
entities themselves for relational ontology in contrast to
substantivist ontology where entities are ontologically primary and
relations derivative (2010, 55).
Historically, participation, Hegelian dynamic ontology, and process
dynamic ontology have been utilized to describe the ontological basis
for the relations between God and the world. Participation has
philosophical antecedents in Plato and Aristotle and was utilized in
Augustinian and Orthodox Christian traditions. In participation, the
existence of the world somehow takes part in God’s being. Early
modern usage of the concept of participation appears in the thought of
Krause (1781–1832) and Sergei Bulgakov (1871–1944). Krause
identifies the character of every thing as the result of its
participation in the original unity of the Absolute. But the Absolute
is still different in its internal constitution from its parts
(Göcke 2013a, 372). Bulgakov describes participation as the
inclusion of the finite by the Absolute (Gavrilyuk 2015, 453).
Hegelian dynamic ontology describes an Infinite which gives rise to
the finite through a dialectical process of negation. The finite
through a second reciprocal negation of its finitude brings about
union and return in transformation to both the Infinite and the finite
(Williams 2010, 143). Process dynamic ontology understands God as
dipolar with a primordial nature that is eternal and a consequent
nature that includes the actualizations achieved by the world. God
presents possibilities to the events of the world which then make
decisions bringing about actualities that are then included in
God.
Bracken and Cazalis seek to make the ontological nature of the
relation more precise. Bracken proposes a Trinitarian field theory to
explain the world’s presence in God. The world is a large but
finite field of activity within the all-comprehensive field of
activity constituted by the three divine persons in ongoing relations
with each other and with all the creation (2009, 159). Bracken’s
Trinitarian field theory draws on systems theory from science,
Whitehead’s concept of society, and Christian Trinitarian
doctrine. A society as a type of system is a group of entities with an
organizing principle. Basically, reality is an all-encompassing
society in which subsocieties operate in their own ways as distinct.
God functions as the regnant subsociety and receives the richness of
the information from the world of creation (Bracken 2014, 80). Bracken
summarizes this system understanding of panentheism in three
conclusions: (1) systems are social rather than individual, can be
combined horizontally and vertically, change over time due to changes
in constituents, and do not make decisions; (2) the three divine
persons and all their creatures are together constituent members of an
expanded divine life-system; and (3) the relationships of the
various levels of societies involve both bottom-up causation and
an objective formal top-down causation of the constraints of
higher order systems on lower order systems (2015a, 223). Although not
as fully developed as Bracken’s society explanation, Cazalis
uses category theory and the concept of adjunction in order to offer
an internal law that gives specificity to panentheism. In this
approach relations go both ways between two categories and the link
carries the universal property from one element of a given category to
another category (Cazalis 2016, 210).
Panentheism continues to grow and change. Much of this growth has
taken place as a result of advances in science and conversations with
science. This growth has led to diverse forms of panentheism such as
soteriological, revelational or expressivist, and dipolar (Gregersen
2004, 21). The variety of forms of panentheism has also resulted in
different degrees of panentheism ranging from explicit fully
developed panentheism to vague and underdeveloped forms of panentheism
and to expressions of theism that share certain concepts with fully
developed forms of panentheism. Michael Brierley lists three premises
as distinctive to panentheism: God is not separate from the cosmos,
God is affected by the cosmos, and God is more than the cosmos (2006,
639–640). Fully developed panentheism includes thinkers such as
Charles Hartshorne, Phillip Clayton, Leonardo Boff, Peter Hodgson,
John Macquarrie, Sallie McFague, Jürgen Moltmann, and Arthur Peacocke
who have identified themselves as panentheists. Other thinkers such as
Paul Tillich have rarely self-identified as panentheists but share
concepts with panentheism (Burch 1998, 251). And finally, especially
through world religions and early theologies various forms of theism
offer diversity sharing certain concepts with panentheism.
Another impetus for development has been criticisms of panentheism.
These criticisms have taken two forms. One form, by major alternatives
to panentheistic understandings of the God-world relation, has
criticized the adequacy of panentheism. Panentheism faces challenges
both from those who resist any lessening of the emphasis upon divine
transcendence and from those who find pantheism more adequate than any
system distinguishing between God and the world. Recently, an
important criticism, especially from Analytic theology, has been that
panentheism lacks the distinctiveness needed to identify it precisely
enough to distinguish it from other forms of theism, critique it, and
further its development. Finally, the variety of the versions of
panentheism has led to an active internal discussion among the various
versions.
Criticisms of panentheism from major alternatives such as pantheists
and scientists working with naturalist assumptions criticize
panentheism for its metaphysical claim that there is a being above or
other than the natural world. At times, this criticism has been made
by claiming that a thorough-going naturalism does not need a
transcendent, individualized reality. Robert Corrington describes the
development of his thought as a growing awareness that panentheism
unnecessarily introduces a being above nature as well as in nature
(2002, 49). William Drees expresses a similar criticism by arguing
that all contemporary explanations of human agency, including
non-reductionist explanations, are naturalistic and do not require any
reference to a higher being. For panentheists to claim that divine
agency is analogous to human agency fails both to recognize that human
agency requires no additional source or cause and to explain how a
divine source of being could act in the realm of physical and mental
processes (1999). Frankenberry makes this objection more specific.
Panentheism offers a more complex relationship between God and the
world than is necessary. This unnecessary complexity is revealed by
the problems that panentheism has with the logic of the freedom of
parts in wholistic relations, the possibility of the body-soul analogy
relapsing into gender inflected ideas of the soul as the male
principle, the problem with simultaneity of events in the divine
experience in relation to the principle of the relativity of time, the
necessity of the everlasting nature of value, and finally the use of
the ontological argument to establish the necessity of the abstract
pole of the divine nature (1993, 36–39). Carl Gillett points out
that panentheism lacks an explanation for a causal efficacy higher
than the causal efficacy realized by microphysical causation (2003,
19). Generally, panentheists respond to these criticisms by claiming
the inadequacy both scientifically and metaphysically of any type of
reductionistic naturalism. Such a naturalism whether articulated in
scientific categories or religious categories fails to recognize the
emergence of levels of complexity in nature. The emergence of higher
levels of organization that cannot be completely explained in terms of
lower levels renders non-differentiated accounts of being inadequate.
Panentheists often argue that the emergence of higher levels of order
makes possible downward causation. Davies describes the difficulties
in coming to a clear description of downward causation and concludes
that the complexity of systems open to the environment makes room for
downward causation but has not yet provided an explanation of how
downward causation works (2006, 48). The concepts of entanglement and
divine entanglement may offer a new perspective on causation and
especially the role of the divine in natural causation
(Wegter-McNelly 2011).
Traditional Christian theists raise different critiques of
panentheism. Experiential critiques question the ability of
panentheism to provide a God worthy of worship (Nash 1983, 117). One
response to this critique is to question the definition of
“worthy of worship”. Brian Leftow suggests that any
definition of God as meriting worship includes a conceptually
appropriate object that is aware of the world and being superior to
the world in some way (2016, 70). A closely related experiential
critique is that the panentheistic God is unable to guarantee a future
good. While panentheists agree that human freedom logically precludes
God’s prevention of future evil that results from human choice,
many affirm that God’s response to unpreventable evil is that
God suffers with the person suffering evil. However God’s
suffering with a person does not offer any guarantee that evil will be
overcome. But, the support of a relationship with God may offer a
basis for the hope of overcoming evil.
These experiential criticisms express underlying theological
critiques. The dominant theological criticism of panentheism is that
God is unable to guarantee the defeat of evil. Clayton and Bracken
respond by maintaining that the world does influence God but
God’s will, expressed through the decisions that God makes,
protects God’s ability to save (Clayton 2005). Moltmann
describes God’s essence as directing God’s activity in
order to maintain the reliability of God as love acting on behalf of
creation. Moltmann does not find it necessary to protect divine
freedom by giving it priority over divine love but rather understands
freedom as acting according to the divine nature of love (Moltmann
1981, 98, 99). J. Cooper challenges this response by criticizing
panentheism for holding a concept of God that can save through the
general processes of nature but not in any distinctive way. Kevin
Vanhoozer’s concern about divine freedom is based on a similar
concern (1998, 250). But, Griffin’s discussion of divine
variable action does allow for specific and distinctive manifestations
of divine love (2004, 45). Alexander Jensen also criticizes the
ability of the panentheist concept to save by distinguishing between
salvation by God and salvation through agents of their own salvation
(2014, 12–13). For him, a process panentheist’s God can
only draw and persuade rather than save (Jensen 2014, 128). Kenneth
Pak concludes that an open future makes any ultimate victory over evil
impossible (Pak 2014, 223–224). In response, B. Cooper lists
five ways in which a process theology supports God’s power over
other realities: (1) ontological priority in providing definition, (2)
universality to all actuality, (3) as the ground of novelty, (4) as
the ground and preserver of all value, and (5) the unconditioned
character of God’s integrity as seeking to increase value in the
world and love towards the world (1974, 102). Palmyre Oomen finds
three similar elements in Whitehead’s thought that relate to
God’s governing and sustaining the world: (1) God originates all
occasions by presenting the initial aim which provides some direction
against evil, (2) God preserves all that can be preserved, and (3) God
as everlasting means that no occasion can overcome God forever (2015,
287–288). An additional criticism is that since God and the
world are interdependent in the classic panentheism of Hegel and
Whitehead, God is not free to choose to create and to save. The
necessity of the world for God loses grace as the source of creation
and redemption. God’s provision of salvation then becomes
necessary rather than free. While Roger Olson questions whether or not
a classic panentheist can hold to creation from nothing (Olson 2012,
in Other Internet Resources), Clayton affirms creation from nothing as
consistent with panentheism (2008). Ultimately the panentheist
response is that God’s nature as love directs God’s
actions bringing salvation. God’s nature as love is the crucial
aspect of divine action rather than a causal efficacy. The emphasis of
classical theism on divine will misses that the divine will is
directed by divine love (Oord 2015; Molnar, 1990, 679).
Metaphysical critiques of panentheism provide a basis for both the
theological and experiential criticisms made by Christian theists.
Four types of metaphysical critiques have been made. One criticism is
that panentheism fails to maintain an ontological distinction between
God and the world (M. Leidenhag 2014, 215, 219, 220). While
panentheism identifies differences between God and the world, the
distinction is one of characteristics rather than one of being.
Although different forms of panentheism understand similarities and
differences between God and the world in different ways, both Hegel
and Whitehead refer to differences between God and the world that are
important. Hegel’s dialectical panentheism distinguishes between
God prior to creation and creation in God (Tabaczek 2013, 151).
Whitehead describes God as non-temporal and events composing the
world as temporal (Bracken 2015, 542). Clayton identifies the
difference between God and creation as differences in essence and
function (2001,210). The modal status of the world in relation to God
provides a related challenge to panentheism. Göcke concludes that
the significant difference between panentheism and classical theism is
that according to panentheism the world is an intrinsic property of
God while classical theism holds that the world is an extrinsic
property of God (2013b, 74). A third type of critique is that
panentheism holds an inadequate concept of transcendence. According to
J. Cooper, if God’s transcendence does not infinitely exceed
God’s immanence, God’s presence, knowledge, and power are
limited rather than complete, immediate, and unconditioned (2006,
322–328). Whitehead’s understanding of God’s
transcendence is limited because God only influences events before or
after the decisions of the events. God cannot be present
simultaneously with the event. Likewise, Hegel’s denial of
divine simplicity makes ontological difference between God and the
world impossible thus limiting God’s transcendence (Tabaczek
2013, 151, 154). While Clayton and others have identified
top-down causation as indicating God’s vertical
transcendence, Jensen finds this inadequate because they are unable to
identify clearly God’s presence in the causal nexus of the world
(2014, 131). However, Bracken rejects the necessity of a causal joint
when both top-down and bottom-up causation take place
(2014, 10). Also, Clayton counters that few process panentheists
accept a full equality between finite actual occasions and the divine
actual occasion or occasions. God being the chief exemplification of
creativity indicates a difference between God and actual occasions and
thus a vertical transcendence (Clayton 2015b, 27). Finally,
Bracken’s field understanding of panentheism gives priority to
God as the regent subsociety (2014, 79–80). The fourth
metaphysical criticism grows out of a technical aspect of
Whitehead’s cosmology, the relation between creativity and God.
Whitehead attributes metaphysical ultimacy to creativity and
understands God as the primordial manifestation of creativity. This
appears to leave God in a secondary position (Hosinski 2015, 275).
John B. Cobb, Jr. resolves the problem of the priority of creativity
by identifying creativity as an abstract metaphysical principle rather
than an actuality more important than God (1982, 126 and see Nobharu
2015, 499). Bracken considers creativity to be the systematic whole
rather than a greater reality than God (1992, 216, 214).
Analytic theology (Jeanine Diller and Asa Kasher, eds. 2013; Andrei A.
Buckareff and Yujin Nagasawa, eds. 2016) offers a different type of
critique of panentheism. Analytical approaches to panentheism critique
panentheism as lacking a distinctive identity making careful
identification, research, and development of a distinctive position
impossible. Two responses to this challenge to identify the
distinctiveness of panentheism have developed. One response seeks to
identify a defining characteristic. The second response affirms the
richness of diversity and suggest certain commonalities distinguish
panentheism from other forms of theism.
Benedikt Göcke’s effort to identify a specific
characteristic of panentheism notes the similarities of classical
theism and panentheism and concludes that the crucial difference is a
modal difference in that the world is not necessary for God in
classical theism while the world is necessary for God in panentheism
(2013). Raphael Lataster challenges Göcke’s limitation of
the distinction between classical theism and panentheism by claiming
that panentheism’s rejection of divine immutability
distinguishes panentheism from classical theism (2014). Göcke
rejects this distinction as failing to recognize that spatial
references are not adequate in dealing with metaphysical rather than
physical or logical necessity (2014). Göcke makes the
requirements for the distinction between classical theism and
panentheism more specific by calling for a consistent definition of
“in” by panentheists and by noting the presence of
logically contradictory but self-consistent interpretations of key
notions by various panentheists (2015). Yujin Nagasawa develops the
concept of modal panentheism by describing modal panentheism as
holding that God is the totality of all possible worlds and that all
possible worlds exist to the same extent that the actual world exists.
Thus, God includes all possible worlds and any actual worlds. But
Nagasawa also notes that modal panentheism has some similarities to
classical theism which limits any modal distinction between classical
theism and panentheism (2016). R. T. Mullins provides further evidence
and refinement in identifying the distinctiveness of panentheism by
pointing out similarities among panentheism, open theism, and
neo-classical theism and by critiquing Göcke’s modal
distinction as failing to say anything unique about God. Both modal
distinctions and considering the world as God’s body fail
because they do not say anything unique about the nature of God
(2016). Mullins offers an analytic response to the challenge regarding
the distinctiveness of panentheism by suggesting that panentheism can
distinguish itself from classical theism by making absolute space and
time attributes of God and by recognizing the distinction between
absolute time and space and physical and temporal realities contained
within absolute time and space. Such a distinction offers a literal
understanding of “in” in contrast to classical theism
(2016). Oliver Crisp critiques Mullins’s identification of
absolute space and time as attributes of God because that appears to
make God spatial and temporal (2019, 30–31). Pfeifer finds that
Mullins’s identification of absolute time and space is helpful
but lacks clarity as to whether absolute time and space are attributes
of God or the substance of God (2020, 130).
One type of response to the challenge that panentheism lacks a
distinctive characteristic suggests a symmetrical, mutual relation
between God and the universe as the crucial characteristic of
panentheism (Griffin 2004, 43–44; Keller 2008, 73; Clayton 215a,
189; Gregersen 2004, 20, 22, 23; J. Cooper 2006, 29; Olson 2013, 330;
Meister 2017, 5; Henriksen 2017, 1084; Stenmark 2019, 27; Gasser
2019, 50).
A variety of terms have been used to describe a mutual relation
between God and the universe. Daniel Dombrowski (1996, 32) described
God’s relation to the universe as an organic relation in that
God and the universe influence each other. Niels Gregersen (2004, 20),
cited by Stenmark (2019, 29), uses the phrase “bilateral
relations”. Stenmark calls God’s relation to the world an
“ontological symmetrical” relation in comparison to
classical theism’s “asymmetrical” ontological
dependence. The basic nature of a mutual relation between God and the
universe involves an influence of each member of the relationship on
the other member and assumes some degree of independence or freedom of
each member.
A mutual relation differs from the more specific understanding of the
God/world relation in classical Christian theism. Panentheism and
classical Christian theism both distinguish between God and the world.
Classical theism identifies this as an ontological difference.
God’s being differs from the being of the world. Göcke
calls this a model difference in which God’s existence is
necessary while the world’s existence is contingent (2013b).
Stenmark describes this as God being ontologically distinct from the
world in classical theism and contrasts that with panentheism as
holding that God ontologically includes the world (2019, 19, 27;
Göcke 2017, 5–6). At times, classical Christian theism
maintains the ontological difference between God and the world while
allowing for the influence of the world upon God by distinguishing
between God’s ontological nature and God’s conceptual
knowledge of the world or God’s compassion for the world
(Göcke 2017, 3). Classical Christian theism recognizes that
biblical statements (see I Kings 21 and Jonah 3) can be found
indicating that God has changed because of something that happened in
the world, but such statements are identified as anthropomorphism that
try to communicate God’s actions without indicating any change
in either God’s nature or will. God’s knowledge may change
as the world changes and God’s care may respond to different
events in the world, but God’s existence or essence is not
changed (Stenmark 2019, 30). While God is immanent and active in the
world as well as transcendent for classical Christian theism, the
relationship between God and the universe is asymmetrical in that God
influences the universe, but the universe does not affect God (J.
Cooper, 2006, 18, 22 and Stenmark 2019, 30). The world changes because
of God’s presence in the world, but this dynamic relationship
does not indicate any change in God’s nature or will.
The balance between God’s transcendence and God’s
immanence further refines the distinctiveness of panentheism’s
mutual relation between God and the universe in distinction from both
classical Christian theism and pantheism. By deriving divine immanence
from divine transcendence, classical Christian theism prioritizes
God’s transcendence (J. Cooper 2006, 328; Coman 2016, 82). In
contrast, Gregersen (2004, 19) balances transcendence and immanence.
Thus, panentheism affirms the basic role of divine immanence.
Likewise, in contrast to pantheism’s derivation of divine
transcendence from divine immanence, panentheism affirms God’s
transcendence from the world. David Nikkel recognizes the importance
of this balance even within panentheism. He warns against an
overemphasis upon transcendence leading to the loss of the
indeterminacy needed for growth that occurs in panentheism overly
influenced by German idealism and an overemphasis on immanence leading
to the loss of God as the source of existence that occurs in
panentheism overly influenced by process thought (2016). The classical
Christian tradition due to a variety of influences such as Platonic
influence that stressed the reality of the forms in contrast to matter
shaped by the forms (see Straus 2010) has tended to understand God as
an unrelated Other to ordinary existence. Prioritizing divine
transcendence by calling for a deity unlimited by events in the world
as seen in the doctrine of creation from nothing limits
creation’s freedom to impact divine actions. While the biblical
tradition describes God as creator and sustainer of the creation, many
assumed that the ability to create and sustain depended upon the
otherness of God in comparison to creation. While divine immanence is
not denied by the classical Christian tradition, divine immanence
derives from divine transcendence. Transcendence over all specific
relations enables the immanence of the divine relation to all of
reality. God is present to all of reality because God exists
independently from all other reality and is uninfluenced by other
reality. This separation of divine reality from ordinary, created
reality makes the relationship of the divine to all of created reality
an external relationship. The external nature of this relationship
become apparent in deviations from the classical Christian tradition
such as deism. Because of the assumed external nature of God’s
relation to creation, God cannot logically be conceived of as being
affected by created reality. God’s freedom is only possible if
God is not affected in any way by created reality. God then does not
respond in any way to the created order but acts without consideration
of the events of the world. An understanding of God’s
transcendence in balance with God’s immanence enables a positive
relation between science and theology (Clayton 2020, “Nature:
And Beyond?”) and provides a basis for morality and ethics
(Ciocan 2016, 175). J. Leidenhag critiques the panentheistic claim to
balance divine transcendence and immanence (2016, 873).
If divine immanence rather than transcendence is stressed, even when
that includes the influence of other realities, it fails to retain a
robust concept of divine transcendence. The postmodern theological
tradition offers an alternative understanding of the
divine-created relationship that considers God as wholly
immanent (see Barber 2014, 41–76). This emphasis upon divine
immanence seeks to affirm the presence of God in the world. While some
forms of this interest lead to pantheism and the identity of God with
the creation, the emphasis upon immanence can acknowledge the need for
a source of newness and novelty that is not limited by, or to, the
past. The basis for this novelty is internal to created reality rather
than an external reality providing novelty. However, the question
about the adequacy of the novelty for the present situation must be
considered. The transcendence involved in the emphasis upon immanence
is a horizontal rather than a vertical transcendence. A horizontal
transcendence involves beings of the same ontological status. For
example, a person differs from other persons and thus in a sense
transcends the limitation of other peoples’ experiences just as
they are not limited to the first person’s experiences. Newness
and novelty then arise from the unrealized potentials in the original
situation. However, this limitation risks making radical novelty
impossible because the context always limits the possibilities. In
response to an emphasis upon transcendence, the emphasis upon
immanence clearly affirms the value and importance of the creation.
But at the same time that it affirms the value an importance of
creation, the creation is a limited creation incapable of being more
than what is already in some way present in the creation.
Another response to the challenge that panentheism lacks a distinctive
characteristic recognizes the diversity of types of panentheism and
similarities between some other forms of theism and panentheism (Olson
2020 [Other Internet Resources]; Birch 1998; Gustafson 2011). This
diversity of panentheism and the similarities to other forms of theism
requires identifying panentheism by means of more than single
characteristic (Lataster and Bilimoria 2018, 57–58). Several
suggestions about ways to identify the commonality among the diverse
expressions of panentheism and similar forms of theism have been made.
Michael Brierley finds eight common themes in panentheism although all
eight themes may not be present in each expression of panentheism
(2004, 6–8). Gregersen identifies a core common to all forms of
panentheism, God contains the world so that the world belongs to God
and there is a feeding back from the world into divine life (2017,
582). This common then is expressed in a variety of forms of
panentheism as particular theologies (Gregersen 2017, 583). Stenmark
describes panentheism as having core doctrines and extension claims
(2019, 23). Panentheism and classical theism share extension claims
that God is the creator of the world and that continued existence of
the world depends upon God’s ongoing creative activity. Both
panentheism and classical theism maintain the immanence of God, but
they differ in that panentheism holds that God ontologically includes
the world while classical theism maintains an ontological distinction
between God and creation. For Stenmark, the core claims of panentheism
are that God ontologically includes the world and that God depends on
the world for God’s own existence (2019, 25–26). Clayton
suggests that panentheism be considered a philosophical research
program which may include sub-research programs. The
panentheistic research program affirms the pervasiveness of change
with real change taking place in the divine experience but not in the
divine nature. Since panentheists differ on whether creation is from
nothing or is necessary this is a sub-research program within
panentheism (Clayton 2019, 9–10).
While the idea of panentheism may not be a philosophically stable
concept in itself, that instability makes possible respecification in
light of particular theologies (Gregersen 2017, 583). Thus the term
“panentheism” pointed to a balance between classical
theism and pantheism in the early twentieth century with its use of
“in”. The growth of the influence of scientific thought
upon theology leads to a more specific understanding of the balance in
the relation between God and the world that emphasizes the mutual
interaction of God and the world and moves on from the usefulness of
“in”.
The varieties of panentheism participate in internal criticism.
Clayton (2008, 127) and Steven Crain (2006) emphasize the dependence
of the world upon God rather than the dependence of God upon the world
although they maintain that God is influenced, and changed, by the
world. They criticize understandings of God that limit God by making
God subject to metaphysical principles. Griffin emphasizes the
regularity provided by metaphysical principles. This regularity
recognizes the order in reality that the reliability of God’s
love provides. Panentheists also caution that the emphasis upon the
ontological nature of the relation between God and the world can lead
to a loss of the integrity of the world. Richardson warns against
losing the discrete identity of finite beings in God (2010, 345).
Case-Winters calls for maintaining a balance between the distinction
between God and the world and God’s involvement with the world.
Over-emphasis upon either side of the balance leads to positions
that are philosophically and theologically inadequate
(Case-Winters 2007, 125).