Clear indications of panpsychist doctrines are evident in early Greek
thought. One of the first Presocratic philosophers of ancient Greece,
Thales (c. 624–545 BCE) deployed an analogical argument for the
attribution of mind that tends towards panpsychism. The argument
depends upon the idea that enminded beings are self-movers. Thales
notes that magnets and, under certain circumstances, amber, can move
themselves and concludes that they therefore possess minds. It is
claimed that Thales went much beyond such particular attributions and
endorsed a true panpsychism and pantheism. For example, as reported by
Barnes (1982: 96–7), Diogenes claimed that Thales believed that
“the universe is alive and full of spirits”, but this
remark is derived from an earlier claim of Aristotle: “some say
a soul is mingled in the whole universe—which is perhaps why
Thales thought that everything is full of gods”. While Barnes
disputes the pantheistic reading of Thales, he allows that Thales
believed in the “ubiquity of
 animation”.[1]
The Presocratics were struck by a dilemma: either mind is an elemental
feature of the world, or mind can somehow be reduced to more
fundamental elements. If one opts for reductionism, it is incumbent
upon one to explain how the reduction happens. On the other hand, if
one opts for the panpsychist view that mind is an elemental feature of
the world, then one must account for the apparent lack of
mental features at the fundamental level. Anaxagoras (c. 500–425
BCE) flatly denied that novel elements can emerge from more basic
features of reality and instead advanced the view that
“everything is in everything” (there are interesting
parallels between this and much more recent arguments for panpsychism
by Thomas Nagel and Galen Strawson, discussed below). Anaxagoras
explained the appearance to the contrary in terms of a
“principle of dominance and latency” (see Mourelatos
1986), which asserted
that some qualities were dominant in their contribution to the
behavior and appearance of things. However, Anaxagoras’s views
on mind are complex since he apparently regarded mind as uniquely
not containing any measure of other things and thus not fully
complying with his mixing principles. Perhaps this can be interpreted
as the assertion that mind is ontologically fundamental in a special
way; Anaxagoras did seem to believe that everything has some portion
of mind in it while refraining from the assertion that everything has
a mind (even this is controversial, see Barnes 1982: 405 ff.).
On the other hand, Empedocles, an almost exact contemporary of
Anaxagoras, favored a reductionist account based upon the famous
doctrine of the four elements: earth, air, fire and water. All
qualities were to be explicated in terms of ratios of these elements.
The overall distribution of the elements, which were themselves
eternal and unchangeable, was controlled by “love and
strife” in a grand cyclically dynamic
 universe.[2]
 The purest form of reductionism was propounded by the famed atomist
Democritus (c. 460–370 BCE). His principle of emergence was
based upon the possibility of multi-shaped atoms
“interlocking” to form an infinity of more complex shapes.
But Democritus had to admit that the qualities of experience
could not be accounted for in this way, and thus chose to relegate
them to non-existence: “by convention sweet and by convention
bitter, by convention hot, by convention cold, by convention color;
but in reality atoms and void” (Taylor 1999).
What is striking about these early attempts to formulate an integrated
theory of reality is that the mind and particularly consciousness keep
arising as special problems. It is sometimes said that the mind-body
problem is not an ancient philosophical worry (see Matson 1966), but
it does seem that the problem of consciousness was vexing philosophers
2500 years ago, and in a form redolent of contemporary worries.
We find these worries re-emerging at the start of the scientific
revolution, as the mechanistic picture of the world inaugurated by
Galileo, Descartes and Newton put the problem of the mind at center
stage while paradoxically sweeping it under the rug. Galileo’s
mathematisation of nature seemed to leave no space for the qualities
we find in experience: the redness of the tomato, the spiciness of the
paprika, the sweet smell of flowers. Galileo’s solution, in a
move reminiscent of Democritus, was to strip matter of such sensory
qualities. This led to the distinction between “primary
qualities”—such as shape, size and motion—which were
thought to really exist in matter, and “secondary
qualities”—such as colours, odours and tastes—which
were thought to exist only in the mind of the observer (or to exist as
powers to cause ideas in the minds of
 observers).[3]
 Galileo and Descartes did not take the radical Democritian step of
denying the existence of the secondary qualities; instead they placed
them in the
 soul.[4]
 However, this of course led to a radical form of dualism, with a
sharp metaphysical division between souls with their secondary
qualities and bodies with their primary qualities. 
In opposition to this dualism, the panpsychist views of Spinoza
(1632–77) and Leibniz (1646–1716) can be seen as attempts
to provide a more unified picture of nature. Spinoza regarded both
mind and matter as simply aspects (or attributes) of the eternal,
infinite and unique substance he identified with God Himself.
In the illustrative scholium to proposition seven of book two of the
Ethics ([1677] 1985) Spinoza writes: 
a circle existing in nature and the idea of the existing circle, which
is also in God, are one and the same thing … therefore, whether
we conceive nature under the attribute of Extension, or under the
attribute of Thought … we shall find one and the same order, or
one and the same connection of causes…. 
We might say that, for Spinoza, physical science is a way of studying
the psychology of God. There is nothing in nature that does not have a
mental aspect—the proper appreciation of matter itself reveals
it to be the other side of a mentalistic coin.
Leibniz’s view is sometimes caricatured as: Spinoza with
infinitely many substances rather than just one. These substances
Leibniz called monads (Leibniz [1714] 1989). Since they are
true substances (able to exist independently of any other thing), and
since they are absolutely simple, they cannot interact with
each other in any way. Yet each monad carries within it complete
information about the entire universe. Space, for Leibniz, was
reducible to (non-spatial) similarity or correspondence relationships
between the intrinsic natures of the monads.
Leibniz’s monads are fundamentally to be conceived
mentalistically—they are in a way mentalistic automatons moving
from one perceptual state (some conscious and some not) to another,
all according to a God imposed pre-defined rule. It is highly
significant for the development of contemporary forms of panpsychism
that Leibniz could find no intrinsic nature for his basic elements
other than a mentalistic nature—the only model he found adequate
to describe his monads was one of perception and spontaneous activity.
This view has been highly influential on the emergence in recent times
of Russellian monism, discussed below.
The nineteenth century was the heyday of panpsychism. Even a partial
list of panpsychists of that period reveals how many of the best minds
of the time gravitated towards this doctrine. Prominent exponents of
distinctive forms of panpsychism include Gustav Fechner
(1801–1887), Wilhelm Wundt (1832–1920), Rudolf Hermann
Lotze (1817–1881), William James (1842–1910), Josiah Royce
(1855–1916) and William Clifford (1845–1879). Royce and
Lotze represent what may be called “idealist panpsychism”.
That is, the primary motivation for the ascription of mental
attributes to matter is that matter is, in essence, a
“form” of mind, and thus panpsychism is a kind of theorem
that follows from this more fundamental philosophical view.
An important figure in the development of panpsychist thought is
Arthur Schopenhauer (1788–1860). Schopenhauer was influenced by
Kant’s view that we lack an understanding of reality as it is in
and of itself, but he made a crucial exception for the immediate
knowledge one has of oneself. Taking will to be the
fundamental quality one is aware of in introspection, Schopenhauer
thus theorised that will is the inner nature of all things. This line
of reasoning bears a striking similarity to, and indeed is an
important influence on, the contemporary Russellian monists, whom we
will discuss below.
Other panpsychists of this time include Friedrich Paulsen
(1846–1908), a student of Fechner’s who extended his
teacher’s version of panpsychism, and Morton Prince
(1854–1929), psychologist and physician who advocated a
panpsychism that emphasized that it is matter that must be
“psychologized” or imbued with mentalistic attributes
(Prince regarded this as a form of materialism, and there are again
affinities here with Russellian monism, discussed below). Also to be
mentioned are Eduard von Hartmann (1842–1906) who extended his
famous doctrine of the unconscious down to the level of atoms,
Ferdinand C.S. Schiller (1864–1937) who provided a pragmatist
defense of panpsychism as a doctrine which by various analogical
arguments yields otherwise unattainable insights into nature, and
Ernst Häckel (1834–1919), an early and avid proponent of
Darwinism in Germany who interpreted our evolutionary connection with
the rest of nature as evidence for panpsychism, and who was thus
willing to ascribe mental properties to living cells.
Fechner and Royce developed panpsychist accounts of nature that did
not attribute mental properties to the smallest bits of matter. This
might seem to exclude their being correctly classed as
“panpsychists”, as it is part of the definition of
panpsychism that mentality is fundamental. Surely someone who believes
that amoebas have experiences, but that the quarks and electrons that
ultimately constitute amoebas do not, is no panpsychist. However, this
simplifying view contains an implicit assumption about the nature of
fundamental reality, namely that micro-level entities are its building
blocks. Fechner and Royce did not accept this assumption, holding
instead that the ontological foundation of reality is the
“world-soul” or “world-mind” of which
everything is a part (there are obvious echoes of Spinoza in such a
view). This top-down view of the place of mind in the world does seem
to be a legitimate sort of panpsychism, and it is one that does not
require that everything in the world be itself enminded. Hartshorne
(1950) labelled this kind of panpsychism “synecological”,
in opposition to “atomistic” panpsychism. In contemporary
philosophy, these views are known respectively as
“(constitutive) cosmopsychism” and “(constitutive) micropsychism”, and both
have their defenders as we shall see below.
William James’s panpsychism grew out of his “neutral
monism”— the view that the fundamental nature of reality
is neither mental nor physical, but of some third form that
can be regarded as either mental or physical from different
viewpoints. To the extent that a neutral monism can be regarded as a
dual-aspect view (as in Spinoza’s philosophy), it might be
regarded as a kind of panpsychism in its own right; but James’s
view developed beyond this, to incorporate mind-like elements into the
basic structure of reality. In a notebook of 1909 he wrote: “the
constitution of reality which I am making for is of the psychic
type” (see Cooper 1990). James’s commitment to panpsychism
remains somewhat controversial, since he also advanced a cogent set of
objections against a version of the view, which he labelled the
“mind dust” theory, in chapter six of The Principles
of Psychology ([1890] 1981). These objections are the inspiration
for the so-called “combination problem”, around which much
of the twenty first century literature on panpsychism focuses. But in
the end James’s commitment is quite clear (see James 1909, 1911;
Lamberth 1997; and for an excellent analysis of James’s views on
mind see Cooper 1990 or chapters 2–4 of Cooper 2002).
The most significant development and defense of a panpsychist
philosophy in the twentieth century was undoubtedly that of Alfred
North Whitehead
 (1861–1947).[5]
 Exploration of the details of Whitehead’s philosophy would
require an article of its own, and would be fraught with interpretive
difficulties in any case since Whitehead’s own presentation is
forbiddingly complex. But roughly speaking Whitehead proposed a
radical reform of our conception of the fundamental nature of the
world, placing events (or items that are more event-like than
thing-like) and the ongoing processes of their creation and
extinction as the core feature of the world, rather than the
traditional triad of matter, space and time. His panpsychism arises
from the idea that the elementary events that make up the world (which
he called occasions) partake of mentality in some—often
extremely attenuated—sense, metaphorically expressed in terms of
the mentalistic notions of creativity, spontaneity and perception. The
echoes of Leibniz are not accidental here, and Whitehead also has a
form of Leibniz’s distinction between unities and mere
aggregates, which he explains in these terms: 
… in bodies that are obviously living, a coordination has been
achieved that raises into prominence some functions inherent in the
ultimate occasions. For lifeless matter these functionings thwart each
other, and average out so as to produce a negligible total effect. In
the case of living bodies the coordination intervenes, and the average
effect of these intimate functionings has to be taken into account.
(1933: 207) 
(Lest it seem that Whitehead is only discussing life, he is
clear that this depends upon a sort of mental
 functioning.)[6]
From the 1930s to the end of the twentieth century, there was
relatively little interest in panpsychism in Western philosophy. This
attitude was arguably caused by two things: the dominance of
physicalism in the philosophy of mind, and the general hostility to
metaphysics which reigned up until the 1970s. A rare exception to this
trend was Timothy Sprigge who, in A Vindication of Absolute
Idealism (1983), defends an idealism-based form of panpsychism.
Sprigge summarized his views and provided some novel defences of them
in Sprigge (2007), which is a response to critics, a number of which
explicitly discuss panpsychism (see e.g., Maddell 2007). An important
form of the anti-emergence argument for panpsychism (discussed below)
was published by Thomas Nagel in 1979. Later David Griffin, in
Unsnarling the World Knot (1998), espoused an atomistic
panpsychism in the form of an explicit interpretation, extension and
defense of Whitehead’s version of the doctrine. We also find
sympathy for panpsychism in David Chalmers’ (1996) The
Conscious Mind, and in articles responding to Chalmers by Piet
Hut & Roger Shepard, Gregg Rosenberg, and William Seager, all in
Shear 1997 (for more on the history of panpsychism see Clark 2004 and
Skrbina 2005).
Recent developments have gone some way to reversing the aversion to
panpsychism that has dominated Western philosophy in recent times.
From the 1970s onwards hostility to metaphysics slowly withdrew, and
most philosophers in the analytic tradition now accept the
inevitability of metaphysics. And towards the end of the twentieth
century and into the twenty-first, the continuing failure of
physicalists to come up with a satisfying account of consciousness has
led many to look for alternatives. As a result of both of these
things, a significant and growing minority of analytic philosophers
have begun seriously to explore the potential of panpsychism, both to
provide a satisfying account of the emergence of human consciousness
and to give a positive account of the intrinsic nature of matter
(these motivations should become clearer in the discussion below of
the arguments for panpsychism). The following volumes include some of
this recent work: Freeman 2006; Skrbina 2009; Blaumauer 2011; Alter
& Nagasawa 2015; Brüntrup & Jaskolla 2016; Seager
forthcoming.
The word “panpsychism” literally means that everything has
a mind. However, in contemporary debates it is generally understood as
the view that mentality is fundamental and ubiquitous in the natural
world. Thus, in conjunction with the widely held assumption (which
will be reconsidered below) that fundamental things exist only at the
micro-level, panpsychism entails that at least some kinds of
micro-level entities have mentality, and that instances of those kinds
are found in all things throughout the material universe. So whilst
the panpsychist holds that mentality is distributed throughout the
natural world—in the sense that all material objects have
parts with mental properties—she needn’t hold
that literally everything has a mind, e.g., she needn’t hold
that a rock has mental properties (just that the rock’s
fundamental parts do).
We can distinguish various forms of panpsychism in terms of
which aspect of mentality is taken to be fundamental and
ubiquitous. Two important characteristics of human minds are
thought and consciousness. In terms of these
characteristics we can distinguish the following two possible forms of
panpsychism:
According to the definition of consciousness that is dominant in
contemporary analytic philosophy, something is conscious just in case
there is something that it’s like to be it; that is to say, if
it has some kind of experience, no matter how
 basic.[7]
 Humans have incredibly rich and complex experience, horses less so,
mice less so again. Standardly the panexperientialist holds that this
diminishing of the complexity of experience continues down through
plants, and through to the basic constituents of reality, perhaps
electrons and quarks. If the notion of “having experience”
is flexible enough, then the view that an electron has
experience—of some extremely basic kind—would seem to be
coherent (of course we must distinguish the question of whether it is
coherent from the question of whether it is plausible; the
latter will depend on the strength of the arguments discussed
below).
Thought, in contrast, is a much more sophisticated phenomenon, and
many doubt that it is correct to ascribe it to non-human animals,
never-mind fundamental particles. The traditional view in analytic
philosophy is that thoughts are mental states that can be modelled as
psychological attitudes towards specific propositions:
believing that Budapest is the capital of Hungary,
hoping that war is over, fearing that there will be
another Global Financial Crisis. Panpsychism is often caricatured as
the view that electrons have hopes and dreams, or that quarks suffer
from existential angst. However, whilst there have been some defenders
of pancognitivism in history, it is panexperientialist forms of
panpsychism that are taken seriously in contemporary analytic
philosophy. From now on I will equate panpsychism with
panexperientialism. 
Panpsychists believe that there is much more consciousness in the
universe than most Westerners tend to think there is; indeed at least
some fundamental entities have consciousness according to panpsychism.
But what is the relationship between this “extra”
consciousness and the consciousness we ordinarily believe in, the
consciousness we pre-theoretically associate with humans and other
animals?
David Chalmers (2015) distinguishes between constitutive and
non-constitutive forms of panpsychism, a distinction I present here in
a slightly modified form:
The most common form of constitutive panpsychism is:
According to constitutive micropsychism, the smallest parts of my
brain have very basic forms of consciousness, and the consciousness of
my brain as a whole is in some sense made up from the consciousness of
its parts. This is the form of panpsychism that suffers most acutely
from the combination problem, which we will explore below.
However, if it can be made sense of, constitutive micropsychism
promises an elegant and parsimonious view of nature, with all the
richness of nature accounted for in terms of facts at the micro-level.
Turning to non-constitutive forms of panpsychism, we should note that
by saying that human and animal consciousness is not
“fundamental”, we simply mean that it is not grounded
in (realized by/constituted of) micro-level consciousness; and
this does not entail that human/animal consciousness is not caused
by micro-level consciousness. Indeed, non-constitutive
panpsychism typically takes the form of some kind of
emergentism, according to which the conscious minds of humans
and animals arise as a causal product of interactions between
micro-level conscious subjects.
Emergentist panpsychism in turn takes two forms. Gregg Rosenberg
(2004) and Godehard Brüntrup (2016) have each defended a form of
layered emergentism, according to which human minds
co-exist with the micro-level conscious subjects that give
rise to them and sustain them throughout their existence. The
resulting picture is structurally similar to the “British
emergentism” of the 19th and early 20th
century: in both pictures new fundamental entities and forces appear
when matter reaches a certain level of
 complexity.[9]
 However, panpsychist emergentists are arguably committed to a less
radical form of emergence than non-panpsychist emergentists, as the
emergent entities are of the same kind as the micro-level entities
from which they emerge.
William Seager (2016) and Hedda Hassel Mørch (2014) have
independently defended a non-layered form of panpsychist emergentism,
which we can call “fusionism”. According to fusionism,
when micro-level subjects come together to form a human mind they
don’t compose it as bricks compose a house, rather they as it
were fuse into it, ceasing to exist in the process. On Seager’s
view the post-fusion conscious brain entirely lacks parts; it is a
“big simple”. On Mørch’s view the post-fusion
conscious brain still has parts, but whereas pre-fusion the brain was
dependent for its existence on its parts, post-fusion the parts are
dependent for their existence upon the brain.
By taking human and animal consciousness to be fundamental, rather
than somehow made up of more basic forms of consciousness,
emergentists avoid some forms of the combination problem (discussed
below). However, this comes at the cost of having an empirically more
risky view. It is natural to think that emergent fundamental features
of reality would introduce radically new causal powers, and hence it
ought to be possible in principle to observe the difference they make
in the world when they come into existence. David Papineau (2001) has
argued that (i) neuroscience and cellular biology show no sign of the
existence of distinctive causal powers associated with biological
consciousness, and that (ii) this counts strongly against emergentism
of any kind.
It is worth mentioning a position very similar to panpsychism, namely
panprotopsychism. Whereas panpsychists think that
consciousness is fundamental and ubiquitous,
panprotopsychists think that proto-consciousness is
fundamental and ubiquitous. The properties that characterise conscious
experience are commonly referred to as “phenomenal
properties”; and hence the properties involved in
proto-consciousness are referred to as “protophenomenal
 properties”.[10]
In the first instance, we can think of protophenomenal properties as
properties that are not themselves forms of consciousness but which in
combination give rise to forms of consciousness. However, as Daniel
Stoljar (2010) has pointed out, this definition is too broad, as
anybody who believes that consciousness is not fundamental holds that
it is constituted of some other properties, and hence believes in
properties which are “protophenomenal” in this sense.
Standard forms of physicalism will turn out to be forms of
“panprotopsychism” on such a definition.
To get around this problem, a fuller definition of
“protophenomenal properties” would define them as
properties that in certain combinations transparently account
for the existence of consciousness, in the sense that one could in
principle move a priori from knowing the relevant facts about
protophenomenal properties to knowing the relevant facts about
phenomenal properties (Chalmers 2015; Goff 2015, 2017). That is to
say, if you could magically perceive the protophenomenal properties
in my brain (assuming panprotopsychism is true), you would in
principle be able to deduce what it’s like to be me. This would
distinguish panprotopsychism from the standard contemporary form of
physicalism—that advocated by proponents of the so-called
“phenomenal concept strategy” (Loar 1990; Papineau 1998; Diaz-Leon
2010)—according to which there is no explanatory entailment from
the physical to the mental. We can further stipulate that the
explanatory entailment advocated by the panprotopsychist does not hold
(solely) in virtue of the kind of properties physical science reveals
to us, thus distinguishing panprotopsychism from more radically
reductive views such as analytic functionalism.
Thus, protophenomenal properties have a kind of indirect definition,
in terms of their propensity to ground consciousness. Different forms
of panprotopsychism are distinguished by what if anything they have to
say about the positive nature of protophenomenal properties. Many
panprotopsychists think we currently have no positive conception of
the nature of protophenomenal properties. Indeed, some have argued
that we are constitutionally incapable of ever forming one. This view
was dubbed “mysterianism” by Owen Flanagan, and is most
associated with Colin McGinn (1989; McGinn does not use the label
“panprotopsychism” to describe his view, but it fits the
definition laid out in this section).
Perhaps the most promising conception of protophenomenal properties
is given by the view Herbert Feigl (1960) called
“panqualityism”, crediting it to a conversation with
Stephen C. Pepper. Versions of the view itself were held by William
James (1904), Ernst Mach (1886), Bertrand Russell (1921) and Peter
Unger (1999). More recently the view has been prominently defended by
Sam Coleman (2012, 2014, 2015, 2016). According to panqualityism the protophenomenal
properties are unexperienced qualities. Our conscious
experience is filled with experienced qualities, e.g., those
phenomenal qualities involved in seeing colour or feeling pain.
Panqualityists believe that such qualities are only contingently
experienced, and that in basic matter they exist unexperienced.
Panqualityists typically give some kind of reductionist account of how
such unexperienced qualities come to be experienced, such as a
functionalist account according to which for a quality to be
experienced is for it to play the right causal role in the cognitive
capacities of the organism. Thus, panqualityism can be seen as a kind
of middle way between panpsychism and
 physicalism.[11]
 Whereas the physicalist thinks that we can give an entirely reductive
account of consciousness, and the panpsychist thinks that
consciousness is fundamental, the panqualityist thinks that that the
qualitative aspect of consciousness is fundamental, whilst
holding a reductive view of subjectivity, i.e., the fact that
those qualities are experienced.
Tom McClelland (2013) defends a form of panprotopsychism that combines
elements of mysterianism with the kind of reductive account of
subjectivity favoured by the panqualityists. McClelland is a mysterian
about the basic features of matter that give rise to the qualitative
properties we encounter in our experience, but like Coleman he hopes
that we may be able to give a reductive account of how those qualities
come to be experienced.
For some other defences of protopanpsychism or closely related views,
see Stoljar (2001), Holman (2008), Montero (2010) and Pereboom (2011,
2015). 
Contemporary philosophers tend to assume that fundamental things exist
at the micro-level. Coleman (2006) calls this “smallism”:
the view that facts about big things are grounded in facts about
little things, e.g., the table exists and is the way it is because the
particles making it up are related in certain extremely complicated
ways. However, the work of Jonathan Schaffer (2010) has recently
brought to prominence an alternative picture of reality. According to
the view Schaffer calls “priority monism”, facts about
little things are grounded in facts about big things. The
table’s atoms exist and are the way they are because the table
exists and is the way it is; and all things ultimately exist and are
the way they are because of certain facts about the universe as a
whole. For the priority monist there is one and only one fundamental
thing: the universe.
If we combine priority monism with constitutive panpsychism we
get:
We can also envisage non-constitutive forms of cosmopsychism. On a
standard form of layered emergentism (discussed above), human and
animal minds are causally dependent on consciousness-involving
micro-level facts whilst being fundamental entities in their own
right; on the cosmopsychist analogue, human and animal minds are
causally dependent on the conscious cosmos whilst being fundamental
entities in their own
 right.[12]
 The minimal commitment of cosmopsychism is that the universe is
conscious; in principle this is compatible with holding that the
universe is a derivative entity, grounded in facts about is parts.
Cosmopsychism is not to be confused with pantheism: the view that the
universe is
 God.[13]
 Just as the micropsychist holds that electrons have experience but
not thought, so the cosmopsychist holds that the universe has some
kind of experience, but may refrain from attributing thought or agency
to the universe. It could be that the consciousness of the universe is
a gigantic mess that doesn’t add up to anything coherent enough
to ground cognition.
Detailed forms of cosmopsychism have been proposed by Mathews (2011),
Jaskolla & Buck (2012), Shani (2015), Nagasawa & Wager (2016),
and Goff (2017, forthcoming). Most of these philosophers are attracted
to cosmopsychism on the grounds that it is better fitted than
micropsychism to deal with the combination problem (we will discuss
some of their reasons for thinking this below in the section on the
combination problem). Cosmopsychism is the contemporary analogue of
the “synecological” forms of panpsychism, defended by
Fechner and Royce amongst others, which were discussed above. 
In his 1927 book The Analysis of Matter, Bertrand Russell
proposed a novel approach to the mind-body problem. Arthur Eddington,
in his Gifford lectures of the same year, independently expressed very
similar thoughts (published in Eddington
 1928).[14]
 Remarkably this approach was almost completely forgotten about for
much of the twentieth century. However, there has recently been a
revival of interest in this approach, resulting in a Russell-inspired
view that has become known as “Russellian monism”.
Russellian monists are motivated by the need to characterise the
intrinsic nature of matter (This issue is discussed in great detail
below in the section on the “Intrinsic nature argument”;
reading that section will help one get a grip on Russellian monism and
its motivation). We can define the view itself in terms of two
components, one negative and one positive:
Some Russellian monists think that the intrinsic nature of fundamental
matter is itself consciousness-involving; others that it involves
non-phenomenal properties that somehow transparently explain the
reality of consciousness. Thus, we get panpsychist and
panprotopsychist forms of the view, which we can call
“Russellian panpsychism” and “Russellian
panprotopsychism” respectively.
The attraction of Russellian monism is that it has the potential to
avoid both the deep problems facing dualism and the
deep problems facing physicalism. The problem with dualism is its
difficulty reconciling the causal efficacy of human consciousness with
(what many philosophers take to be) the empirical fact that the
physical world is causally closed, in the sense that every
event has a sufficient physical cause. The causal closure of the
physical seems to leave no room for fundamental non-physical mental
causes to do any work. If my behaviour is entirely caused by physical
events in my brain, then my immaterial soul is left with no role to
play in the production of behaviour. The physicalist avoids this
problem as on her view consciousness states are physical
states, and hence they are themselves parts of the causally closed
physical system. Or rather physicalists can avoid this problem if they
can give an adequate account of the grounding of consciousness. The
problem for physicalists, as we will discuss in the next section, is
that there are strong philosophical grounds for thinking that they are
unable to do
 this.[15]
Russellian monism offers hope of a satisfying solution to both of
these difficulties. Its elegant integration of consciousness in the
material world looks to be a promising way of accounting for the
causal role of human consciousness. If conscious states just are the
intrinsic nature of brain states, then the causal action of brain
states and the causal action of conscious states are arguably one and
the same thing. And by postulating a phenomenal or protophenomenal
nature to fundamental physical reality, Russellian monism hopes to
provide an adequate account of the grounding of
 consciousness.[16]
For these reasons, Russellian monism is increasingly being seen as one
of the most promising ways forward on the problem of consciousness.
Even its opponents have expressed admiration for its virtues;
physicalist Alyssa Ney (2015: 349) says of it 
This proposal strikes me, suspending disbelief about the…theses
that lead up to it, as at least as bold and exciting as Newton’s
proposed identification of terrestrial and cosmic reality.
The growing prominence of Russellian monism, given that one
paradigmatic form of Russellian monism is panpsychist, has resulted in
panpsychism once again being considered as a serious option.
See Alter & Nagasawa (2015) for a recent collection of essays on
Russellian monism. For further work on Russellian monism and related
views see Feigl (1967), Maxwell (1979), Lockwood (1989), Strawson
(1994, 2003, 2016), Chalmers (1996, 2015), Griffin (1998), Stoljar
(2001), Pereboom (2011, 2015) and Goff (2015, 2017).
Neuroscience has made great progress in uncovering the mechanisms in
the brain that underlie our cognitive and behavioural functioning. But
this form of scientific investigation has not produced anything
approaching a satisfying explanation of why it is that a person has
subjective experience, i.e., of why there is something that
it’s like to be a human being. It seems that we can imagine a
creature that was empirically indiscernible from a human being in
terms of its physical brain processes and the behaviour they give rise
to, but which had no experience whatsoever (it screams and runs away
when you stick a knife in it, but it doesn’t actually
feel pain). And it arguably follows that facts about physical
brain processes and behaviour cannot explain, at least not in a
transparent and satisfying manner, the reality of conscious
experience.
This is the problem David Chalmers (1995, 1996) famously named
“the hard problem of
 consciousness”.[17]
 Some think the alleged problem involves a confusion, although
anyone who thinks this is obliged to diagnose the exact root of the
confusion. Others think that there is a problem, but one that further
scientific investigation will solve. Perhaps we just need to wait for
the arrival of the “Darwin of consciousness” to make
progress. However, there is no reason to suppose that “further
scientific investigation” has to be pursued under the
methodological assumption that consciousness is to be accounted
for in terms of processes which don’t involve
consciousness, e.g., in terms of facts about non-conscious
neurons. The panpsychist proposes an alternative approach: explain
human and animal consciousness in terms of more basic forms of
consciousness. These more basic forms of consciousness are then
postulated as properties of the fundamental constituents of the
material world, perhaps of quarks and electrons. Thus, we try to
explain the consciousness of the human brain in terms of the
consciousness of its most fundamental parts.
Thomas Nagel (1979) influentially argued that adopting a view like
panpsychism is the only way to avoid what he called
“emergence”. Crucially, close examination of the text
reveals that Nagel is using the word “emergence” slightly
differently to how it has come to be used in contemporary discussions
of panpsychism (discussed above). For Nagel, “emergent”
properties of a complex system are ones that cannot be intelligibly
derived from the properties of its parts. In contrast, for the
“emergentist panpsychists” discussed above,
“emergent” properties of a complex system are simply
fundamental macro-level properties, which may or may not be
intelligibly derived from the properties of its
 parts.[18]
 Following Galen Strawson (2006a) we can use the word “radical
emergence” to express Nagel’s notion of
 emergence.[19]
Nagel’s argument involves four premises:
Nagel concludes from these premises that there must be non-physical
properties of basic matter that, when combined in the right way,
intelligibly imply the existence of mental states. It is worth noting
that, although Nagel calls the resulting view
“panpsychism”, it seems compatible with panprotopsychism
(discussed above).
More recently, Galen Strawson (2006a) has defended a similar argument
from the untenability of radical emergence. Whereas Nagel’s aim
is merely to establish the disjunction of panpsychism and
panprotopsychism, the conclusion of Strawson’s argument is very
definitely the truth of panpsychism. Strawson begins by arguing that
radical emergence is upon reflection unintelligible:
Emergence can’t be brute. It is built into the heart of
the notion of emergence that emergence cannot be brute in the sense of
there being absolutely no reason in the nature of things why the
emerging thing is as it is (so that it is unintelligible even to God).
For any feature Y of anything that is correctly considered to
be emergent from X, there must be something about X and
X alone in virtue of which Y emerges, and which is
sufficient for Y (Strawson 2006a: 18)
There are of course cases in which one property arises from another,
e.g., liquid arises from individual molecules each of which is not
itself liquid. However, in all such cases, Strawson argues, the
emergence is perfectly intelligible:
We can easily make intuitive sense of the idea that certain sorts of
molecules are so constituted that they don’t bind together in a
tight lattice but slide past or off each other (in accordance with van
de Waals molecular interaction laws) in a way that gives rise
to—is—the phenomenon of liquidity. So too, with
Bénard convection cells we can easily make sense of the idea
that physical laws relating to surface tension, viscosity, and other
forces governing the motion of molecules give rise to hexagonal
patterns on the surface of a fluid like oil when it is heated. In both
these cases we move in a small set of conceptually homogeneous
shape-size-mass-charge-number-position-motion-involving physics
notions with no sense of puzzlement…. Using the notion of
reduction in a familiar loose way, we can say that the phenomena of
liquidity reduce without remainder to shape-size-mass-charge-etc.
(Strawson 2006a: 18)
Thus, the crucial feature of intelligible emergence, according to
Strawson, is that the relationship between the product of emergence
and its producer can be adequately characterized using a single set of
conceptually homogeneous concepts. But it’s very hard to see how
any set of conceptually homogeneous concepts could capture both the
experiential (i.e., consciousness-involving) and the non-experiential
(non-conscious-involving), and hence hard to see how the thesis that
consciousness emerges from non-consciousness could be rendered
intelligible. Strawson argues that it is only by supposing that human
and animal consciousness emerges from more basic forms of
consciousness, that we have hope of avoiding the emergence of animal
consciousness being a brute and inexplicable miracle. 
It is not clear that Strawson is able to conclusively rule out the
panprotopsychist option discussed above. It is plausible that we
currently have no positive conception of wholly non-experiential
states that would intelligibly give rise to consciousness. But maybe
that’s because the Darwin of consciousness hasn’t come
along yet to theorise her way to their nature. Or maybe, as Colin
McGinn (1989) famously argued, human beings are constitutively
incapable of grasping the nature of the properties underlying
consciousness; it could nonetheless be that the emergence of
consciousness from non-consciousness is intelligible to God if not to
us. We have seen that Strawson insists that an emergent feature and
that from which it emerges must be capable of being captured under a
set of conceptually homogeneous notions; but perhaps there is an
unknown (at least thus far) neutral vocabulary in terms of which both
experiential and non-experiential features of reality can be
adequately described (Nagel is open to this possibility, which is
another way of seeing how the conclusion of Strawson’s argument
is stronger than that of Nagel’s). Furthermore, as Philip Goff
(2006, 2017: ch. 7)
has argued in response to Strawson, there is reason to doubt that the
panpsychist herself is able to give a wholly intelligible story as to
how macro-level consciousness emerges from the micro-level
consciousness, which threatens to undermine Strawson’s claim
that panpsychism avoids radical emergence. (This issue is discussed in
detail below in the section on The Subject-Summing
Problem).
Strawson’s argument is intended to show that a non-panpsychist
reduction of consciousness is impossible. However, it is not
obvious that this is essential for the anti-emergence argument for
panpsychism to have force. Philosophers and scientists have spent a
great deal of time trying to explain consciousness in terms of
non-consciousness, and these efforts have not produced even the
beginnings of an intelligible explanation. Given this failure it seems
reasonable to explore other paradigms of scientific explanation.
It might seem obvious that emergentist panpsychists (discussed above)
are unable to make use of the anti-emergence argument for panpsychism.
However, many panpsychists argue that panpsychist forms of emergentism
are less radical than non-panpsychism forms of emergentism. Hedda
Hassel Mørch (2014), for example, defends a form of panpsychism
involving partially intelligible emergence, which she argues
is to be preferred over fully brute emergence.
Brian McLaughlin (2016) responds to Nagel’s argument by
deploying a currently popular strategy for defending physicalism: the
phenomenal concept strategy. See also Freeman 2006 for a volume of
responses to Strawson’s anti-emergence argument, followed by
Strawson’s counter-response.
There is a second prominent argument for panpsychism, which has
nothing to do with the need to explain human consciousness; rather it
begins from a certain gap in the picture of the world we get from the
physical sciences. This argument has its roots in Leibniz,
Schopenhauer, Russell (1927) and Whitehead (1933 [1967]), and is
defended by many panpsychists, including Sprigge (1999), Strawson
(2003) and Goff (2017). It is also strongly connected to the
motivations for Russellian monism, and so it may be useful to read
this section in close conjunction with the section above on Russellian
monism.
In the public mind physics is on its way to giving us a complete
account of the fundamental nature of the material world. It seems
almost tautological that “physics” is the true theory of
“the physical”, and hence that it is to physics we should
turn for an understanding of the complete nature of space, time and
matter. However, this commonplace opinion comes under pressure when we
reflect on the austere vocabulary in terms of which physical theories
are framed. A crucial moment in the scientific revolution was
Galileo’s declaration that the book of the universe is written
in the language of mathematics; from this point onwards mathematics
has been the language of physics. The vocabulary of physics is
arguably not entirely mathematical, as it involves causal or nomic
notions, such as the notion of a law of nature. But the kind of
qualitative concepts we find in the Aristotelian
characterisation of the universe are wholly absent from modern
physics. Physical theories are framed in a wholly mathematico-nomic
vocabulary.
The problem is that it’s not clear that such an austere
vocabulary can even in principle capture the complete nature of
concrete reality. A mathematical description of a situation abstracts
from concrete reality; a mathematical model in economics for example
abstracts away from what is being bought or sold, or the nature of
labour. And nomic predicates can only express information about how
physical entities are disposed to behave. This is fine if we want to
predict, say, how electrons will behave. But intuitively there must
also be an intrinsic nature to an electron; there must be an
answer to the question “How is the electron in and of
itself?” And this question doesn’t seem to be answered by
describing how electrons are disposed to behave.
Some philosophers, known as “dispositional essentialists”,
hold that all fundamental properties are pure dispositions
(Ellis 2001; Molnar 2003; Mumford 2004; Bird 2007). On this view, once
we have fully described how the electron is disposed to behave, e.g.,
the disposition to repel other electrons and to attract positrons, or
the disposition to exert gravitational attraction on other entities
with mass, we have thereby said everything there is to be said about
the nature of the electron. Entities on this view are not so much
beings as doings.
However, there are powerful arguments against the intelligibility of
dispositional essentialism. Most discussed is the charge that attempts
to characterize the nature of properties under the assumption of
dispositional essentialism lead to vicious regress (Robinson 1982;
Blackburn 1990; Armstrong 1997; Heil 2003; Lowe 2006; Goff 2017: ch.
6). For any given disposition X, we understand the nature of
X only when we know the nature of its manifestation, that is,
the property it gives rise to when manifested. For example, the
manifestation of flammability is burning; we only know what
flammability is when we know that burning is its manifestation.
However, assuming dispositional essentialism the manifestation of any
disposition X will be another disposition, call it
“Y”. To know the nature of X we need to know
the nature of Y. But we can only know the nature of Y by
knowing the nature of its manifestation, which will be another
disposition, call it “Z”. To know the nature of Z we need
to know the nature of its manifestation, and so on ad infinitum. The
buck is continually passed, and hence an adequate understanding of the
nature of any property is impossible, even for an omniscient being; in
other words, a dispositional essentialist world is unintelligible.
Russell records the moral of the story thus: 
There are many possible ways of turning some things hitherto regarded
as “real” into mere laws concerning the other things.
Obviously there must be a limit to this process, or else all the
things in the world will merely be each other’s washing (Russell
1927: 325)
If this argument is sound, then physical theory will never provide us
with a complete and adequate account of the nature of the material
world. The job of physics is to provide us with mathematical models
that accurately predict the behaviour of matter. This is incredibly
useful information; rich understanding of the causal structure of
matter has enabled us to manipulate the natural world in all sorts of
extraordinary ways, allowing us to build lasers and hairdryers, and to
put men on the moon. Indeed we can explain the extraordinary success
of physics in terms of the fact that from Galileo onwards it focused
on this more limited project of capturing matter’s causal
structure, rather than speculating about the underlying nature of the
stuff that has that structure. 
However, as philosophers we may be interested in finding out what the
intrinsic nature of matter is, or at least having our best guess as to
what it might be. And if the above line of reasoning is correct, we
must look beyond physics for this. The panpsychist has a proposal: the
intrinsic nature of matter is, at least in part, consciousness.
Supposing for the sake of discussion that electrons are fundamental
constituents of reality, the panpsychist proposal is as follows:
physics tells us how an electron behaves, but in and of itself the
electron is essentially a thing that instantiates consciousness (of
presumably some extremely basic kind).
What is to be said in favour of this proposal? The first thing to say
is that it is not obvious that we have an alternative proposal, at
least at present. We learn about matter through its causal impact on
our senses or on our measuring devices; as Eddington (1928:
58–60; quoted in Strawson 2006a) put it “Our knowledge of
the nature of the objects treated in physics consists solely of
readings of pointers [on instrument dials] and other
indicators”. It’s hard to see how this indirect method of
investigating matter could yield insight into its intrinsic nature.
Derk Pereboom (2011) has suggested that future thinkers may through
imagination theorise their way to a positive hypothesis concerning the
intrinsic nature of matter, and such a proposal may turn out to have
empirical support, or theoretical support of some other kind. However,
at least as they are currently conceived of, the physical sciences
have no use for speculation concerning matter’s intrinsic
nature. It is arguable that our choice is between the panpsychist
proposal and the view that the intrinsic nature of matter is “we
know not what”.
Furthermore, assuming the falsity of dualism, we know that the
intrinsic nature of at least some matter is
consciousness-involving: namely the matter of brains (or whole
organisms if we think that organisms are the bearers of
consciousness). This is perhaps our only real clue as to the intrinsic
nature of matter in general; as regards the intrinsic nature of stuff
outside of brains (or of the parts of brains) we can only speculate.
Goff (2016, 2017: ch. 7) has argued that from this epistemic starting
point there is a clear “simplicity argument” in favour of
panpsychism: in the absence of any reason to suppose otherwise, the
most simple, elegant, parsimonious hypothesis is that the matter
outside of brains is continuous with the matter of brains in also
having a consciousness-involving nature. Eddington (1928:
259–60; quoted in Strawson 2003) remarked that it was rather
“silly”, given that we know nothing from physics of the
intrinsic nature of matter, to suppose that its nature is incongruent
with mentality and then to wonder where mentality comes from. These
panpsychists try to put the onus on their opponents to come up with
a non-panpsychist proposal as to the intrinsic nature of matter, and
to give reasons to prefer it to the prima facie much simpler
and more parsimonious panpsychist proposal.
Whereas the anti-emergence argument discussed above tries to show that
panpsychism offers the best account of the synchronic dependence of
biological consciousness on more fundamental features of reality,
genetic arguments try to show that panpsychism offers the
best account of the development of biological consciousness in
evolutionary
 history.[20]
 Such arguments turn on the assumption that evolution is a continuous
process that molds pre-existing properties into more complex forms,
but that cannot produce “entirely novel” properties.
William Clifford puts the argument thus:
… we cannot suppose that so enormous a jump from one creature
to another should have occurred at any point in the process of
evolution as the introduction of a fact entirely different and
absolutely separate from the physical fact. It is impossible for
anybody to point out the particular place in the line of descent where
that event can be supposed to have taken place. The only thing that we
can come to, if we accept the doctrine of evolution at all, is that
even in the very lowest organism, even in the Amoeba which swims about
in our own blood, there is something or other, inconceivably simple to
us, which is of the same nature with our own consciousness….
(Clifford [1874] 1886: 266)
A similar argument is due to James: 
we ought … to try every possible mode of conceiving of
consciousness so that it may not appear equivalent to the irruption
into the universe of a new nature non-existent to then. ([1890] 1950:
148) 
More recently, Goff (2013) has argued that consciousness is not
vague, and that this leads to a sorites-style argument for
panpsychism. Very roughly if consciousness does not admit of
borderline cases, then we will have to suppose that some utterly
precise micro-level change—down to an exact arrangement of
particles—marked the first appearance of consciousness (or the
change from non-conscious to conscious embryo/foetus), and it is going
to seem arbitrary that it was that utterly precise change that was
responsible for this significant change in nature.
A final important motivation for panpsychism comes from the need to
account for mental causation in a way that is consistent with
alleged causal closure of the physical: the thesis that every
physical event has a sufficient physical cause (Chalmers 2015; Goff
2017: ch. 6). If, as the dualist believes, consciousness exists
outside the physical world, it is hard to see how it could impact on a
causally closed physical system. But if, as the panpsychist believes,
consciousness infuses the intrinsic nature of the material world, then
consciousness and its effects are part of the causally closed system.
As discussed above, this is an important motivation for the
contemporary position Russellian
 monism.[21]
Many people, both philosophers and non-philosophers, find deeply
counterintuitive the idea that fundamental constituents of the
physical world, such as electrons, have conscious experience. And many
take this to be a good reason not to take panpsychism seriously.
However, panpsychists may respond by denying that a theory’s
ill-fit with our intuitions is a reason for doubting its truth.
Consider the thesis that we have a common ancestors with apes, or that
time flows slower when travelling at high speeds, or that a particle
can exist in a superposition between distinct locations; all of these
theses are highly counter-intuitive, but this gives us little or no
reason to think them false. 
Presumably these scientific theories are taken so seriously in spite
of their strangeness because they are supported by empirical evidence.
However, most arguments for panpsychism start from a datum which is
known with greater certainty than the data of observation and
experiments: the existence of human consciousness. Of course the mere
existence of human consciousness does not logically entail the truth
of panpsychism. There are always an infinite number of theories
consistent with the data, and we must choose between them on the basis
of theoretical virtues, such as parsimony and simplicity. But if it
could be shown that panpsychism provides the best explanation of the
existence of human and animal consciousness, or that it is the most
parsimonious theory of the intrinsic nature of matter (given that the
only clue we have as to the intrinsic nature of matter is that some of
it involves consciousness), this would give us strong support for the
truth of panpsychism in spite of its prima facie strangeness.
Consider the following analogy (Goff 2016, 2017: ch. 7). Einstein’s
theory of special relativity is empirically equivalent to the
Lorentzian theory that preceded it; and if our concern is fit with
commonsense then Lorentz’s theory is superior as it preserves
our commonsense notion of absolute time. However, the scientific
community almost universally went for Einstein’s view on the
grounds of its greater simplicity and elegance. Similarly, we should
assess panpsychism on the grounds of its theoretical virtue and
explanatory power, rather than the fact that most Western people find
it strange.
It is generally agreed, both by its proponents and by its opponents,
that the hardest problem facing panpsychism is what has become known
as the “combination problem”. This term comes from William
Seager (1995), although in the contemporary literature the problem
itself is generally traced back to William James ([1890]
 1981).[22]
 The combination problem is most obviously a challenge for
constitutive micropsychism, although as we shall see there are forms
of it that threaten other kinds of panpsychism. According to
constitutive micropsychism, micro-level entities have their own very
basic forms of conscious experience, and in brains these micro-level
conscious entities somehow come together to constitute human and
animal consciousness. The problem is that this is very difficult to
make sense of: “little” conscious subjects of experience
with their micro-experiences coming together to form a
“big” conscious subject with its own experiences.
The inspiration for the problem is the following passage from
James:
Take a hundred of them [feelings], shuffle them and pack them as close
together as you can (whatever that may mean); still each remains the
same feeling it always was, shut in its own skin, windowless, ignorant
of what the other feelings are and mean. There would be a hundred-and
first-feeling there, if, when a group or series of such feelings were
set up, a consciousness belonging to the group as such should emerge.
And this 101st feeling would be a totally new fact; the 100
feelings might, by a curious physical law, be a signal for its
creation, when they came together; but they would have no substantial
identity with it, nor it with them, and one could never deduce the one
from the others, nor (in any intelligible sense) say that they evolved
it. (James [1890] 1981: 160)b
In fact, if one reads on in the text one finds that James’
argument is that there is no mental combination because there is no
combination whatsoever (Shani 2010). James believes that in reality
there are only particles arranged in various ways, which give rise to
the idea of composite objects by the effects they have on our senses.
The denial that there are any composite objects whatsoever is fairly
radical. However, contemporary philosophers have been inspired by the
above passage to think that there is something specifically troubling
about the notion of mental combination, a concern that
doesn’t obviously arise in the physical case. At least on the
face of it we have no problem with the idea of bricks forming a house,
or mechanical parts forming a car engine. But the idea of many minds
forming some other mind is much harder to get your head around (so to
speak).
The general consensus among panpsychists is that there is currently no
wholly adequate solution to the combination problem. However, this is
not obviously a reason to think the panpsychist research project is
not worth pursuing. Compare: it was only many decades after Darwin and
Wallace formulated the principle of natural selection that modern
genetics developed, and indeed there are many deep problems facing the
Darwinian research project that remain unsolved. It takes time to move
from a broad theoretical framework to a complete theory with all the
details filled in. It is only recently that panpsychism is once again
being taken seriously by contemporary philosophers and some neuroscientists
(e.g., Tononi & Koch 2015). If it does eventually produce a
perfectly adequate account of human consciousness and of the nature of
matter, this will no doubt only be after many decades or centuries of
serious inter-disciplinary work.
The kind of mental combination which is generally taken to be most
troubling is subject-summing: the combination of distinct
conscious subjects into a single conscious mind. And hence the
paradigmatic form of the combination problem is the
subject-summing problem.
The subject-summing problem, and indeed all forms of the combination
problem, can be construed in a stronger or a milder form. In its
milder form it is taken to be a challenge that the panpsychist must
address in the long run, either by eventually coming up with an
adequate theoretical account of mental combination, or at least by
explaining why such an account is beyond our ken. Almost all
panpsychists accept this challenge, and one major activity of the
contemporary panpsychism research project is attempting to solve (or
circumnavigate) the subject-summing problem and the combination
problem more generally.
In its stronger form the subject-summing problem takes the form of an
argument to the conclusion that subject-summing is incoherent or
impossible, and hence that panpsychism—or at least constitutive
micropsychism—must be false. Sam Coleman (2014), for example,
has argued that subject-summing is incoherent on the grounds that each
subject has a viewpoint that excludes the viewpoints of all other
subjects. The essence of my current point of view as a conscious
subject is a matter not just of the conscious experiences I am
positively having, but of the fact that I am having those
experiences and no others.  The same could be said of the
essence of the point of view you are currently enjoying. If my point
of view and your point of view were to be combined into an
“uber-mind”, then that uber-mind would have to have
both your experiences to the exclusion of all other
experiences and my experiences to the exclusion of all other
experiences. This seems flatly contradictory, assuming that you
and I have different experiences. If this argument works, it ought to
apply to the much simpler points of view of micro-level subjects, thus
rendering constitutive micropsychism
incoherent.[23]
Another attempt to demonstrate the impossibility of subject-summing is
found in Goff’s (2009, 2017) conceivability argument against
mental combination. Goff reads into the above James passage a claim
about conceivability:
Conceivable Isolation of Subjects (CIS)—For any group
of subjects, \(S_{1}\), \(S_{2}\), …, \(S_{n}\), and any
conscious states, \(E_{1}\), \(E_{2}\), …, \(E_{n}\), the
following scenario is conceivable: there are \(S_{1}\), \(S_{2}\),
…, \(S_{n}\) instantiating \(E_{1}\), \(E_{2}\), …,
\(E_{n}\), but it’s not the case that there is a subject \(S*\)
such that \(S*\) is not identical with any of \(S_{1}\), \(S_{2}\)
… \(S_{n}\).
Building on this he argues that we can conceive of a
“micro-experiential zombie”, defined as a creature that
is:
If we can infer from the conceivability to the possibility of such
creatures, then the falsity of constitutive micropsychism seems to
follow. For the constitutive micropsychist holds that the facts about
micro-subjects wholly account for the existence of macro-level
conscious subjects. But if it is possible for the facts about
micro-subjects to obtain in the absence of any macro-level
consciousness—which on the face of it seems to be the case in a
world of micro-experiential zombies—then it seems that the facts
about micro-subjects cannot wholly account for the existence of
macro-level consciousness (it’s generally assumed that for fact
X to ground fact Y, it must be the case that X
necessitates Y). In that sense, it’s impossible for
subjects to sum.
This is a particularly worrying argument for the panpsychist, as she
generally motivates her view in terms of a rejection of physicalism:
if physicalist accounts of consciousness are implausible then this can
motivate turning to panpsychism as an alternative. However, the most
common way of rejecting physicalism is via a conceivability argument
of the above form, roughly: we can conceive of the physical facts of
the body and brain obtaining in the absence of the facts about
consciousness, and hence the physical facts cannot wholly account for
the facts about consciousness (see Chalmers 2009 and Goff 2017). If
the same form of argument also applies to the panpsychist account of
macro-level consciousness—the kind of consciousness we surely
want explained at the end of the day—then it seems we’ve
got nowhere. (Note that this worry does not threaten the intrinsic
nature argument for panpsychism, discussed
 above).[24]
For further details, see the supplementary document
 Possible Solutions to the Subject-Summing Problem.
In David Chalmers’ (2016) taxonomy of the combination problem,
there are three dimensions of difficulty:
We have already covered the subject-summing problem in some detail. I
turn now to a briefer treatment of problems pertaining to quality and
structure.
Human consciousness is a rich and wonderful thing. In any given sense
modality, we enjoy an incredible variety of qualities. Moreover, prima
facie the delightful qualities we enjoy in one sense modality seem to
be wildly different from the sensory qualities we enjoy in any other
sensory modality; what it’s like to smell, for example, seems to
have nothing in common with what it’s like to see a colour. For
the panpsychist all this richness and variety results from fundamental
kinds of mental qualities, which panpsychists tend to suppose are
quite small in number (e.g., for Russellian monists basic conscious
properties are the intrinsic nature of the basic properties picked out
by physics, which are relatively few in number). The palette problem
(Chalmers 2016), expressed as metaphor, goes as follows: How is it
that the richly painted canvas of human experiences is produced from
such a small palette of paints? 
Numerous speculative solutions have been offered to the palette
problem. Patrick Lewtas (forthcoming) avoids the palette problem
altogether by postulating an enormous number of fundamental
micro-experiential properties, one corresponding to every basic
quality we find in human experience. Luke Roelofs (2014, 2015)
develops a form of constitutive micropsychism according to which we
cannot recognise or imagine the basic micro-conscious ingredients
which make up human consciousness, because we never experience them in
isolation from the extremely complex combinations we find in our
experience; given that we are unable even to imagine the
micro-conscious ingredients, we have no good reason to deny that those
ingredients are extremely small in number.  Keith Turausky (2012,
Other Internet Resources) considers the view that perhaps there is
just one fundamental mental quality that somehow contains all others,
in something like the way white light contains all colours.
Human conscious experience is not only rich in qualities, but also
rich in structure. For example visual experience appears to have a
structure that corresponds to the spatial environment being
experienced, and experience as a whole comes carved up into distinct
sensory modalities. The structure of our experience seems very
different from the structure of the brain, at either the micro or the
macro level. For the dualist this is of course not a worry, as the
conscious mind is a completely distinct entity from the brain.
However, many panpsychists believe that the conscious mind is
identical with, or bears a very intimate relationship with, the brain.
Most Russellian monists, for example, believe that the conscious mind
is the intrinsic nature of the brain. And all constitutive
micropsychists think that human experience is grounded in the
properties of micro-level entities. Thus, these forms of panpsychism
face the challenge of explaining how the rich structure of
consciousness results from, or at least co-exists with, the seemingly
very different structure of the brain. Perhaps the most discussed form
of the structural mismatch problem is the grain problem
(Maxwell 1979; Lockwood 1993): the worry that experiences seem to be
smooth and continuous in a way that is at odds with the discrete,
particularized structure of brain properties.
Again there are numerous proposals for addressing the worry. Michael
Lockwood (1993) suggests that the worry only arises when we are
implicitly thinking of the brain in terms of classical physics, and
that it evaporates when we explicitly adopt more recent scientific
paradigms. Stoljar (2001) argues that the alleged problem arises from
philosophers confusing the structure of consciousness itself with the
structure of what is represented by consciousness. Nagasawa &
Wager (2016) suggest that the problem goes away when we adopt
cosmopsychism rather than micropsychism, because we no longer suppose
that the structure of the macro-level brain is derived from its
structure at the micro-level. Roelofs (2015: 182–97) has argued,
echoing certain views of Leibniz and Spinoza, that the structure of
our conscious experience might outstrip our awareness of it. Goff
(2017: ch. 8) argues that we do find structure in the brain
isomorphic with the structure of consciousness, so long as we consider
less basic kinds of brain structure; and hence the moral of the story
is that there is much more consciousness present in the brain than we
ordinarily suppose, corresponding both to more basic and to less basic
brain structures (cf. Roelofs 2015: 213–28 and Chalmers 2016:
7.8).