There are several different ways to think about pantheism. (1) Many
of the world’s religious traditions and spiritual writings are
marked by pantheistic ideas and feelings. This is particularly so for
example, in Hinduism of the Advaita Vedanta school, in some varieties
of Kabbalistic Judaism, in Celtic spirituality, and in Sufi mysticism.
(2) Another vital source of pantheistic ideas is to be found in
literature, for example, in such writers as Goethe, Coleridge,
Wordsworth, Emerson, Walt Whitman, D.H. Lawrence, and Robinson Jeffers.
Although it should be added that, far from being limited to high
culture, pantheistic themes are familiar, too, in popular media, for
example in such films as Star Wars, Avatar, and The Lion
King. (3) Thirdly, as it is in this article, pantheism may be
considered philosophically; that is, a critical examination
may be made of its central ideas with respect to their meaning, their
coherence, and the case to be made for or against their acceptance.
A good way to understand any view is to appreciate the kind of
drives that may push someone towards it. What arguments may be given
for pantheism? Although there are a great many different individual
lines of reasoning that might be offered, generally they may be placed
under two heads; arguments ‘from below’, which start from
a posteriori religious experience, and arguments ‘from
above’, which start from a priori philosophical
abstraction.
Following the first type of argument, pantheistic belief arises when
the things of this world excite a particular sort of religious reaction
in us. We feel, perhaps, a deep reverence for and sense of
identity with the world in which we find ourselves.
Epistemically it seems to us that God is not distant but can be
encountered directly in what we experience around us. We see God in
everything. The initial focus of attention here may be either our
physical environment (the land on which we live, our natural
environment) or else our social environment (our community, our tribe,
our nation or, generally, the people we meet with) but further
reflection may lead to its more universal expansion.
In the second kind of argument, reasoning starts from a relatively
abstract concept whose application is taken as assured, but further
reflection leads to the conclusion that its scope must be extended to
include the whole of reality. Most typically, the concept in question
is that of ‘God’, or ‘perfect being’, in which
case pantheism appears as the logical terminus or completion of theism.
The following paragraphs illustrate four examples of such
reasoning.
(1) Traditional theism asserts the omnipresence of God and,
while it strongly wishes to maintain that this is not equivalent to
pantheism, the difference between saying that God is present
everywhere in everything and saying that God is
everything is far from easy to explain. If omnipresence means, not
simply that God is cognisant of or active in all places, but literally
that he exists everywhere, then it is hard to see how any finite being
can be said to have existence external to God. Indeed, for Isaac Newton
and Samuel Clarke divine omnipresence was one and the same thing as
space, which they understood as ‘the sensorium of God.’
(Oakes 2006)
(2) The traditional theistic position that God’s creation of the
universe is continuous can easily be developed in pantheistic
directions. The view that the world could not exist—even for a
second—without God, makes it wholly dependent on God and,
hence, not really an autonomous entity. (Oakes 1983) Moreover, to
further develop this argument, if God creates every temporal stage of
every object in the universe, this undermines the causal power of
individual things and leads to occasionalism, which in turn encourages
pantheism; for in so far as independent agency is a clear mark of
independent being, the occasionalist doctrine that all genuine agency
is divine—that it all comes from a single place—tends
to undermine the distinction of things from God. Both Malebranche and
Jonathan Edwards have found themselves charged with pantheism on these
grounds, and it was for this reason that Leibniz, in attempting to
refute the pantheistic monism of Spinoza, felt it most important to
assert the autonomous agency of finite beings.
(3) Alternatively it might be argued that God’s
omniscience is indistinguishable from reality itself. For if
there obtains a complete mapping between God’s knowledge and the
world that God knows, what basis can be found for distinguishing
between them, there being not even the possibility of a mismatch?
Moreover, were we to separate the two, since knowledge tracks reality
– we know something because it is the case and not vice versa
– then God would become problematically dependent upon
the world. (Mander 2000)
(4) Arguments of this general type may also proceed from starting
points more philosophical than theological. For example, Spinoza, the
most famous of all modern pantheists starts from the necessary
existence of something he calls ‘substance.’ By this he
means that which exists wholly in its own right, that whose existence
does not depend upon anything else. The notion of ‘the
Absolute’, or wholly unconditioned reality, as it figures in the
philosophies of Schelling, Hegel, and the British Idealists may be
considered a related development of the same philosophical starting
point. In both cases the reasoning runs that this necessary being must
be all-inclusive and, hence, divine.
The pantheist asserts an identity between God and nature, but it
needs to be asked in just what sense we are to understand the term
‘identity’? To begin with it is necessary to raise two
ambiguities in the logic of identity.
(1) Dialectical identity. It is important to note that many
pantheists will not accept the classical logic of identity in which
pairs are straightforwardly either identical or different. They may
adopt rather the logic of relative identity, or identity-in-difference,
by which it is possible to maintain that God and the cosmos are
simultaneously both identical and different, or to put the matter in
more theological language, that God is simultaneously both transcendent
and immanent. For example, Eriugena holds that the universe may be
subdivided into four categories: things which create but are not
created, things which create and are created, things which are created
but do not create, and things which neither create nor are created. He
argues that all four reduce to God, and hence “that God is in all
things, i.e. that he subsists as their essence. For He alone by Himself
truly has being, and He alone is everything which is truly said to be
in things endowed with being” (Periphyseon, 97). But
nonetheless, for Eriugena, the uncreated retains its distinct status
separate from the created, not least in that the former may be
understood while the later transcends all understanding. In
consequence, he insists that God is not the genus of which creatures
are the species. Similarly, the Sufi philosopher, ibn ‘Arabi
identifies God and the universe, suggesting in a striking metaphor that
the universe is the food of God and God the food of the universe; as
deity swallows up the cosmos so the cosmos swallows up deity.
(Bezels of Wisdom, 237; Husaini 1970, 180) But Ibn
‘Arabi in no sense regards such claims as preventing him from
insisting also on the fundamental gulf between the unknowable essence
of God and his manifest being. We must distinguish between the nature
of God and the nature of things, between that which exists by itself
(God) and that which exist by another (the universe), but since the
nature of God just is Being itself, no parallel distinction may be
drawn between the being of God and the being of things. Nothing real
exists besides God who discloses himself in and through the universe.
(Chittick 1989, ch.5) Again, Nicholas of Cusa’s celebrated
doctrine of the ‘coincidence of opposites’—which he
memorably illustrated by pointing to way in which, upon infinite
expansion, a circle must coincide with a straight line—allows
him to say both that God and the creation are the same thing
and that there exists a fundamental distinction between the
realm of absolute being and the realm of limited or contracted being.
(Moran 1990) Even Spinoza goes to great lengths to show that the two
attributes of thought and extension by which we pick
out the one substance as ‘God’ or ‘nature’ are
nonetheless at the same time irreducibly different. They may be
co-referring but they are not synonymous; indeed, they are utterly
incommensurable. Such a dialectical conception of unity, in which there
can be no identity without difference, is a strong element in
Hegel’s thought, and also one aspect of what Hartshorne meant by
dipolar theism; the opposites of immanence and transcendence
are included among those which he thinks God brings together in his
being.
(2) Partial Identity. Even accepting a classical conception of
identity and difference, there remain issues to settle. If we think of
pantheism negatively as a rejection of the view that God is distinct
from the cosmos, we would face four possible schemes by which we might
represent their merelogical relation: we might understand God as proper
part of nature, we might take nature as a proper part of God, we might
regard the two domains as partially overlapping, or else we might hold
that they are strictly identical.
Reflecting upon the ambiguities of the previous two paragraphs, it
might be argued that only where we find strict classical identity do we
have pantheism. For if the universe is not wholly divine we have mere
immanentism, while if God includes but is not exhausted by the
universe then we have rather panentheism. Now, certainly it
may be allowed there are metaphysical schemes for which the range of
overlap between divinity and the cosmos is so small that they fail to
capture the spirit of pantheism. (For example, a world-view in which
God were understood as the vital spark which animates an otherwise dead
and motionless cosmos, or a world-view in which the cosmos were merely
one small fraction of the being of God would indeed seem far from the
spirit of pantheism.) However, to limit the term’s application to
just those schemes advancing strict classical identity would be far too
restrictive.
Such ‘strict identity’ is virtually impossible to
define due to the extreme difficulty of stipulating what would count as
an acceptable and what as an unacceptable sense, part, aspect, or
element of difference. For example, Aquinas distinguishes between
the doctrine that God is the form of all things (‘formal
pantheism’) and the doctrine that God is the matter of all things
(‘material pantheism’) (Moran 1989, 86). Does either of
these count as pantheism ‘proper’, or must both obtain at
the same time? Again, while some pantheists conceive of deity in
mereological terms as the collection of things which make up the
universe, many others have found this approach inadequate, maintaining
that in some important sense ‘the whole is greater than the sum
of its parts.’ The finite things that we encounter around us and
are happy enough to describe as parts of nature we feel less
happy to think of as parts of God. Such theorists may also
reject the charge that their way of thinking is panentheistic,
maintaining that the proper lesson to draw is not one of the
transcendence of the holistic view but rather one concerning the degree
of unreality or abstraction involved in any distributed view. In short,
does any admission of difference between the world as
common-sense experiences it and the divine cosmos as pantheism
understands it amount to a concession either that there are aspects of
experience which fall outside deity or aspects of deity which fall
outside experience? If so, then the class of ‘true
pantheists’ threatens to become null. In the end, rather than
attempt to draw sharp but artificial and contentious lines it seems
more fruitful to maintain that the boundaries of demarcation between
immanence, pantheism, and panentheism are vague and porous.
This approach has the further advantage of keeping together
historically cognate thinkers. If the essence of pantheism lies in
strict classical identity, the issue of who is or is not a pantheist
comes down to the somewhat arcane dispute whether there could be any
conceivable aspect or side of reality which was not natural, and/or
whether there could be any conceivable aspect or side of reality which
was not divine, but these are abstruse points that can only take us
away from the fundamental pantheistic intuition of the overlap of God
and nature, the intuition that that in grasping the reality before us
we grasp God himself, not something separate or intermediary.
To say that God is identical with the world as a whole is
not self-explanatory and, although often the matter is left
disconcertingly vague, examination of the literature reveals a variety
of different understandings of the identity relation being asserted
here.
(1) Substance identity. For Spinoza the claim that God is the
same as the cosmos is spelled out as the thesis that there exists one
and only one particular substance which he refers to as ‘God or
nature’; the individual thing referred to as ‘God’ is
one and the same object as the complex unit referred to as
‘nature’ or ‘the cosmos.’ On such a scheme the
finite things of the world are thought of as something like
parts of the one great substance, although the terminology of
parts is somewhat problematic. Parts are relatively autonomous from the
whole and from each other, and Spinoza’s preferred terminology of
modes, which are to be understood as more like properties, is
chosen to rectify this. A further problem with the terminology of parts
is that many pantheists have wanted to claim that God or nature is not
just the whole or totality of things, but is somehow the inner essence
or heart of each individual thing. This may be expressed in
the idea that somehow the whole is present in each of its parts, a
suggestion whose meaning has often been left metaphorical or obscure.
Giordano Bruno, for example employs the two illustrations of a voice
heard in its entirety from all sides of the room, and that of a large
mirror which reflects one image of one thing but which, if it is
broken into a thousand pieces, each of the pieces still reflects the
whole image. (Bruno 1584, 50, 129) A thesis of the complete
interpenetration or interrelation of everything, the claim being made
here is related to that defended by Leibniz (who was not a pantheist)
that each monad is a mirror to the entire universe.
In Western philosophy Spinoza’s formulation of the pantheistic
position has become so influential as to almost complete define the
position, but while practically all pantheists are monists (of some
sort), not all are substance monists, and there do exist
alternative ways of expressing identity besides a head-count of the
number of particular entities.
(2) Being itself. There is a long theological tradition in
which God is regarded as being itself, rather than as one
being among others, and insofar as it treats God as something to be
found inseparable from and at the very root of all that is, such a
conception may be used to express pantheism. While a conceptual
distinction may be drawn between ‘the totality of beings’
and ‘being itself,’ it is clear that neither of these could
have any reality except in and through the other. The identification of
God with being itself is a common Christian view, from Augustine to
Tillich, but it is not exclusive to Christian thought. For example, Ibn
‘Arabi, in developing the Koranic notion of tawhīd
(God’s unity), asserts that there can be no real being other than
God; that God permeates through all beings and is essentially
all things. Especially among his followers this was developed into a
monistic ontology of wahdat al-wujūd (the unity of
being).
(3) Identity of origin. A third way to express the identity of
God and nature is by reference to the thought that all things come from
God, rendering them both identical with each other and with the one
source from which they came. It is important in this connection to
discuss the difference between such notions as emanation, expression,
or instantiation and the more specifically theistic conception of
creation ex nihilo, for given the plausibility of supposing
that what ‘flows forth’ or ‘radiates out’ from
a source is only latent within that stem, traditional theists have
often insisted on creation ex nihilo precisely to drive a
wedge between creator and created and thereby rule out pantheism. But
although it would be tempting to contrast creation ex nihio as
theistic and emanation as pantheistic, such thoughts are probably too
simple. Plotinus’ universe comprises in a hierarchy of emanations
from what he terms, the ‘One’; but as neither anything in
the cosmos nor the sum of all things in the cosmos, as an ideal
construction from which all expressions fall short, Plotinus’ God
is really too transcendent for his doctrine to count as pantheism
proper. Eriugena, by contrast, has an emanation-theory that is more
genuinely pantheist but, given his apophatic conception of God as
marked by both being and non-being, he regards this position as wholly
compatible with the doctrine of creation ex nihilo. To
Eriugena, God is precisely the nothing from which all things were made.
Spinoza approaches the question of origin from a rather different
angle. Arguing that God is the immanent cause of all things, he draws
an important distinction between natura naturans and
natura naturata; between the universe considered in active
mode as cause and the very same universe considered in passive mode as
effect (Ethics 1p29s). This is an important doctrine not least
for the way in which it links with necessity. Modelled more on the way
in which the theorems of geometry derive from its axioms than on the
sense in which a work of art results from the free or spontaneous
activity of its artist, pantheistic creation of this second type courts
a determinism that threatens to rule out free will. And that has
been a very common objection to pantheism.
(4) Teleological Identity. Religious world views in which it
is the ultimate destiny or purpose of the cosmos to achieve oneness
with or to fully express deity provide a fourth model for understanding
pantheistic claims of identity. The true identity of the universe is
that which is revealed at the end of all things. For example, on the
Absolute Idealist scheme, history culminates in the complete
realization of God or Absolute spirit in the world and so, as Schelling
put it, in the last days “God will indeed be all in all,
and pantheism will be true” (Schelling 1810, 484). A rather
different example of this type of thinking is that of Samuel Alexander
who thinks that the universe evolves in a steadily progressive manner
and will finally ‘attain deity’, where deity is thought of
as an unknown but superior quality that will ‘emerge’ from
the complex whole in rather the same way as, at a lower level,
consciousness ‘emerges’ from complex organisations of
organic matter. By way of objection to such teleological conception of
identity it might be challenged that something can only become merged
with God, or become God, if it is now different from God. But
against this it could be replied that, if the notion of teleology be
taken seriously, a thing more truly is what it is destined to
become than what it currently seems to be, for everything
about it is to be explained in terms of its telos or goal. It
may also be responded that anything which can be converted
into God cannot be finally different from God. Hence
Alexander, for example, is clear that since all potentiality must be
grounded in some actuality there is also a sense in which the universe
is already implicitly God: “God as actually possessing deity does
not exist but is an ideal, is always becoming; but God as the whole
universe tending towards deity does exist” (Alexander 1921,
428).
At least as usually understood the two terms ‘nature’
and ‘God’ have different and contrasting meanings. If they
are identified, it follows that one or both words are being used in a
different way than usual; that nature is more like God than commonly
thought and/or that God is more like nature than commonly thought. With
respect to the cosmos this may be seen in the stress pantheists
typically put on the unity of the cosmos.
A distinction may be drawn between distributive pantheism, the
view that each thing in the cosmos is divine, and collective
pantheism, the view that the cosmos as a whole is divine. (Oppy,
1994) And if polytheism in general is coherent there is no reason in
principle why we should exclude the possibility of a distributive
pantheism. But as in pursuit of explanatory unity and coherence belief
in many Gods tends historically to give way to belief in single deity,
while it would be technically possible to identify the universe with a
collection of deities, in practice monism tends to win out, and it has
been characteristic of pantheists to stress heavily the unity of
nature. Thus pantheism typically asserts a two-fold identity:
as well as the unity of God and nature, it urges the unity of all
things with each other.
It may be asked whether a statement of the world’s unity is a
precondition for asserting its identity with God, or a
consequence of asserting it? Is the intuition that the cosmos
constitutes a single integrated whole a contributory factor in thinking
it divine, or (reflecting the traditional idea that God is unique and
simple or without parts) is the intuition that it is divine the reason
for regarding it as such a unity?
The kind of unity which the pantheist thinks to find in nature can vary
from a very strong metaphysical oneness, like that of Parmenides, which
excludes all diversity or difference, to a much looser systematic
complex of distinct but inter-related elements, but the four species of
unity most commonly defended are: (1) the unity of all that falls
within the spatio-temporal continuum under a common set of physical
laws, (2) the reductive unity of a single material out of which all
objects are made and within which no non-arbitrary divisions can be
made, (3) the unity of a living organism, or (4) the more psychological
unity of a spirit, mind or person.
Besides commitment to the view that the cosmos as a whole is divine,
pantheists as a general class hold no specific theory about the
nature of that cosmos. There are three main traditions.
(1) Physicalism. Many pantheists argue that physical
conceptions are adequate to explain the entire cosmos. This is an
ancient form of pantheism, found for example in the Stoics, for whom
only bodies can be said to exist. Soul they understood as nothing more
than a specific form of pneuma, or breath, the active power to
be found throughout nature. This is also a form of pantheism popular
today—often termed, scientific or naturalistic pantheism. Such
worldviews make no ontological commitments beyond those sanctioned by
empirical science.
(2) Idealism. During the nineteenth century, when pantheism
was at its most popular, the dominant form was idealist. According to
Absolute Idealism, as defended by such figures as Fichte, Schelling,
Hegel, and many of the British Idealists, all that exists is a single
spiritual entity, of which the physical world must be understood as a
partial manifestation. The search for that which may be asserted
without condition or qualification leads to the conclusion that all
variety is the expression of an underlying unity, and that nothing can
be real in the absence of mind or spirit. On some versions of this sort
of doctrine the physical world starts to look more like an
appearance of the ultimate spiritual (or possibly unknown)
reality beneath. Hegel himself rejects this sort of doctrine
—which he terms acosmism—and while it certainly
amounts to a view that there exists nothing besides God, in view of its
basic denial of the reality of the world we all experience it hardly
seems like a kind of pantheism.
(3) Dual-aspect theory. The pantheism of Spinoza is of neither
these types. For Spinoza, there is one thing which expresses itself, or
which may be understood, in two different ways, either as thinking
substance or as extended substance. The principle difficulty of any
such position is to further specify that ambiguous relationship, whilst
simultaneously avoiding the twin but opposed pitfalls of reductionism
and dualism.
Pantheists holds that whatever exists falls within God. This places
them in disagreement with any theory of the supernatural. But
such opposition must not be misunderstood, for to say that there is no
supernatural realm is not in itself to delineate the range of what is
natural. This is important, for while many contemporary pantheists have
been epistemologically conservative, there is no reason in
principle why the pantheist should oppose the idea of that which
is epistemically transcendent to us, no reason (that is) why he should
seek to limit the compass of the universe to the known
universe. For example, Spinoza held, not only that the realms of
thought and extension must stretch indefinitely beyond our finite
grasp, but that, as well as in the two known realms of thought and
extension, the one substance must exist also in an infinity of other
dimensions completely beyond our power to conceive.
One of the strongest and most commonly raised objections to
pantheism is that it is simply inappropriate to call the universe
‘God’. Thus Schopenhauer complains that “Pantheism is
only a euphemism for atheism,” for “to call the world God
is not to explain it; it is only to enrich our language with a
superfluous synonym for the word world” (Schopenhauer 1851,
I:114, II:99). It has been described as nothing more than
‘materialism grown sentimental,’ (Illingworth 1898, 69)
while more recently Richard Dawkins in The God Delusion
complains that “Pantheism is sexed-up Atheism” (Dawkins
2007, 40). It is clear that the more naturalistically the cosmos is
conceived the stronger that objection must seem, but to estimate more
carefully its validity the following six sections take in turn a number
of characteristics which the cosmos possesses or might possess and
which could be thought to make it divine. We may proceed from the least
to the most contested, noting that not all pantheists will agree on all
marks.
Most straightforwardly it has been maintained that the One is holy
because we feel a particular set of religious emotions towards it.
(Levine 1994, ch.2.2) For Rudolf Otto, (1917) whatever is holy or
‘numinous’ is so characterised on the basis of our
non-rational, non-sensory experience of it rather than its own
objective features and, taking its departure from Otto’s work,
one approach has been to argue that the feelings of awe which people
feel towards God can be, and often are, applied to the universe itself.
Whether it is really possible, or appropriate, to entertain such
feelings towards the cosmos as a whole will be discussed below, but the
chief point to make here concerns the extreme subjectivism of this
response; it’s coming to rest upon feelings which, while sincere
enough, indicate nothing whatsoever about the universe itself. On this
view, all that distinguishes a pantheist from an atheist is
feeling; a certain emotional reaction or connection that we
feel to the universe. It would become akin, say, to the difference
between one who loves art and another who is relatively indifferent to
it. Prima facie, however, this approach puts the cart before
the horse; rather than say that the One is divine because we feel a set
of religious emotions towards it, it seems more appropriate to suppose
that we feel those emotions towards it because we think it is
divine.
Religion gives meaning to human lives by assigning them a certain
definite place within a grander scheme or narrative. It gives its
adherents a sense of their part in a coherent universe. It tells us
that the universe is not a random conjunction of brute facts, but a
whole in which we have our proper location. The pantheist may regard
the cosmos as divine for very similar reasons. To think of oneself as
part of a vast interconnected scheme may give one a sense of being
‘at home in the universe.’ Here ecological thinking
may come to the fore; like the individual creatures in a complex
ecosystem, small but vital contributors to a larger whole, we too may
be thought to have our place in the connected whole that is Nature.
Historically the majority of pantheists have regarded the universe
as Infinite, metaphysically perfect, necessarily existent, and eternal
(or some subset thereof) and—taking these attributes as the
characteristic marks of divinity—that has formed one very
important reason for thinking that the universe itself is in fact
God.
In more recent times, however, there have arisen naturalistic or
scientific forms of pantheism which reject or are neutral about these
characteristics and, while they remove one important set of reasons for
thinking the cosmos divine, so long as others remain, the amputation in
itself seems insufficient reason to refuse the label
‘pantheist’ to such views. Any methodology which limits
itself to empirical science will presumably find it hard to attribute
anything like infinitude or necessary existence to the cosmos, while
approaches which do find a role for such features will need to be
careful that they understand them in an appropriate fashion. (For
example, it is doubtful that mere infinite extent, or infinite
divisibility, in space and time would be sufficient to merit that the
universe be called divine.) But with these caveats aside the pantheist
is not without arguments for believing that the universe as a whole
displays marks of metaphysical perfection.
The earliest arguments for such a view are to be found in the
pre-Socratic philosopher Anaximander who held that the universe emerges
from what he termed ‘to apeiron,’ a complex notion
which may be rendered as the infinite, the boundless or the indefinite.
Anaximander’s thought seems to have been that the ground by which
all qualitative characteristics are explained must itself lack any
determination. Insofar as we can construct his reasons, he argued that
some such boundless potentiality was need to ensure the continual
coming to be and passing away in the world that characterises the
passing of time. As something thus immortal and indestructible,
Anaximander concluded that the infinite was also divine. (Aristotle,
Physics, 203b)
It is notable that much of the same reasoning that theists employ in
the Kalaam cosmological argument for the existence of God may be used
for the universe itself. If we inquire into the origin of the universe,
it may be suggested (1) that it simply began without reason, (2) that
it was somehow self-creating, or (3) that its origin requires a prior
cause which in turn calls for an infinite causal chain. Each of these
answers has sufficient problems such that one might well prefer to
argue instead, (4) that the universe in fact exists necessarily.
But perhaps the most commonly used argument among pantheists has been
the ontological argument. As employed by classical theism this line of
argument has been much criticised, but the forms in which it has been
put forward by pantheists (such as Spinoza and Hegel) are interestingly
different. On their way of thinking, the more perfect an idea becomes
the less room there remains for any gap between it and its
instantiation, but no idea becomes perfect simply by defining itself to
be so. This can be shown only by a full development of its content
amounting to nothing less than a complete philosophical system.
(Harrelson 2009)
A fourth feature commonly taken to mark the divinity of God is his
ineffability. If he is so much greater than anything else, anything we
say of him would limit or falsify him, so we can speak at best in
negatives, or simply conclude that he is an ineffable mystery. It would
be hard to think of a line of reasoning less congenial to the
rationalist spirit that has characterised many pantheists, for example
scientific pantheism.
At the same time it must be allowed that there is a strong apophatic
streak in much pantheism. In contrast to his teacher, Thales, who
thought it possible to specify the ground of all things as water, for
Anaximander the one source from which cosmos comes forth (to
apeiron) is construed precisely in terms of its resistance to any
determinate characterisation, while both Eriugena and Ibn ‘Arabi
stress that although the God of which we can speak is identical with
the cosmos, there remains another sense in which we cannot speak of God
at all. The essence of God considered in himself, the universal ground
of being cannot itself be captured by any of the limited categories
which flow out from it. Even Spinoza suggests that the highest stages
of knowledge consist in a form of intuitive insight, which transcends
mere reasoning or conceptual knowledge in that it enables us to grasp
the essence of individual things. Part of what he calls ‘the
intellectual love of God’, such scientia intuitiva is
itself assigned a salvific role in Spinoza’s thought; it is the
path to human blessedness.
Einstein was a pantheist but rejected any notion of a personal God.
(Einstein 2010, 325) And like Einstein, for many pantheists rejection
of a personal deity is the definitive mark or most important element of
their position. (Levine 1994; Harrison 2004) However, the matter calls
for more considered attention.

It is important to distinguish between the specific question of whether
God is literally a ‘person’ and the more general question
whether God is ‘person-like’; the issue of whether
notions such as intellect, thought, consciousness, intent, etc. have
any application to the divine, even if analogical or metaphorical. It
should also be recognised both that the notion of personhood is itself
deeply problematic, and that a not inconsiderable number of traditional
theists would only with considerable qualification be prepared
to allow that God is personal.
These points made, while it is true that traditional theism has
regularly opposed pantheism on the grounds that it tends to be
impersonal, and true also that many pantheists would deny that God is
personal, it is nonetheless the case that many other pantheists have
thought mind-like attribution of some form or other to the cosmos
absolutely central to their position.
It is clear that pantheistic systems which start from the theistic God
which they then find to be all-inclusive, or Absolute Idealist systems
which derive all reality from a spiritual principle, will find it
easier to attribute something like personhood to the cosmos than will
those which are more naturalistically motivated. But it is important to
realise that not even the latter are wholly resistant to
personhood.
For example, it has been argued (Baltzly 2003) that the Stoics believed
in a personal deity. Just as they construed human beings as physical
creatures animated by a physical soul, so too they regarded God as the
mind of the world—with the cosmos as his body. Like a vast
biological individual, to them God was a conscious rational being,
exercising providence over life and to whom we might approach in
prayer.
Spinoza’s God is an “infinite intellect”,
(Ethics 2p11c) all knowing, (2p3) and capable of loving both
himself—and us, insofar as we are part of his perfection.
(5p35c) And if the mark of a personal being is that it is one towards
which we can entertain personal attitudes, then we should note too that
Spinoza recommends amor intellectualist dei (the intellectual
love of God) as the supreme good for man. (5p33) However, the matter is
complex. Spinoza’s God does not have free will (1p32c1), he does
not have purposes or intentions (1appendix), and Spinoza insists that
“neither intellect nor will pertain to the nature of God”
(1p17s1). Moreover, while we may love God, we need to remember that God
is really not the kind of being who could ever love us back. “He
who loves God cannot strive that God should love him in
return,” says Spinoza (5p19).
Another notable pantheist to insist that the supreme being is personal
was Gustav Fechner, who develops a form of panpsychism according to
which all organised matter must be thought of as possessing its own
inner life or soul. The more complex and developed its structure, the
more sophisticated its spiritual life; from the lowest soul-life of
plants, through our own mental life, which is just the inner side of
our bodies, through the soul-life of the planets and stars up to the
most developed spirit of all, God, the consciousness which corresponds
to the most complex organism there is, the cosmos itself. More
recently, a very similar view has been put forward by Timothy Sprigge
who maintains that that the only conceivable form of reality consists
in streams of experience, such as we know ourselves to be, all of which
must be thought of as included together within a single all-embracing
experience; which we may call God or the Absolute. Sprigge, however, is
more cautious than Fechner insofar as he declines to identify any
physical systems other than those of animals (including human beings)
that can confidently be said to possess their own inner conscious life.
(Sprigge 2006, ch.9) Against the idea that God is some type of
all-embracing spirit or person it is often complained that this would
undermine the autonomous personhood of finite individuals; for can one
person be part of another? Fechner suggests as a model for
understanding this the way in which our different sense modalities
(sight, smell, touch, etc), each inaccessible to each other, combine
together into one unified consciousness. (Fechner 1946, 144) While to
extend such a model beyond the merely receptive to the active aspects
of personhood, we might think of the way in which the agency of an
organisation is exercised through the agency of its individual members.
Here several pantheists have been influenced by Christian ideas of the
indwelling spirit of God at work within the body of the Church.
Sixthly (and perhaps most importantly of all) it is widely thought
that the most important thing about God—thing that most makes
us call him ‘God’—is his perfection or goodness.
God is a being ‘worthy of worship.’ Can the pantheist say
this of the cosmos as a whole? A variety of positions are possible. (1)
Any pantheistic world-view arrived at by extending the reach of the
traditional theistic God will find it relatively easy to assert the
same value to the cosmos that it attributed to God, but there are other
possibilities as well. (2) Insofar as the pantheist assertion of unity
may be understood as an assertion of complete and coherent integration,
and disvalue held to lie in conflict, disharmony or incompleteness,
then it may be possible to argue that the culmination of metaphysical
unity constitutes also the culmination of value. For example, the
Absolute Idealist Bernard Bosanquet states, “We cannot describe
perfection; that is, we cannot enumerate its components and state their
form and connection in detail. But we can define its character as the
harmony of all being. And good is perfection in its character of
satisfactoriness; that which is considered as the end of conations and
the fruition of desires” (Bosanquet 1913,194). (3) More
naturalistically, it might be suggested than pantheism tells us that
nature is our proper home and, as such, our proper good. Everything has
its place in a wider system which both supports it and to which it
contributes. As natural creatures our most fulfilling life is found in
and at one with nature. (4) Lastly, it should be noted that many
scientific pantheists argue that nature has no intrinsic value
whatsoever. It is merely something that we happen to love and
venerate in the highest degree.
Historically one of the strongest and most persistent objections to
pantheism is that, because of its all-encompassing nature, it seems
inhospitable to the differentiations of value that characterise life.
In what might be thought of as a pantheistic version of the problem of
evil, it is challenged that if God includes everything and God is
perfect or good, then everything which exists ought to be perfect or
good; a conclusion which seems wholly counter to our common experience
that much in the world is very far from being so. Or to put the
argument slightly differently, if whatever we do or however things turn
out must be deemed the action of God, how can our pantheistic belief
demand of us any specific duty? The only alternative conclusion, if we
wish to hold on to the difference between what is good and what is bad,
would seem to be equally unattractive claim that a universe
containing both values, in itself possesses
neither; the pantheistic deity in its own being lies beyond
good and evil.
To point out that classical theism faces its own difficulties over evil
and God’s providence, while it may level the playing field, does
nothing in itself to help solve the puzzle, and pantheists themselves
have suggested a variety of explanations or theodicies. (1) The most
popular model for dealing with evil is found in the philosophy of
Spinoza who regards both error and evil as distortions that result from
the fragmentary view of finite creatures; phenomena real enough to the
finite beings who experience them but which would disappear in the
widest and final vision of God. In this he was, of course, developing
the Stoic sense that if we could see the world as God does, as the
perfectly harmonious embodiment of the logos, we would
recognise how its apparent defects in fact contribute to the goodness
of the whole. (2) It may be responded also that the objection that
pantheism councils moral indifference is based on a modal confusion,
comparable to that made by the proponent of logical determinism. If
pantheism amounts to a doctrine of providence, it is true that what
actually happens will be for the best, but it certainly does not follow
from that that whatever else might have happened would
have been for the best, and it possible that part at least of the
perfection of the cosmos comes about through our own individual moral
choices.
Although not all pantheists ascribe intrinsic value to the cosmos as
a whole, insofar as they do, that might be thought give rise to
something of a puzzle. For if God is valuable and God is identical to
the universe then we might seem committed to the somewhat implausible
thought that everything in the universe is equally valuable; a
leveling off which gave rise to Coleridge’s complaint that
‘everything God’ and ‘no God’ are in effect
identical positions. (Coleridge 1839, 224) The pantheist need not be
committed to this view, however, for the fact that a certain feature or
element is present in everything by no means entails that it is
equally present in everything. Although the universe as a
whole may be divine, there is no need to regard each bit of it as
uniformly divine; no need (for example) to feel quite the same about
the loss of biological species as we do about the disappearance of
human cultures and languages. Historically, there have been two main
ways in which pantheists have regarded the distribution of value in the
universe.
(1) Emphasis on nature. Most typically pantheism is
characterized by deep love and reverence for the natural world insofar
as it exists independently of human culture or civilization. The
pantheist finds God more in the waterfall or the rainforest than in the
car park or the gasworks. From the romantic period onwards this is a
very strong drive in both literary and popular pantheism, with urban
and technological life regarded as at best a kind of self-interested
anthropocentric distortion of true value and at worst even a kind of
loss or separation from divinity.
If uncultivated nature is divine then the pantheist may
legitimately conclude that it should be treated with respect, even as
sacred. Such is the import of Aldo Leopold’s ‘land
ethic’ (1949) or the ‘deep ecology’ of Arne Næss,
(1973) and many modern pantheists have developed close connections with
environmentalism. But neither the import nor the justification of such
ideas are straightforward. It might be suggested that as no one person
ought to put their own interests before another, neither ought any
species to put itself ahead of another, nor the sentient ahead of the
insentient, nor the living ahead of the non-living. But with each
further step this argument becomes harder to press, due to the extreme
difficulty of identifying—and weighing—such potentially
conflicting interests. For example, unless the pantheist is some sort
of panpsychist, he will not regard natural objects such as rivers or
mountains as possessing sentience, purpose or interests of its own;
which means that treating them with respect cannot be modelled on what
it means to treat people or animals with respect.
(2) Emphasis on humanity. A second and very different model
for understanding the relationship between divinity and value
maintains that God is most revealed in human culture and history. For
the Stoics, Reason or logos—the essence of the
world—though it underlies all things, is more strongly manifest
in some (such as human life) than in others, while the virtues of
stoic detachment and self-sufficiency preclude our true good being
held hostage to the state of anything external to ourselves, such as
nature. This pair of attitudes is summed up in Cicero’s
notorious assertion that all things were made for either Gods or
men. (Holland 1997, Baltzly 2003) But probably the best illustration
of this more anthropocentric way of thinking about value is the
Hegelian system, in which Geist —the spirit whose
manifestation is the universe—articulates itself in a
developmental sequence of increasingly adequate expressions (which may
or may not also be temporal) up from the most basic abstractions of
merely physical nature, through the organic realm, up to its apex in
the concrete details of social and cultural life. The beauties of
nature are valued as an approximation to those of art, and the
development of ethical life (Sittlichkeit) is literally
“the march of God in the world” (Hegel 1821, 247).
If, as we have suggested, there is room for value in pantheism then
there is room for ethics. But does pantheism prescribe any specific
ethics? There are two respects in which pantheism might be thought to
have significant ethical implications.
Firstly, for pantheism, there is no higher power, no external authority
to tell us what to do. Insofar as it rejects any sense of a
transcendent external lawgiver or—to put the matter more
positively—insofar as it regards deity as the distributed
possession of all, pantheism may be represented as endorsing the
Kantian doctrine of the autonomy of ethical judgement. But the
implications of this are open. It can lead to either democratic
communitarian ethics or to individualism. Paradoxically, it might
equally well result in a species of conservative conformity to whatever
is deemed to be the ‘natural state’ of the world every bit
as stifling to the human spirit as conformity to whatever is deemed to
be ‘the will of God.’
Secondly, it may be argued that pantheism is able to give a
particularly strong ground for an ethic of altruism or compassion. To
Schopenhauer (with whom this argument is particularly associated) only
genuinely altruistic or compassion actions have moral worth, but only
pleasure and pain are capable of motivating the will, from which he
concludes that genuinely moral action is possible only if the pleasure
and pain of others can stir us to action as directly and immediately as
can our own pleasure and pain. It is not enough that we sympathetically
imagine ourselves in their shoes, he argues, we must literally feel the
pleasure and pain of others as our own, an attitude that will be
rationally grounded only in a monistic metaphysics in which the
distinction between ego and not ego becomes a trivial or illusory one
between two manifestations of the same underlying unity. (Schopenhauer
1839) Schopenhauer includes nonhuman animals in this argument. To the
charge that what is defended here remains but a species of
egoism—metaphysically enlarged, but still morally 
worthless—it may be replied that self-concern is to be deprecated only
insofar as it is something that exists in contrast with concern for
others; a contrast which no longer finds any purchase in this
scheme.
Religion is a form of life, not a philosophical theory. Thus theism
is not itself a religion, although it lies at the core of many
religions, and neither is pantheism itself a religion, although a core
of pantheistic belief has unquestionably grounded the religion of many
people.
No doubt many pantheists self-consciously and deliberately reject
theism, while many theists strongly reject pantheism. But to conclude
from this that pantheism should be understood as essentially
opposed to theism would seem precipitous (like concluding mutual
incompatibility from the fact that many Christians oppose socialism and
many socialists oppose Christianity). Without being drawn into
doctrinal questions well outside the purview of this essay, two points
may be made. Many philosophers who have put forward pantheist beliefs
have thought there was no need for anyone who accepted them to abandon
traditional religion (for example, Spinoza, Hegel, or Edward 
Caird—who argues that “the religious consciousness is not the
consciousness of another object than that which is present in finite
experience and science, but simply a higher way of knowing the same
object,” (1892, 464) but whom nonetheless considered himself
Christian.) From the other side, many committed theologians have
advanced positions with deeply pantheistic implications (e.g. the
‘Christian Pantheism’ of Teilhard de Chardin or the
‘Ethical Pantheism’ of Albert Schweitzer.)
It is sometimes objected that pantheism cannot really be religious on
the grounds that it can make no sense to direct at the cosmos
the religious attitudes and emotions—worship, love, 
gratitude—which are more normally directed towards a person.
(Levine 1994, 315) (This is, of course, to assume that the pantheistic
God is not personal; a claim which, as we have seen, many
pantheists would reject.) Worship is commonly an expression of
dependence on a personal creator God, but, even if we don’t
approve of their doing so, people worship many other things, such as
money, fashion, the State, or idols, without necessarily assuming that
these have residing within them some conscious spirit or other. Love is
more usually felt towards people, but Wordsworth described himself as a
‘lover of nature’ (Tintern Abbey) while Byron
thought it possible to love his country but not his countrymen. (Byron
1854, 25) We typically thank a person, but it is possible also to feel
gratitude which transcends any feeling to particular individuals to an
institution (such as a college, community, or even State) which has
nurtured you. In each case there remains room for doubt whether these
attitudes are really equivalent to the sort of emotions more typically
associated with religion, but equally it is hard to see on what
legitimate grounds emotions might excluded from consideration as
‘not properly religious.’
In most religions prayer is not simply the expression of worship, love,
and gratitude, but an act in which we petition the deity for
intercession. We can petition the theistic God, but can we petition the
universe itself? Most pantheists have thought not, but where the cosmos
is conceived as personal, or at least moral, room may exist to develop
such ideas. Construing the entire universe as a conscious being,
Fechner argues that it makes perfect sense to petition it; the only
difference being that normal requests must be expressed since the
object to which they are directed lies outside of us, but in the case
of God this is unnecessary since we exist already within him. (Fechner
1946, 242–6) Even if not personal, so long as it could be said that the
universe exhibits a moral narrative structure there is no reason to
insist that that structure be independent of the moral needs or
requests of creatures within it. (Mander 2007)
A common mark of religion is its soteriological character, its
recognition that the human condition is somehow unsatisfactory or
‘fallen’ and its offer to overcome this state through a
process of human transformation, be the result of that renovation
enduring happiness or some more elevated state of blessedness or
nirvana. Can pantheism respond to this? Can it offer the
believer hope for a better life?
If all that is hoped for is the well-being that comes from a more
ethical mode of existence, then pantheism is perfectly able to offer
this, supporting a value system which eschews selfishness in favour of
a wider concern. For example the American poet Robinson Jeffers
suggests that “there is peace, freedom, I might say a kind of
salvation, in turnings one’s affections outwards towards this one
God, rather than inwards on one’s self, or on humanity”
(Jeffers 2009, 365) But some other pantheists have sought to offer
something further. Pantheist systems with a teleological structure
(such as those discussed in Section Four above) readily lend themselves
to soteriology on a grand scale; for example, while to Spinoza the
highest state of human happiness consists in the intellectual love of
God (a state not dissimilar to the Beatific Vision), Hegel outlines a
developmental scheme whose climax consists in the full and explicit
self-manifestation of God.
In many traditional religions salvation has been linked to immortality.
Against this, it has been common among pantheists to argue that what is
distinctive about pantheism is precisely its disavowal of any hope for
personal immortality. However, some have argued that a measure of
endurance may be found in so far as we recognize our real identity
with, either the eternal universe (for example, Schopenhauer
1851, 267–82) or, perhaps more specifically with the ongoing life of
our community (for example, John Caird 1880.) A small number of
pantheistic thinkers have attempted to develop more genuinely personal
senses of immortality. For example, Spinoza controversially claims that
“The human mind cannot be absolutely destroyed with the body, but
something of it remains which is eternal” (Ethics
e5p23). Josiah Royce, in his early Absolute Idealist phase, attempted to
argue that if our finite will, which in this life is never quite
satisfied, is itself but a part of a greater infinite will that is
eternally satisfied, then that can only mean that we must find our
share of that satisfaction “in a life that is not this present
mortal life” (Royce 1906, 147).