Charles Sanders Peirce was a philosopher, but it is not easy to
classify him in philosophy because of the breadth of his work.  Logic
was one of the main topics on which Peirce wrote.  If one focuses on
logic, however, it becomes apparent that Peirce's concept of logic and
his work on logic were much broader than his predecessors', his
contemporaries', and ours.  Peirce located logic in his large
architectonic framework of philosophy, which is why some philosophers
strongly believe that Peirce's logic cannot be properly understood
without understanding his pragmatism and his semiotics, to mention but
two of his other contributions.  Even within the traditional
boundaries of logic, Peirce made too many contributions to outline in
a single article.
Acknowledging the nature of this next-to-impossible task, we focus
on Peirce's revolutionary achievements as follows: extending the
horizon of logic in two dimensions, one from monadic properties to
relations and the other from symbolic to diagrammatic systems. While
the former contribution has positioned Peirce as a founder of modern
logic along with Frege, it took much longer for Peirce's latter
achievement to receive proper attention from logicians. The main goal
of this entry is not only to present Peirce's accomplishments in
extending both logic and logical systems, but also to explore the
relation between these two novel developments.
In the next section, we locate the root of Peirce's introduction of
quantifiers and bound variables. Starting with his 1870 paper
“Description of a Notation for the Logic of Relatives, Resulting
from an Amplification of the Conceptions of Boole's Calculus”
(DNLR), we follow the steps Peirce took until he presented the final
form of his first-order logic in his 1885 paper “On the Algebra
of Logic: A Contribution to the Philosophy of Notations.” Our
focus is on the main motivation behind Peirce's search for a new logic
rather than on the details of the final product that could represent
relations.  Interestingly enough, we find that the same
goal—when viewed from a slightly different angle—is also a
driving force behind Peirce's new diagrammatic system, Existential
Graphs (‘EG’ henceforth), that is, how to represent
relational states of affairs in a better way. This is the topic of
the third section. Again, it is important to
remember that Peirce's Existential Graphs are not just an expansion of
logical languages but also underline Peirce's new approach to logic
and formalization.
Finally, there is a brief discussion of Peirce's notes on developing
semantics for three-valued logic in the supplement:
  Peirce's Three-Valued Logic.
Independently of one another, Peirce and Frege introduced quantifiers
and bound variables in a large leap from the traditional
Aristotelian logic to modern logic. What is the essence of the leap
made by Peirce and Frege?  Is it just a matter of introducing new
notation, i.e., quantifiers and variables, so that we may more easily
formalize our reasoning?  Nobody could deny the power of formalization
which has led early 20th century mathematicians to surprising
achievements and
 results.[1]
If so, modern logic would simply be Aristotelian logic plus
quantifiers/variables. This would equate one of Peirce's main
contributions to logic to the simple increase of the scope of
formalization. Thus, those who believe that increasing the scope of
formalization is equivalent to increasing the scope of logic would
agree with this evaluation.
While acknowledging the enormous impact of the adoption of
quantifiers and bound variables on the world of logic and mathematics,
we will explore Peirce's insight behind the new formalism. In
this section, we will show how Peirce's conviction about the novelty
of the logic of relatives led him to the invention of
quantifiers/variables. Hence, quantification theory, according to
Peirce, is not a matter of an extension of formal vocabulary, but an
expansion into territory that is qualitatively different from what
Aristotelian logic covers.
Peirce's 1885 paper “On the Algebra of Logic: A Contribution
to the Philosophy of Notations” has been considered to be the
place where Peirce's quantification theory was fully presented.  This
is why we hear that there is a six year interval between
Frege's Begriffsschrift (1879) and Peirce's quantification
theory.  Since Peirce was not aware of Frege's work on the topic, it
is correct give credit to both logicians for their work on the
foundations of modern logic.  Nonetheless, there are two main reasons
why Frege's contribution to the foundations of modern logic is
distinctive: (i) Frege's Begriffsschrift was published before
Peirce's “On the Algebra of Logic,” and (ii) Frege
presented a logical system equipped with axioms and rules. Though
the matter is controversial, we do not plan to pursue it in this
entry.
But the story has some twists.  One is that Peirce's 1870 paper
exhibits his struggle for the essential feature of modern
logic—the algebra of relations and quantified phrases, as we
will see in section 2.1.  The other interesting
fact is that Peirce's work and notations were much better known to
contemporary logicians, and we had to wait for Russell to reintroduce
Frege's first ‘discovery’ of quantifiers (Putnam 1982).
For example, Ernst Schröder's Vorlesungen über die
Algebra der Logik (1895) adopted Peirce's notation.  Hence,
strictly speaking, the Frege-first view seems to be a more recent
phenomenon than Peirce's/Frege's era.
Some Peirce scholars have also claimed that Peirce's invention of
quantifiers is a product of Peirce's own philosophy of logic, which is
different from
 Frege's.[2]
Hintikka's (1997) proposal to explain a main difference between
Frege's and Peirce's contribution to modern logic is quite intriguing.
Borrowing van Heijenoort's distinction between Boole's logic as a
calculus and Frege's universality of logic, Hintikka locates Peirce in
Boole's camp, calling it the model-theoretic tradition.  Unlike
Frege's view of the universe, the model-theoretic tradition allows us
to reinterpret a language and thus assign different universes to
quantifiers. Acording to Hintikka, Peirce's development of modal logic
is a good piece of evidence to show how fruitful Peirce's way of
understanding quantifiers could be (Hintikka 1997).  At the same time,
Hintikka suggests that the recent Frege-first view is symptomatic of a
larger prejudice against the model-theoretic tradition and a
bias towards the
universalist tradition of logic.  Some have speculated that the
somewhat unique and unfortunate circumstances surrounding Peirce's
life might be related to his reputational lag. Perice had no regular
academic job and no luck with the publication of the major portion of
his work on logic; he was unpopular among mainstream academics, and a
certain obscurity was found in his writings.
It is not a goal of the present entry to settle this debate. The
point is not to determine who deserves the credit as the founder of
modern logic, but rather to appreciate the novelty of the contribution
that each logician made to overall development of modern logic.  In
what follows, we focus on Peirce's own developments and aim to show
that Peirce's insight about special features of relations (as opposed
to non-relations, i.e., properties) is the main driving force behind
his inventions of both his quantification theory and his graphical
systems.  Hence, we claim that Peirce's invention of
quantifiers/variables is not just an introduction of new notation, but
a reflection of Peirce's deep insight into a new logic to come.
First, we will examine how Peirce's work on relations transformed into
quantification theory.
Peirce's 1870 paper “Description of a Notation for the Logic
of Relatives, Resulting from an Amplification of the Conceptions of
Boole's Calculus” (DNLR) is the first place where Peirce
presented the logic of relations in a full length, and his 1885 paper
“On the Algebra of Logic: A contribution to the Philosophy of
Notations” is where his quantification theory was presented
in a comprehensive together with axiomlike
 “icons”.[3]
As the title suggests,  DNLR extends the territory of logic from non-relations to
relations while remaining faithful to Boole's algebraic
notation.[4]
 First, it is well-known
that a problem with Boole's existential propositions (as opposed to
universal propositions) motivated Peirce and others to go beyond
Boole's logic.[5]
  It is
somewhat instructive to compare the following three notations for
Aristotelian
 statements:[6]
It is clear that all three logicians had quantification (i.e.,
“all” and “some”) in mind, but it is far from
clear whether Boole's problematic representation of existential
statements caused Peirce to invent or move on to a notation for
quantifiers and variables in something like a first-order logic. In
light of Mitchell's more elaborate representation for two-dimensional
propositions (Mitchell 1883: 87), some who believe that this is the
case have argued that Mitchell's use of quantifiers was the direct
source for Peirce's introduction of quantifiers and bound variables
(Geraldine Brady 1997).  There is a strong possibility that Mitchell
influenced Peirce's notation for quantifiers and bound variables
(which appear in his 1885 paper).  But, we need to note that
Mitchell's subscript does not function as a bound variable.  More
importantly, this view might overlook one crucial aspect of Peirce's
quantification logic, namely his effort to mathematize and/or
formalize relations.  Hence, we cannot talk about Peirce's
quantification logic without mentioning De Morgan's influence, in
particular with regards to his writing on relations in logic.
The following picture emerges: Inspired by Boole's algebra of
logic, but at the same time taking his father's (Professor Benjamin
Peirce) negative view of logic
 seriously,[7]
Peirce explored a way to extend Boole's spirit to a larger domain of
our reasoning.  The title of the 1870 paper spells out the project:
“Description of a notation for the logic of relatives, resulting
from an amplification of the conceptions of Boole's calculus of
logic.” The paper started with mentioning De Morgan's work on
  relations (1864)
 but after several examples concluded that
“[t]his system [De Morgan's system] still leaves something to be
desired.” By praising Boole's work in the next sentence, Peirce
hinted at his plan to bring in the algebra of logic to improve the
shortcomings of De Morgan's system.  On the other hand, Boole's
algebra of logic is “restricted to that simplest and least
useful part of the subject, the logic of absolute
terms” (DNLR CP:3.45). Hence, Peirce's project is 
to
inquire whether it [Boole's algebra of logic] cannot be extended over
the whole realm of formal logic … [and] to show that an affirmative
answer can be given to this question. (DNLR CP:3.45)
 What
does he mean by ‘the whole realm of formal logic’?  Peirce answers:
“Deductive logic can really not be understood without the study
of the logic of relatives” (1902 CP:3.641).
Correctly believing that traditional Aristotelian logic was too
limited to be used for comprehensive deductive reasoning, Peirce
sought to extend the algebra of logic beyond monadic predicates (which
correspond to Boole's classes) so that our reasoning involving
relations could be formalized in a system. In that sense, Peirce's
pioneering work on modern logic started in the 1870 paper. This is not
to raise the Frege-first or Peirce-first debate again, but rather to
draw our
attention to the goal of Peirce's project—that is, to broaden the
scope of formalization in logic. Peirce's main contribution to modern
logic does not simply lie in the
introduction of new vocabulary for quantifiers and bound variables, but
also in his
sharp appreciation of the distinction between properties and
relations. Peirce's early insight into the importance
of reasoning involving relations is a key element in understanding the
difference between Peirce's and Frege's developments of first-order
logic.[8]
Furthermore, in the next section we will show how Peirce's obsession
with the logic of relations led him to the invention of Existential
Graphs.
Peirce intuited a fundamental difference between the logic of
non-relatives versus the logic of
relations.[9]
Peirce makes an insightful remark about the distinct logical nature for
relations when negation is combined: 
[W]hile in non-relative
logic negation only divides the universe into two parts, in relative
logic the same operation divides the universe into
2n parts, where n is the number of objects in
the system which the relative supposes. (1880 CP:3.221) 
Suppose P is a monadic predicate (which is
non-relative).  Then, given an object in the universe, we know it is
either P or not-P.  However, in the case of
relations, negation complicates the division of the universe.  With a
binary relation on a given pair of
objects,[10]
there are four possible combinations, depending on whether it is
“yes” or “no” to first and second elements of
the pair.  In the same manner, a ternary relation has eight ways
to carve up the given universe.  It seems obvious that the
complication that relations bring in our reasoning pushed Peirce to
develop new notational systems.  In other words, Peirce's invention of
quantifiers and bound variables was an outcome of his struggle to
expand the scope of formalization to cover relations.  Merrill's
paragraph is a nice summary for the matter:
It is widely recognized that Peirce's two most important contributions
to logic were the logic of relations and the theory of quantification.
It is also clear that these two aspects of his logic are closely
connected, since Peirce's search for an adequate logic of relations
stimulated his development of quantification theory.  The
quantification complexities of many relational statements cried out
for quantifiers.  (Merrill 1997: 158)
Hence, Peirce and Frege approached the project of modern logic from
different directions: Peirce struggled with the formalization of
reasoning involving relations and produced the representation of
quantifiers/variables, while Frege aimed to present a system
comprehensive enough to represent arithmetic.  Peirce's battle for a
new system of logic between 1870 and 1885 could remind us that
propositional logic is as powerful as monadic predicate logic, and
that quantifiers are needed for non-monadic predicates.  In the entry
of Dictionary of Philosophy and Psychology (1902), Peirce
himself summarizes the literature on the logic of relatives in the
following way:
His 1870 paper is far from being a final product of modern logic,
but represents a milestone as the first attempt to formalize relations
and to introduce quantified phrases. As Peirce states at the beginning
of the paper, the goal of the project is to apply Boole's algebra of
logic to the realm of relations which De Morgan was interested in. As
we now know, first-order logic is a logic of relations insofar as
quantifiers and bound variables are dispensable for a logic of monadic
predicates.  Along with a notational distinction between monadic
versus relational predicates in terms of plain fonts and italics,
“lw” denotes “whatever is lover of a
woman” (DNLR CP:3.68) and “lw”
means “a lover of every woman” (DNLR CP:3.77). By
connecting multiplication with the phrase ‘every’ and
addition with ‘some,’ the following passage is a precursor
for the notations which appear in his 1885 paper: 
From this [Π′ ≺ Σ′, where Π′
signifies logical multiplication and Σ′ signifies logical
addition] it follows that sw
≺ sw [i.e., a servant of every woman is a servant
of a woman] … From this we have (ls)w
≺ lsw [i.e., a lover-of-a-servant of every woman is
a lover-of-a-servant of a woman]. (DNLR CP:3.97)
These notations and algebra led Dipert to the following statement:
C.S. Peirce was the first person in the history of logic to use
quantifier-like variable-binding operators (briefly in 1870, W2, 392f,
pre-dating Frege's Begriffsschrift (1879)). (Dipert
2004: 290)
 However, the limit of the project of the 1870 paper is clear.  It
does not present a calculus for the logic of relations: 
I
regret that I am not in a situation to be able to perform this labor
[a calculus, or art of drawing inferences based on the notation I am
to describe]. (DNLR CP:3.45) 
Hence, as Dipert said, 
this [no
concern with axioms for logic or any ordering of theorems] causes for
the modern reader an appearance of casualness, even sloppiness.
(Dipert 2004: 297) 
Here is Putnam's
 observation:[11]
Peirce gave no system of axioms for first-order logic, although
his “existential graphs” are a complete proof procedure
for first-order logic (an early form of natural
deduction). (Putnam 1982: 298) 
While a good portion of that
paper was devoted to classification among relations, the paper has
important notions which became consistent themes throughout Peirce's
numerous writings on logic: assigning logical interpretations to
mathematical (i.e., algebraic in this case)
operations,[12]
relations as sets of ordered pairs, logical sum and logical product,
compositions among relations, and matrix
representation.[13]
In a more comprehensive and survey-style
paper written ten years later entitled  “On the algebra of
 logic” (Peirce 1880).
we find the introduction of Σ and Π
to express logical sums and logical products, and existential and
universal quantifiers, respectively (1880 CP:3.223, 3.247, 3.249).
Interestingly enough, Peirce again focuses on compositions of
relations and predicts when complexity arises, which must have pushed
him to the invention of a new notation.  In
 1882,
we see the
appearance of these two quantifiers with bound variables:
If
l denotes any general dual relative, then the coefficient of
the pair I:J in l is written
(l)i j. (CP:3.309) 
Every relative term, x, is separable into a part
called ‘self-x,’ Sx, such that Sx =
Σx(x)ii(I : I).
(CP:3.310)
One more significant step towards the completion of Peirce's
notation of first-order logic was taken in his 1883 appendix
“The logic of
 relatives.”
 Even though it is not a complete paper but
rather a note, the key notions of his new notation are spelled out more
clearly than in previous papers.  A relation is modeled by a pair of
objects: 
A dual relative term, such as ‘lover,’
‘benefactor,’ ‘servant,’ is a common name
signifying a pair of objects. (1883 CP:3.328) 
Even though the basic
idea for ordered pairs existed in the 1870 paper, we can see more
clearly how it is combined with quantifiers and bound variables in the
1883 Note (CP:3.329):
A general relative may be conceived as a logical aggregate of a number
of such individual relatives.  Let l denote “lover”;
then we may write
l = ΣiΣj(l)ij(I : J)
where (l)ij is a numerical coefficient, whose
value is 1 in case I is a lover of J, and 0 in the
opposite case, and where sums are to be taken for all individuals in
the universe.  (1883 CP:3.329)
With these tools, Peirce started formalizing sentences which require
multiple quantifiers:
Thus,
ΣiΣj(l)ij > 0
means that something is a lover of something; and
ΠiΣj(l)ij > 0
means that  everything is a lover of something. (1883 CP:3.351)
In the same paragraph, another significant move was made toward the
modern style of first-order logic, that is, to remove algebraic
representation:
We shall, however, naturally omit, in writing the inequalities, the
‘> 0’ which terminates them all; and the above two
propositions will appear as
 ΣiΣj(l)ij
and
 ΠiΣj(l)ij
(1883 CP:3.351)
It is worthwhile to note that multiple quantifiers, i.e., both
universal and existential quantifiers, are introduced in one sentence,
and as we all know, this complicates the matter a great deal.  It did
not escape Peirce's attention:
The logic of relatives is highly multiform; it is characterized by
innumerable immediate inferences, and by various distinct conclusions
from the same sets of premises. … The effect of these
peculiarities is that this algebra cannot be subjected to hard and
fast rules like those of the Boolian calculus; and all that can be
done in this place is to give a general idea of the way of working
with it. (1883 CP:3.342)
When the relative and non-relative operations occur together, the
rules of the calculus become pretty complicated. (1883 CP:3.351)
Obviously, Peirce noticed a fundamental difference between the logic
of non-relatives and the logic of relatives, which corresponds to a
difference between propositional and first-order logic.  I suspect
this is one of the reasons why Peirce did not share Frege's interest in
developing an axiomatic system—at least for a while—until his EG was
invented.  For the rest of the Note, Peirce presents examples in the
new notation involving multiple quantifiers (1883 CP:3.352–3.357).
By reading one of Peirce's best-known logic papers, the 1885 paper
“On the algebra of logic: A contribution to the philosophy of
 notation” (1885a),
  we realize that as far as first-order logic goes,
the key concepts and vocabulary were already formed in his previous
work discussed above.  We also note that the goal of the 1885 paper
outlined in the first section is more or less the same as the proposal
made in his 1870 paper: “The first is the extension of the power
of logical algebra over the whole of its proper realm” 
(1885a CP:3.364). Also, he almost reiterates the limit of the project which he
“regrets” in 1870: “I shall not be able to perfect
the algebra sufficiently to give facile methods of reaching logical
conclusions” (1885a CP:3.364). That is, we should not expect a
full-blown deductive system in this paper, but “I can only give
a method by which any legitimate conclusion may be reached and any
fallacious one avoided” (1885a CP:3.364). He carries out his promise
in section 3 of the paper by suggesting a list of methods of
transformation, which is not complete.  The following are some of the
rules involving
 quantifers (1885a CP:3.396):[14]
So far, we have argued that Peirce's insight on relations pushed
him to extend the territory of logic from monadic,
non-relational, propositional logic to relational
quantification logic.  This represented the beginning of modern logic as we
know it.  In this section, we take up a different angle of Peirce's
adventure—to extend forms of representation from
symbolic systems to
diagrammatic systems. Believing that this aspect of Peirce's project is
not yet fully appreciated, we present a story where his two different
kinds of extension—one from non-relations to relations and the
other from
symbolic to diagrammatic—are connected with each other.
In spite of Peirce's own evaluation of EG as ‘my chef
d'oeuvre,’ EG had to wait to be understood for a half century
until two philosophers—Don Roberts and Jay Zeman—produced
their impressive 
 work.[15] 
 In the 1980's, EG was receiving attention
from new disciplines—computer science and artificial
intelligence—thanks to John Sowa's novel application of EG to
knowledge representation.  More recently, interdisciplinary research
on multi-modal reasoning has drawn our attention to non-symbolic
systems (see, e.g., Barwise & Allwein (eds.) 1996 and Barwise
& Etchemendy 1991) and EG, not surprisingly, occupied the top of
their list.  In that context, Shin (2002) focused on differences
between symbolic versus diagrammatic systems and suggested a new way
of understanding the EG system, though this was criticized in
Pietarinen 2006.
While Peirce mainly presented linear expressions in his official writings from 1870 to 
 1885,[16]
 the notation adopted in Frege's
1879 Begriffsschrift is more iconic; it is at least not as
linear as Peirce's in the above period.  However, it is Peirce, not
Frege, who invented a full-blown non-symbolic system for first-order
logic—Existential Graphs.  As the EG system has been
investigated more rigorously, philosophical questions involving
Peirce's invention of the system have been raised as well.  The
discovery of EG's power and novelty has naturally led us to other
parts of Peirce's philosophy.  Why and how did the invention of EG
come about?  What does EG reveal about Peirce's view of logic and
representation?
Many of us have pointed out Peirce's theory of signs, which classifies
signs as being of three kinds—symbols, indices, and 
 icons—as the foremost theoretical background for Peirce's
 EG.[17]
 It is natural to connect Peirce's interest in icons with his invention of
graphical systems.  We do think the connection is real, and the more we
explore his view on signs the better we understand his EG (Shin 2002:
22–35).  But we do not think his sign theory could provide us
with everything we need for the story of EG.  There is a big gap
between Peirce's talk about
 icons[18]
 and his invention of full-blown graphical systems; something else 
has to be brought into the picture to explain how Peirce arrived
at EG from his talk about icons.
From a slightly different perspective, van Heijenoort's's
distinction between Boole's calculus ratiocinator  versus
Frege's lingua characteristica
could be related to the topic.
Agreeing with both Hintikka's and Goldfarb's evaluation that Peirce
belongs to Boole's tradition, Shin found a connection between the
model-theoretic view of logic (where Boole and Peirce are placed) and
EG's birth (see Shin 2002: 14–16, and Pietarinen 2006). However,
Peirce's awareness of the re-interpretation of language is necessary,
but not sufficient,
for his pursuit of a different form of representation. While the
acknowledgment of the possibility of different models of a given system
was presupposed by Peirce's project for various kinds of systems, not
every Boolean has presented multiple systems.
Without challenging these existing explanations involving Peirce's
EG, in this entry we bring in one overlooked but crucial
aspect of Peirce's journey to EG so that our story may fill in part of
the puzzle of Peirce's overall philosophy.  Peirce's mission for a new
logic started with the question of how to represent relations, which led him to invent
quantifiers and bound variables, as we discussed in the previous
section. We claim that the same commitment—that is, to represent relations in a
logical system—was a main motivation behind Peirce's search
for a new kind of sign system: the iconic representation of
relations.  Peirce's work on Euler/Venn diagrams provides us with
another piece of evidence to support our claim that the main
motivation behind EG was to represent relations.  While improving Venn
systems, Peirce realizes that the following defect cannot be
eliminated:
[T]he system [Venn's] affords no means of exhibiting reasoning, the
gist of which is of a relational or abstractional kind.  It does not
extend to the logic of relatives.  (Peirce 1911 CP:4.356)
Again, we do not think this is the crucial ingredient for the
creation of EG, but one key element which works well with
his theory of signs and his model-theoretic view of logic.
Peirce's graphical representation was first published in his 1897
paper “The Logic of Relatives”.  After
his own new notation came out in 1885 as seen above, why did Peirce
revisit the logic of relations?  The first paragraph of the paper
provides a direct answer:
I desire to convey some idea of what the new logic is, how two
“algebras,” that is, systems of diagrammatical
representation by means of letters and other characters, more or less
analogous to those of the algebra of arithmetic, have been invented
for the study of the logic of relatives, and …. (1897 CP:3.456)
Two things should be noted.  One is that diagrammatic systems are
also called ‘algebra’ by Peirce.  That is, according to
Peirce, algebra is not limited to symbolic systems.  The other is that
Peirce makes it clear that two different forms of algebra carry
out the new logic of relations, not new logics.
In thinking about the scope of the logic of relations, the question
arises: Why did Peirce feel the need for another form of
representation different from the 1885 notation?  “I must
clearly show what a relation is” (1897 CP:3.456). The clear
understanding of ‘relations,’ Peirce believes, is a guide
for his excursion into different forms of logical systems.  To the
reader's surprise, Peirce devotes three sections to the three grades
of meaning presented in his well-known paper “How To Make Our
Ideas 
 Clear” (1878).

(See the entry on
 Peirce's Theory of Signs.)
The first grade of understanding the word ‘relation’
comes from our ordinary experience, and the second grade is to have a
more abstract and general definitional understanding.  According to
Peirce, that is not enough to achieve a full understanding of the word
‘relation’. Finally, Peirce's hallmark of the pragmatic
maxim leads us to the third grade of clarity:
It appears, then, the rule for attaining the third grade of clearness
of apprehension is as follows: Consider what effects, which might
conceivably have practical bearings, we conceive the object of our
conception to have. Then the whole of our conception of those effects
is the whole of our conception of the object. (1878 CP:5.402)
In order to understand what a relation is, we need to know what
follows from it.  Then, the question is how we know what its
consequences are.  Here is one answer given by Peirce in the 1897
paper, as far as the term “relation” goes:
The third grade of clearness consists in such a representation of the
idea that fruitful reasoning can be made to turn upon it, and that it
can be applied to the resolution of difficult practical problems.
(1897 CP:3.457)
Therefore, how a relation is represented is crucial in figuring out
what follows from a relational state of affairs.  Better
representations will yield more ‘fruitful reasoning’ and
hence will be more helpful for solving practical problems.  It is
obvious that in the paper Peirce intends to search for
more desirable  representations.  Importantly, in section 4
when the third grade of clearness of the meaning
‘relation’ is discussed, diagrammatic representation of
relations makes its first appearance.
Influenced by A. B. Kempe's graphic 
 representation,[19]
 Peirce finds an analogy between relations and chemical compounds:
A
chemical atom is quite like a relative in having a definite number of
loose ends or ‘unsaturated bonds,’ corresponding to the
blanks of the relative. (1897 CP:3.469)
 A chemical molecule
consists of chemical atoms, and the manner in which atoms are connected with one
another is based on the number of loose ends of each atom.  For
example, chemical atom H has one loose end and chemical atom O has
two.  So, the following combination is possible, and it is a
representation of the water molecule, H2O:
An analogy to the logic of relations goes like this, putting Peirce's
ideas into more modern terms: A proposition consists of names (proper
names or indices) and predicates, and each predicate has a fixed
arity.  For example, the predicate ‘love’ needs two names
and ‘gives’ three.  Hence, the following diagrammatic
representation is grammatical and it is a representation of the
proposition “John loves Mary.”
Peirce created a novel and productive analogy in representation
between chemistry and the logic of relation by adopting the doctrine
of valency as the key element for the analogy, as shown in the above
two diagrams.  Believing that this graphic style of representation
would help us conceive the consequences or effects of a given relation
in a more efficient way, Peirce presents Entitative Graphs, which is a
predecessor of
 EG.[20]
EG keeps the representation of a relation developed in Peirce's
1897 paper, and it remains as his final and the most cherished notation
for the logic of relations (CP: 3.456–3.552). EG consists of
three parts—Alpha, Beta, and Gamma—which respectively correspond roughly to
propositional, first-order, and modal logic.  After
presenting the Alpha system in a formal way, we discuss the Beta
system of EG focusing on Peirce's novel ideas in expanding a
propositional graphic system to a quantificational graphic system.
For more details, we recommend works on EG by Roberts, Zeman, Sowa,
and Shin.
Below we introduce Alpha Graphs as a formal system in a standard
way, that is, to present its syntax (inductively) and its semantics
(recursively).  In order to place Peirce's graphic systems in the
traditional well-developed discourse of logic, we introduce an
intermediate stage, that is, to read off Peirce's graphs into symbolic
language.  This will make Peirce's graphs more accessible, and at the
same time support our claim that Peirce extended forms of
representations under the same scope of logic.
As a result, the reader might notice some differences between
Peirce's terminology and ours since some of Peirce's terms are
modified versions of familiar phrases.  Inevitably we will end up
simplifying many of Peirce's ideas behind EG.  We also would like to
emphasize that this is not the only way to approach Peirce's EG.  For
example, some claim that game-theoretic semantics were foreshadowed by
Peirce, and thus  argue for a more dynamic understanding of EG from the
game-theoretic point of view (Burch 1994; Hilpinen 1982; Hintikka
1997; Pietarinen 2006).
Here we present two equivalent reading methods for the system.  The
Endoporeutic reading algorithm, formalized based on Peirce's
suggestion, is a traditional way to understand EG.  An alternative
reading method, the Multiple reading algorithm, was more recently
presented to approach EG in a more efficient way (for more details,
see Shin 2002, §4.3).
Each of these two readings has its own strength.  The Endopreutic
reading assures us that the Alpha system is truth-functionally
complete, since it has power to express conjunction and negation.
However, this traditional method has been partly responsible for the
following two incorrect judgments about Alpha diagrams: (i) There is
not much difference between the Alpha system and a propositional
language with only two connectives, ∧ and ¬, except that
Alpha diagrams have cuts instead of symbolic connectives.  (ii) When
it comes down to practical use, we have no reason to adopt the Alpha system
over propositional languages with more connectives justlike how we do not want to use only two
connectives in a language.
Challenging these misconceptions, the Multiple readings algorithm
shows that Alpha diagrams do not have to be read off as a sentence
with ‘∧’ and ‘¬’ only, but can be
directly read off in terms of other connectives as well.  Two
questions may be raised: (i) Is there a redundancy in the Multiple
readings method?  For example, is 4(b) above dispensable in terms of 3
and 4(a)?  (ii) Does this new reading show that the Alpha system is
just like a propositional language with various connectives?
Let us answer these questions through the following simple
example:
The Endoporeutic reading allows us to get the first reading only,
but we may obtain different sentences by the Multiple Readings.  Of
course, all of these sentences are logically equivalent.  Here is an
interesting point: In the case of symbolic systems, we need to prove
the equivalence among the above sentences by using inference rules.
But, derivation processes are dispensable in the case of the Alpha
system when the Multiple readings are
 adopted.[22]
  Hence, having the clause 4(b) above in
addition to clauses 3 and 4(a) is not redundant, but instead
highlights a fundamental difference between Alpha diagrams and a
symbolic language with various connectives (see Shin 2002:
§§4.3.2, 4.4.4, and 4.5.3).
Since we have the semantics for propositional logic and our reading
methods translate Alpha diagrams into a propositional language, we can
live without the direct semantics.  However, if one insists on the
direct semantics:
Since it is a deductive system, we need inference rules (see Roberts
1973: 40–45).
Emphasizing the symmetry both in erasure versus insertion and in even
versus odd number of cuts, Shin rewrote the rules (2002,
84–85):
For examples of deduction sequences, refer to Roberts' pp. 45–46 and
Shin 2002, p. 91. 
In §2, we showed that formalizing relations was a key motivation
behind Peirce's new logic—first-order logic.  In §3.1, we
established a connection between Peirce's own pragmatic maxim and his
graphic representation of relations.  Peirce did not aim to present a
new logic by inventing a graphic system, but rather to present another
new notation for the logic carried out by quantifiers and bound
variables.  He almost took it for granted that a graphic
representation of relations helps us observe their consequences in a
more efficient way.  Hence, the Beta system may be considered to be
the final stop of Peirce's long journey, which started in 1870 at the
latest.
We will not go into the formal details of the Beta system in this
entry but will instead refer to Chapter 5 of Shin, where three slightly different
approaches to Beta graphs—Zeman's, Roberts', and Shin's—are
discussed at a full length.  While Zeman's reading is comprehensive
and formal, Roberts' method seems to appeal to a more intuitive
understanding of the system.  Taking advantage of the merits of these
two existing works, Shin developed a new reading method of Beta
graphs and reformulated the transformation rules of the
 system.[24]
  Her approach focuses on visual features
of Beta graphs and highlights fundamental differences between symbolic
versus diagrammatic systems.  In the remaining part of the entry, we
would like to examine how the essence of the logic of relations is
graphically represented in the Beta system so that the reader may
place EG in the larger context of Peirce's enterprise.
The introduction of quantifiers and bound variables is believed to
be one of the key steps of first-order logic in symbolic
systems.  This is why some logicians take Peirce's 1885 paper “On
the Algebra of Logic: A contribution to the Philosophy of
Notations” to be the birthplace of modern logic. If this is the case, then how does
Peirce represent quantifiers and bound variables in Beta graphs?
Interestingly enough, when Peirce considered a graphic system his
first concern was representation of relations, not representation of
quantifiers.  As we said in §3.1, Peirce
presented diagrammatic representation based on an analogy to chemical
molecules for a full understanding of relations.  Hence, the arity of
a predicate is represented by the number of lines radiating from the
predicate term.  Next, Peirce extends the use of a line to connect
predicates:
In many reasonings it becomes necessary to write a copulative
proposition in which two members relate to the same individual so as
to distinguish these members.…  [I]t is necessary that the signs
of them should be connected in fact.  No way of doing this can be more
perfectly iconic than that exemplified in [the following graph] 
(1903b CP:4.442):

The line connecting two predicates, representing one and the
same object, is called a line of identity by Peirce.  That
is, the sameness is represented visually in Beta
diagrams.[25] In
the case of a symbolic language, we may adopt one and the same
quantified variable-type to represent the identity.  For example, the above
diagram says ∃x(x<A
∧ B<x), and hence, the variable-type x
(roughly) corresponds to the identity line.  However, the same
variable-type is not sufficient for expressing the sameness in other
cases, e.g., ∃x(x<A
∧ B<x) →
∃x(x<C).
The way universal and existential statements are represented in the
Beta system highlights a difference between graphic and symbolic
systems.  Rather than adopting one more syntactic device for
quantification, Peirce relies on the following visual features:
[A]ny line of identity whose outermost part is evenly enclosed refers
to something, and any one whose outermost part is oddly
enclosed refers to anything there may
 be. (1903b CP:4.458[26])
Let us borrow the two following graphs from
 Roberts (1973: 51):[27]

The first graph (where the outermost part of the line is evenly, zero,
enclosed) says that something good is ugly, and the second graph
(where the outermost part is enclosed once) says that everything good
is
 ugly.[28]
How about the scope problem which arises when multiple quantifiers
are used?  In the case of a symbolic system, the linear order takes
care of the problem.  Peirce's solution for EG is to read off another
kind of visuality: The less enclosed the outermost part of a line is,
the larger the scope that the line gets.
Roberts' following example illustrates the scope matter nicely
(1973: 52):
The first graph says ∀x(Catholic(x)
→∃y(Adores(x,y) ∧
Woman(y))) and the second
∃y(Woman(y) ∧
∀x(Catholic(x)
→ Adores(x,y))).  In the first graph, the
line whose outermost part is oddly enclosed is less enclosed than the
line whose outermost part is evenly enclosed. Therefore, the universal
quantifier has larger scope than the existential quantifier.  In the
second graph, it is the other way around.
Let us summarize three interesting features of the Beta system: