In one of his many definitions of a sign, Peirce writes:
What we see here is Peirce's basic claim that signs consist of
three inter-related parts: a sign, an object, and an interpretant. For
the sake of simplicity, we can think of the sign as the signifier, for
example, a written word, an utterance, smoke as a sign for fire
etc. The object, on the other hand, is best thought of as whatever is
signified, for example, the object to which the written or uttered
word attaches, or the fire signified by the smoke. The interpretant,
the most innovative and distinctive feature of Peirce's account, is
best thought of as the understanding that we have of the sign/object
relation. The importance of the interpretant for Peirce is that
signification is not a simple dyadic relationship between sign and
object: a sign signifies only in being interpreted. This makes the
interpretant central to the content of the sign, in that, the meaning
of a sign is manifest in the interpretation that it generates in sign
users. Things are, however, slightly more complex than this and we
shall look at these three elements in more detail.
 The very first thing to note is that there are some potential
terminological difficulties here. We appear to be saying that there
are three elements of a sign, one of which is the sign. This is
confusing and does not fully capture Peirce's idea. Strictly speaking,
for Peirce, we are interested in the signifying element, and it
is not the sign as a whole that signifies. In speaking of the sign as
the signifying element, then, he is more properly speaking of the sign
refined to those elements most crucial to its functioning as a
signifier. Peirce uses numerous terms for the signifying element
including “sign”, “representamen”,
“representation”, and “ground”. Here we shall
refer to that element of the sign responsible for signification as the
“sign-vehicle”. 
 Peirce's idea that a sign does not signify in all respects and has
some particular signifying element is perhaps best made clear with an
example. Consider, for instance, a molehill in my lawn taken as a sign
of moles. Not every characteristic of the molehill plays a part in
signifying the presence of moles. The color of the molehill plays a
secondary role since it will vary according to the soil from which it
is composed. Similarly, the sizes of molehills vary according to the
size of the mole that makes them, so again, this feature is not
primary in the molehill's ability to signify. What is central here is
the causal connection that exists between the type of mound in my lawn
and moles: since moles make molehills, molehills signify
moles. Consequently, primary to the molehill's ability to signify the
mole is the brute physical connection between it and a mole. This is
the sign-vehicle of the sign. For Peirce, then, it is only some
element of a sign that enables it to signify its object, and when
speaking of the signifying element of the sign, or rather, the
sign-vehicle, it is this qualified sign that he means.  
 Just as with the sign, not every characteristic of the object is
relevant to signification: only certain features of an object enable a
sign to signify it. For Peirce, the relationship between the object of
a sign and the sign that represents it is one of determination: the
object determines the sign. Peirce's notion of determination is by no
means clear and it is open to interpretation, but for our purposes, it
is perhaps best understood as the placing of constraints or
conditions on succesful signification by the object, rather than the
object causing or  generating  the sign. The idea is
that the object imposes certain parameters that a sign must fall
within if it is to represent that object. However, only certain
characteristics of an object are relevant to this process of
determination. To see this in terms of an example, consider again the
case of the molehill.
 The sign is the molehill, and the object of this sign is the
mole. The mole determines the sign, in as much as, if the molehill is
to succeed as a sign for the mole it must show the physical presence
of the mole. If it fails to do this, it fails to be a sign of that
object. Other signs for this object, apart from the molehill, might
include the presence of mole droppings, or a particular pattern of
ground subsidence on my lawns, but all such signs are constrained by
the need to show the physical presence of the mole. Clearly, not
everything about the mole is relevant to this constraining process:
the mole might be a conventional black color or an albino, it might be
male or female, it might be young or old. None of these features,
however, are essential to the constraints placed upon the
sign. Rather, the causal connection between it and the mole is the
characteristic that it imposes upon its sign, and it is this
connection that the sign must represent if it is to succeed in
signifying the mole.
Although there are many features of the interpretant that bear
further comment, here we shall mention just two. First, although we
have characterized the interpretant as the understanding we reach of
some sign/object relation, it is perhaps more properly thought of as
the translation or development of the original sign. The idea is that
the interpretant provides a translation of the sign, allowing us a
more complex understanding of the sign's object. Indeed, Liszka (1996)
and Savan (1988) both emphasize the need to treat interpretants as
translations, with Savan even suggesting Peirce should have called it
the translatant (Savan 1988, 41).  Second, just as with the
sign/object relation, Peirce believes the sign/interpretant relation
to be one of determination: the sign determines an
interpretant. Further, this determination is not determination in any
causal sense, rather, the sign determines an interpretant by using
certain features of the way the sign signifies its object to generate
and shape our understanding. So, the way that smoke generates or
determines an interpretant sign of its object, fire, is by focusing
our attention upon the physical connection between smoke and fire.
 For Peirce, then, any instance of signification contains a
sign-vehicle, an object and interpretant. Moreover, the object
determines the sign by placing constraints which any sign must meet if
it is to signify the object. Consequently, the sign signifies its
object only in virtue of some of its features. Additionally, the sign
determines an interpretant by focusing our understanding on certain
features of the signifying relation between sign and object. This
enables us to understand the object of the sign more fully.
Although this is a general picture of Peirce's ideas about sign
structure, and certain features are more or less present, or given
greater or lesser emphasis at various points in Peirce's development
of his theory of signs, this triadic structure and the relation
between the elements is present in all of Peirce's accounts. In what
follows, we shall see three of Peirce's attempts at giving a full
account of signs and signification, the corresponding sign typologies,
look at the transitions between these accounts, and examine some of
the issues that arise from them.
 Peirce's earliest significant attempt at an account of signs comes
in his 1867 paper “On A New List of Categories” (W2
.49–58). In that account, we find the same basic sign structure
outlined above: any sign, or representation as Peirce calls it at this
early stage, will have a sign-vehicle, an object, and an
interpretant. An important difference here though is how he thinks of
the relation between signs and interpretants. In particular, Peirce
thought that whilst our interpreting the signifying relation between
sign and object relied upon understanding the basis of signification
in any given case, he also thought that the generated interpretant
itself functioned as a further, more developed sign of the object in
question. And of course, as a further sign, it will also signify that
object through some features, which again, we must interpret, and
generate a further interpretant. As will be obvious, this leads to an
infinite chain of signs. If any sign must generate an interpretant in
order to be a sign, and any sign is itself the interpretant of some
further sign, then clearly, there must be an infinity of signs both
proceeding and preceding from any given instance of
signification. Some scholars (for example, (Short 2004) and (Short 2007)) think that
infinite semiosis is a characteristic only of Peirce's early
account. Others, (Liszka 1996, Savan 1988) treat infinite semiosis as
present in all of Peirce's accounts. We shall return to the issue of
infinite semiosis in the early account below. First, we shall look at
the types of sign to which Peirce's early account gives rise.  
Peirce thought that “representations” generate further
interpretants in one of three possible ways. First, via “a mere
community in some quality” (W2 .56). These he calls likenesses, but
they are more familiarly known as icons. Second, those “whose
relation to their objects consists in a correspondence in fact”
(W2 .56) are termed indices. And finally, those “whose relation
to their objects is an imputed character” (W2. 56) are called
symbols. Put simply, if we come to interpret a sign as standing
for its object in virtue of some shared quality, then the sign is an
icon. Peirce's early examples of icons are portraits and noted
similarities between the letters p and b (W2. 53–4). If on the other
hand, our interpretation comes in virtue of some brute, existential
fact, causal connections say, then the sign is an index. Early
examples include the weathercock, and the relationship between the
murderer and his victim (W2. 53–4). And finally, if we generate an
interpretant in virtue of some observed general or conventional
connection between sign and object, then the sign is a symbol. Early
examples include the words “homme” and “man” sharing a
reference. (W2. 53–4).
This, then, is the very first outing for Peirce's famous division of
signs into Icons, Indexes, and Symbols. Although Peirce's precise
thoughts about the nature of this division were to change at various
points in his development of sign theory, the division nonetheless
remains throughout his work. There are, however, some important
features to this early account that mark it out from the later
developments. We shall look at two of these features here: the
importance of thought-signs; and infinite semiosis.
 

An interesting feature of Peirce's early account is that he is keen to
associate signs with cognition. In particular, Peirce claims that all
thought is in signs (W2. 213). We can see this from Peirce's early
idea that every interpretant is itself a further sign of the signified
object. Since interpretants are the interpreting thoughts we have of
signifying relations, and these interpreting thoughts are themselves
signs, it seems to be a straight-forward consequence that all thoughts
are signs, or as Peirce calls them “thought-signs”. One
interesting consequence of this is that in the early account, Peirce
is quick to dismiss the importance and relevance of icons and
indices.
This gives Peirce's early account of signs a rather narrow scope; it
is concerned primarily with the general and conventional signs of
which our language and cognition consist. The reason for this narrow
focus is simple: for Peirce, since symbols are “potentially
general” and fall under the remit of general rules, they are a
fit subject of study for his primary focus, logic. This early account,
then, focuses mainly on general and conventional signs, those signs
identified by Peirce as symbols. Icons and indices, although noted at
this early stage, are considered of secondary philosophical
importance. As we shall see later, this narrow focus is something that
Peirce was later to revise.
As previously noted, part and parcel of Peirce's early account of
signs is that an infinity of further signs both proceed and precede
from any given sign. This is a consequence of the way Peirce thinks of
the elements of signs at this early stage and seems to stem from his
idea that interpretants are to count as further signs, and signs are
interpretants of earlier signs. Since any sign must determine an
interpretant in order to count as a sign, and interpretants are
themselves signs, infinite chains of signs seem to become conceptually
necessary.
To see this, imagine a chain of signs with either a first or a last
sign. The final sign that terminates the semiotic process will have no
interpretant; if it did, that interpretant would function as a further
sign and generate a further interpretant, and the final sign would, in
fact, not terminate the process. However, since any sign must
determine an interpretant to count as a sign, the final sign would not
be a sign unless it had an interpretant. Similarly, a first sign could
not be the interpretant of a preceding sign. If it were, that previous
sign would be the first sign. However, since any sign must be an
interpretant of a previous sign, a first sign would not be a sign
unless it was also an interpretant of a previous sign. The problem is
that if we allow a final sign with no interpretant, or a first sign
which is not the interpretant or some earlier sign, then we have
failed signs in the semiotic process. This affects the rest of the
semiotic chain causing something like a collapse of dominoes. For
example, if the final sign fails to be a sign in virtue of generating
no interpretant, then since that failed sign is supposed to act as the
interpretant of the previous sign and function as a further sign in
its own right, it has also failed to be an interpretant. The
consequence of this is that the previous sign has failed to generate a
proper interpretant and so failed to be a sign. The consequence of
this is that…and so on. The alternative is not to countenance
terminating signs. And obviously, if we cannot end the semiotic
process then signs continue generating signs ad infinitum.
Peirce was both aware and untroubled by infinite semiosis. In part,
this is due to the anti-Cartesian project carried out in Peirce's work
in the 1860s. A significant part of this project for Peirce is the
denial of intuitions, something that Peirce took as a key assumption
of Cartesian philosophical method. Given that Peirce defines
“intuition” as “a cognition not determined by a
previous cognition of the same object” (W2. 193), it seems clear
that the infinite procession of thought-signs generated by earlier
thought-signs and in turn generating further thought-signs is part and
parcel of the denial of intuitions. However, in later developments to
his sign theory, despite never explicitly relinquishing infinite
semiosis, many of the concepts that lead to it are replaced or
revised, and the concept becomes less prominent in Peirce's work. 
In 1903, Peirce gave a series of lectures at Harvard, and at The
Lowell Institute. Part of these lectures was an account of
signs. However, the 1903 account of signs showed considerable
developments to the early account of the 1860s. First, where the
early account suggested three classes of sign, the 1903 account
suggests ten classes of sign. Second, where the account the 1860s
treats the general sign, or symbol, as the main focus of sign theory,
the 1903 account counts many more sign types as within the focus of
philosophy and logic. Third, Peirce dropped the claim that an infinite
chain of signs precedes any given sign (see Short 2004, 221–2).
These changes seem to be a consequence of developments in symbolic
logic made by Peirce and his Johns Hopkins student, Oscar Mitchell, in
the early 1880s. As is well known, during this time, and
independently of Frege, Peirce and Mitchell developed quantification
theory (see Peirce (1883), and (W5. 162–191)). An essential part of
this development was the inclusion of singular propositions and
individual variables for objects that cannot be picked out be definite
descriptions. Peirce treated these non-general signs as indices, which
in turn led him to identify the index as an essential part of
logic. This made his earlier account of signs seem
underdeveloped. (See, for instance, Short (2004, 219–222), Hookway
(2000, 127–131), and Murphey (1961, 299–300)). This appears to have
led Peirce to take signs other than the symbol more seriously. In
particular, it led Peirce to realize that some symbolic signs had
distinctly indexical (that is non-general) features. Similarly,
symbols with heavily iconic features, especially in mathematics (see
Hookway 1985 Ch 6), were more important than he thought. What this
meant, of course, was that the account of the 1860s was now woefully
inadequate to the task of capturing the range of signs and
signification that Peirce thought important for philosophy and
logic.
Peirce's 1903 account of signs, then, is notable for its broader
scope, relative neatness, and completeness. In it Peirce returns to
the basic sign structure we gave above and by paying close attention
to those elements of signs and the various interactions between them
gives what seems to be an extensive account of signification, and an
exhaustive typology of signs far beyond the range of his early account
of the 1860s. To understand Peirce's 1903 account, we must return to
the three elements of signification, namely, the sign-vehicle, the
object, and the interpretant and see how Peirce thinks their function
in signification leads to an exhaustive classification of sign
types.
Recall that Peirce thought signs signify their objects not through all
their features, but in virtue of some particular feature. By 1903, for
reasons related to his work on phenomenology, Peirce thought the
central features of sign-vehicles could be divided into three broad
areas, and consequently, that signs could be classified
accordingly. This division depends upon whether sign-vehicles signify
in virtue of qualities, existential facts, or conventions and
laws. Further, signs with these sign-vehicles are classified as
qualisigns, sinsigns, and legisigns
respectively.
 Examples of signs whose sign-vehicle relies upon a quality are
difficult to imagine, but a particularly clear example, used by David
Savan, is this:
 There are many elements to the colored chip as a sign, but it is only
its color that matters to its ability to signify. Any sign whose
sign-vehicle relies, as with this example, on simple abstracted
qualities is called a qualisign.
 An example of a sign whose sign-vehicle uses existential facts is
smoke as a sign for fire; the causal relation between the fire and
smoke allows the smoke to act as a signifier. Other cases are the
molehill example used earlier, and temperature as a sign for a
fever. Any sign whose sign-vehicle relies upon existential connections
with its object is named, by Peirce, a sinsign.
 And finally, the third kind of sign is one whose crucial signifying
element is primarily due to convention, habit or law. Typical examples
would be traffic lights as sign of priority, and the signifying
capability of words; these sign-vehicles signify in virtue of the
conventions surrounding their use. Peirce calls signs whose
sign-vehicles function in this way legisigns.
 Just as Peirce thought signs could be classified according to whether
their sign-vehicles function in virtue of qualities, existential
facts, or conventions and laws, he thought signs were similarly
classifiable according to how their object functioned in
signification. Recall that, for Peirce, objects “determine” their
signs. That is to say, the nature of the object constrains the nature
of the sign in terms of what successful signification requires. Again,
Peirce thought the nature of these constraints fell into three broad
classes: qualitative, existential or physical, and conventional and
law-like. Further, if the constraints of successful signification
require that the sign reflect qualitative features of the object, then
the sign is an icon. If the constraints of successful
signification require that the sign utilize some existential or
physical connection between it and its object, then the sign is an
index. And finally, if successful signification of the
object requires that the sign utilize some convention, habit, or
social rule or law that connects it with its object, then the sign is
a symbol.
 This is a trichotomy with which we are already familiar from the
early account, and indeed, the examples of icons, indices, and symbols
are largely the same as before: icons are portraits and paintings,
indices are natural and causal signs, symbols are words and so
on. There are, however, additional instances, for example, icons
include diagrams used in geometrical reasoning, indices include
pointing fingers and proper names, and symbols including broad speech
acts like assertion and judgment, all of which suggests a considerable
broadening of this trichotomy. It is well worth noting, though, that
by 1903 Peirce was aware that it would be hard, if not impossible, to
find any pure instances of icons and indices. Rather, he began to
suspect that icons and indices were always partly symbolic or
conventional. To try to capture this, Peirce experimented with some
additional terminology and types of icon and index. These he called
the hypo-icon (see CP2 .276 1903) and the sub-index (see CP 2.330
1903) respectively. We shall not explore these signs further here (see (Goudge 1965) and (Atkin 2005) for more on Peirce's view of indices, and (Legg 2008) for more on icons), but it is worth noting that by 1903, the simple icon/index/symbol
trichotomy was something of an abstraction, and Peirce was aware that
any single sign may display some combination of iconic, indexical and
symbolic characteristics. 
 As with the sign-vehicle and the object, Peirce thought we could
classify signs in terms of their relation with their
interpretant. Again, he identifies three categories according to which
feature of the relationship with its object a sign uses in generating
an interpretant. Further, as with the classification of the sign in
terms of the sign-vehicle and the object, Peirce identifies qualities,
existential facts, or conventional features as the basis for
classifying the sign in terms of its interpretant.
 If the sign determines an interpretant by focusing our understanding
of the sign upon the qualitative features it employs in signifying its
object, then the sign is classified as a rheme. Examples are
not straightforward, but one way of understanding rhemes, is to think
of them as unsaturated predicates like, “— is a dog”, “— is
happy”, “— loves —” or “— gives—to —”, and so
on. Whenever we understand a sign in terms of qualities it suggests
its object may have, we generate an interpretant that qualifies its
sign as a rheme. If, on the other hand, a sign determines an
interpretant by focusing our understanding of the sign upon the
existential features it employs in signifying an object, then the sign
is a dicent. We can think of dicents is as saturated
predicates, or propositions, like “Fido is a dog”, “Larry is happy”,
“Fido loves Larry”, “Larry gives food to Fido”, and so on. And
finally, if a sign determines an interpretant by focusing our
understanding on some conventional or law-like features employed in
signifying the object, then the sign is a delome, or as Peirce
most frequently, but confusingly, calls them,
arguments. Further, just as we can think of a rheme as an
unsaturated predicate, and a dicent as a proposition, we can think of
the delome as an argument or rule of inference. Our ability to
understand a sign in terms of its place in some pattern of reasoning
and system of signs enables us to derive information from it (by
deductive reasoning) or make conjectures about it (by inductive and
abductive reasoning). So, whenever we come to understand a sign as
focusing our attention upon some conventional feature of its
relationship with object, that is, enabling us to understand the sign
as part of a rule governed system of knowledge and signs etc., we have
an interpretant that qualifies a sign as a delome (or argument).
 Peirce believed that the three elements, and the respective
classifications they imposed upon signs, could be combined to give a
complete list of sign types. That is, since a sign has a sign-vehicle
it can be classified as either a qualisign, a sinsign, or
legisign. Additionally, since that sign has an object it can be
classified as either an icon, an index, or a symbol. And finally,
since that sign will also determine an interpretant it can be
classified as either a rheme, a dicent, or a delome.  Each sign is
then classifiable as some combination of each of its three elements,
that is, as either one of the three types of sign-vehicle, plus one of
the three types of object, plus one of the three types of
interpretant. Initially, this seems to yield twenty-seven possible
classificatory combinations, but, because of certain of Peirce's
phenomenological theories, there are restrictions on how we can
combine the different elements that mean there are, in fact, only ten
types of sign. (For more on the relation between Peirce's
phenomenological categories, and his sign typology, see (Lizska 1996)
and (Savan 1988))
 The rules for the permissible combinations are actually quite simple
so long as we bear two things in mind. First, types of each element
are classifiable as either a quality, an existential fact, or a
convention. That is, across the three elements of a sign, there are
three types deriving from qualities (the qualisign, the icon, and the
rheme), three deriving from existential facts, (the sinsign, the
index, and the dicent), and three deriving from conventions (the
legisign, the symbol, and the delome). Second, the classification of
the interpretant depends upon the classification of the object, which
in turn depends upon the classification of the sign-vehicle. The rules
that determine permissible classifications, then, are that if an
element is classified as a quality, then its dependent element may
only be a classified as a quality. If an element is classified as an
existential fact, then its dependent element may be classified as
either an existential fact, or a quality. And if an element is
classified as a convention, then its dependent element may be
classified as either a convention, an existential fact, or a
quality. This leaves us with ten permissible combinations between a
sign-vehicle, object and interpretant, and so ten possible kinds of
signs. They look something like this:
 These ten types of sign are simply called after the combination of
their elements: an ordinary proposition is a
dicentic-symbolic-legisign, a spontaneous cry a
rhematic-indexical-sinsign, and so on.
 Despite its apparent completeness and complexity, however, Peirce was
soon to begin rethinking his 1903 account of signs and over the final
years of his life, he introduced further complexities and nuances.
 During the last part of his life the majority of Peirce's
philosophical output concerned semiotic, and he developed his account
of signs far beyond the 1903 theory. There seem to be two reasons for
this. First, Peirce was geographically and intellectually isolated and
his main outlet was correspondence with the English woman, Lady
Victoria Welby. Welby wrote on various philosophical topics and shared
Peirce's interests in signs and meaning. This seems to have given
Peirce a willing and sympathetic audience for his developing ideas on
signs. The second reason seems to have been his growing appreciation of the
connections between the semiotic process and the process of
inquiry. Peirce always thought of his philosophy in a systematic and
architectonic way. However, around 1902, an application for funding to
the Carnegie Institute saw him express more clearly the connections
between different aspects of his philosophy. The application failed,
but Peirce had returned to thinking about the place of sign theory in
his broader philosophy. In particular, he came to see sign theory more
clearly as part of the logic of scientific discovery, that is, as
central to his account of inquiry. We shall not review Peirce's
account of inquiry here, but as an end directed process leading from
doubt-prone to doubt-proof beliefs, Peirce began to see a similar
end-directedness running through the semiotic process. This kind of
thinking lead Peirce to reassess his account of signs and sign
structure: the connection between the process of inquiry and sign
chains led Peirce to notice subtleties and nuances that had previously
been transparent to him. In particular, it led him to see chains of
signs as tending towards a definite but idealized end rather than
progressing ad infinitum. Since at the idealized end of inquiry we
have a complete understanding of some object, there need be no further
interpretant of that object; our understanding cannot be developed any
further. (See Ransdell (1977) and Short (2004) and (2007) for more on the
connections between Peirce's later account and the end-directed
process of inquiry. Indeed, Short (2007) represents the fullest and best developed account of 'telic' interpretations of Peirce's semiotic to date).
 The first effect of Peirce's greater appreciation of the parallels
between inquiry and his sign theory is a distinction between the
object of the sign as it we understand at some given point in the
semiotic process, and the object of the sign as it stands at the end
of that process. The former he calls the immediate object, and
the later he calls the dynamic object. A neat way of capturing
this distinction is as the different objects arising from the “two
answers to the question: what object does this sign refer to? One is
the answer that could be given when the sign was used; and the other
is the one we could give when our scientific knowledge is
complete”. (Hookway 1985, 139).
 The dynamic object is, in some senses, the object that generates a
chain of signs. The aim of a sign chain is to arrive at a full
understanding of an object and so assimilate that object into the
system of signs. Using slightly more simplistic terms, Ransdell (1977,
169) describes the dynamic object as the “object as it really is”, and
Hookway (1985, 139) describes it as “the object as it is known to be
[at the end of inquiry]”. Indeed, Hookway's description shows an acute
awareness of the connection between the dynamic object and the process
of inquiry in Peirce's later sign theory. An example, from Liszka
(1996, 23), captures Peirce's idea quite clearly: taking a petroleum
tank half full with fuel, a variety of signs for this half-full state
are available. Perhaps there is a fuel gauge attached to the tank, or
perhaps the tank makes a distinctive sound when we strike it and so
on. But, despite these various signs, the object underlying them all
is the actual level of fuel in the petroleum tank; this is the dynamic
object.
 Ransdell (1977, 169) describes the immediate object as “what we, at
any time, suppose the object to be”, and Hookway (1985, 139) describes
it as “the object at the time it is first used and interpreted”. The
immediate object, then, is not some additional object distinct from
the dynamic object but is merely some informationally incomplete
facsimile of the dynamic object generated at some interim stage in a
chain of signs. Returning to the petroleum tank example, when we
strike the tank, the tone that it emits (which functions as the
sign-vehicle) represents to us that the tank is not full (but it does
not tell us the precise level of fuel). The immediate object, then, is
a less-than-full-tank.
 Clearly, the immediate and dynamic objects of a sign are intimately
linked and Peirce consistently describes and introduces the two
together. (See, (CP 4. 536 (1896)). However, the connection between
the two is most clear when we consider the connections between sign
chains and inquiry. The dynamic object is, as we have suggested, the
goal and end point that drives the semiotic process, and the immediate
object is our grasp of that object at any point in that
process. Ransdell, for instance, says:
 Put this way, it is clear how Peirce's growing concern to capture the
parallels between semiosis and the process of inquiry leads him to
identify two objects for the sign.
Just as with the object(s) of the sign, the parallels between semiotic
and inquiry result in a similar division of interpretants. As a chain
of signs moves towards a final end there are different interpretants
playing different but important roles. Peirce identifies three
different ways in which we grasp the way a sign stands for an
object. He calls these three types of interpretant, the immediate
interpretant, the dynamic interpretant and the final
interpretant and describes them like this.
We shall examine each of these in turn, but to get a clearer
understanding of the three interpretants it is helpful to look, very
briefly, at Peirce's three grades of clarity, or understanding since
Peirce took these to inform his division of interpretants.
 In his 1878 paper, “How To Make Our Ideas Clear” (W3, 257–275) Peirce
introduces three grades of clarity, or levels of understanding. In
this paper, he introduces his famous pragmatic maxim as a development
of rationalist notions of “clear and distinct ideas”. Combining his
pragmatic maxim with notions of clarity from Descartes and Leibniz,
Peirce identifies three grades of understanding. The first grade of
clarity is to have an unreflective grasp of some concept in everyday
experience. The second grade of clarity is to have, or be capable of
providing, a general definition of that concept. The third grade of
clarity, though, comes from Peirce's famous statement of the pragmatic
maxim:
 A full understanding of some concept, then, involves familiarity
with it in day-to-day encounters, the ability to offer some general
definition of it, and knowing what effects to expect from holding that
concept to be true.
 Although these grades of clarity are part of Peirce's pragmatism, his
greater understanding of the interconnectedness of his thought led him
to realize that they were also crucial to his work on semiotic. In
particular, he saw the three grades of clarity or understanding as
reflected in his notion of the interpretant and of course felt that
the interpretant also had three grades or divisions. Peirce himself
says:
 Here, then, Peirce identifies the first grade of clarity with the
dynamic interpretant, the second grade with the immediate
interpretant, and the third grade with the final interpretant.
 As its identification with the second grade of clarity suggests, the
immediate interpretant is a general definitional understanding of the
relationship between the sign and dynamic object. In an extended
example, where the dynamic object is the weather on a stormy day,
Peirce describes the immediate interpretant as “the schema in [our]
imagination, i.e. the vague Image of what there is in common to the
different images of a stormy day” (CP8 .314 (1907)). The immediate
interpretant, then, is something like recognition of the syntax of the
sign and the more general features of its meaning. Indeed, Peirce
seems to take the immediate interpretant to be “all that is explicit
in the sign apart from its context and circumstances of utterance”
(CP5 .473 (1907)). Also instructive is David Savan's description of
the immediate interpretant as the:
 In terms of an example where ordinary sentences are the signs, the
immediate interpretant will involve something like our recognition of
grammatical categories, syntactic structures and conventional rules of
use. For instance, without knowing anything about its context of
utterance, we can surmise certain things about the sentence, “we don't
want to hurt him, do we?”. We know it is a question, we know it
concerns doing harm to some person, a male, and so on. These things
are part of the immediate interpretant of the sign.
 The second type of interpretant that any sign must have is the
dynamic interpretant. This is our understanding of the sign/dynamic
object relationship at some actual instance in the chain of
signs. Peirce describes the dynamic interpretant as the “effect
actually produced on the mind” (CP8 .343 (1908)), or as the “actual
effect which the sign, as a sign, really determines” (CP4 .536
(1906)). The dynamic interpretant, then, is the understanding we
reach, or which the sign determines, at any particular semiotic
stage.
 To continue with linguistic examples, we know that the dynamic
interpretant is the actual interpretation we make, or understanding we
reach, in the first instance of interpretation. For instance, when you
say to me whilst pointing at some cowardly woman we know, “I saw her
duck under the table”, the dynamic interpretant is my understanding
that you are the utterer, that I am the addressee, and that you saw
our cowardly acquaintance hide beneath a table.
 There is also an interesting connection between the dynamic
interpretant and the immediate object. As the understanding we
actually reach at any particular point in the sign chain, the dynamic
interpretant represents an incomplete understanding, or
interpretation, of the dynamic object. More important, though, is that
the immediate object of some sign in a sign chain consists of the
actual interpretations made previously, that is, it consists of the
dynamic interpretants from earlier stages in the sign chain. As
Ransdell (1977, 169) puts it, the “immediate object is, in other
words, the funded result of all interpretation prior to the
interpretation of the given sign”. The dynamic interpretant then, is
the actual interpretation or understanding we make at some point in
the semiotic process, and also constitutes, along with previous
dynamic interpretants, the immediate object, or partial understanding
we have of the dynamic object at any particular point in the semiotic
process.
 Peirce describes the final interpretant as, “that which would finally
be decided to be the true interpretation if consideration of the
matter were carried so far that an ultimate opinion were reached” (CP8
.184 (1909)). Elsewhere he describes it as the “effect that would be
produced on the mind by the sign after sufficient development of
thought” (CP8 .343 (1908)). The final interpretant, then, seems to be
what our understanding of the dynamic object would be at the end of
inquiry, that is, if we had a reached a true understanding of the
dynamic object. Peirce's notion of inquiry is clearly central here. As
Hookway points out, we might best define the final interpretant as the
understanding:
 As an example, consider again the kinds of utterance that we have
already looked at. In such a case as your uttering, “I saw her duck
under the table”, the final interpretant would be the understanding
where there is “no latitude of interpretation at all” (CP5 .447
(1905)), that is, where the meanings of the words, the identity of the
agents involved and so on, are absolutely determinate. So, the final
interpretant of your utterance of “I saw her duck under the
table” is my coming to a determinate understanding of what you
mean. We can envisage how this would come about, by my asking a
variety of questions, like “are you using ‘duck’ as a verb
or a noun?”, or even “are you talking to me?” and developing a series
of dynamic interpretants that get us closer and closer to the final
interpretant.
 Just as the dynamic interpretant has clear connections with other
elements of Peirce's semiotic, so too does the final interpretant. As
should be clear, from the connections that emerge from the notion of
inquiry, the final interpretant interacts strongly with the dynamic
object. The final interpretant, then, is important to our
understanding of the dynamic object in a couple of ways. First, it is
the point where our grasp of the dynamic object would be complete and,
according to Ransdell (1977, 169–170), is where the immediate object
and the dynamic object coincide. This represents the full assimilation
or integration of the dynamic object into our system of signs. Second,
the final interpretant functions as an exemplar or normative standard
by which we can judge our actual interpretative responses to the
sign. As David Savan puts it, “Peirce's intention was to identify the
third type of interpretant as providing a norm or standard by which
particular stages (Dynamical Interpretants) of an historical process
may be judged.” (Savan 1988, 62).
 This identification of the six elements of a sign is the clearest and
least controversial part of Peirce's final sign theories. Most of what
we know about Peirce's final account is gleaned from letters,
partially worked out manuscripts and other miscellaneous
items. Consequently, there is much to the final account that is still
unclear, unsatisfactory, incomplete, and controversial. In this final
section, we shall look at two of the most interesting issues
surrounding the final account: Peirce's projected Final Classification
of sixty-six signs; and what appears to be his identification of
additional interpretants.
 Just as the Early and Interim Accounts include a corresponding
classification of sign types, Peirce's final account holds similar
typological ambitions. Peirce states explicitly that there are
sixty-six classes of sign in his final typology. (See
EP2. 481). Strictly speaking, the six elements that we have detailed
yield only twenty eight sign types, but we are interested in Peirce's
very final typology. He believes that we can obtain these sixty-six
classes, rather in the manner of the 1903 typology, by identifying ten
elements of signs and signification, each of which has three
qualifying classes, and then working out their permissible
combinations. These ten elements include the six sign elements
identified above, plus four other elements that focus on the relation
between signs, objects and interpretants. The ten elements and their
respective sign types, taken from Peirce's 1908 letters to Lady Welby
(EP2 483–491), then, are as follows:
 The reason that Peirce believes these ten elements will yield
sixty-six classes is clear enough, the same combinatorial
considerations given for the interim typology (outlined above in 3.4)
apply here. However, the precise manner and order in which these
elements interact will determine what the sixty-six classes of signs
will look like in the final typology. Unfortunately, these ten
divisions and their classes represent a baffling array of
under-explained terminology, and there is little to indicate precisely
how we should set about the task of combining them. Even though we may
be confident on the number of signs in the final typology, other
details are sketchy and underdeveloped, and there still exists no
fully satisfactory account of the sixty-six classes. As Nathan Houser
points out, “a sound and detailed extension of Peirce's analysis
of signs to his full set of ten divisions and sixty-six classes is
perhaps the most pressing problem for Peircian
semiotics”. (Houser 1992, 502).
 There is, of course, good work on the final typology (see (Burks and
Weiss 1949), (Sanders 1970), (Savan 1988), (Jappy 1989), (Muller
1994), and (Farias and Queiroz 2003) for the best of this work), but
ultimately, it is not clear that any account will overcome the
problems posed by the incomplete and cursory nature of the final
account. Indeed, it is not clear that Peirce himself was fully at ease
with his final typology and how its elements should hang together. As
he himself said:
 As is common with all of Peirce's work in philosophy, various changes
in terminology and subtleties with accompanying neologisms occur from
one piece of work to the next. His work on interpretants is no
different. At various points in his final accounts of signs, Peirce
describes the division of interpretants as being: immediate, dynamic
and final; or as emotional, energetic, and logical; or as naïve,
rogate and normal; or as intentional, effective and communicational;
or even destinate, effective and explicit. As Liszka (1990, 20) notes,
“the received view in Peirce scholarship suggests that the
divisions of interpretant into immediate, dynamic, and final are
archetypal, all other divisions being relatively synonymous with these
categories.” There are, however, some dissenters from this
view.
 In discussing the interpretant, Peirce describes one of the
trichotomies above as follows:
 For some scholars, this describes a division distinct from the
immediate/dynamic/final trichotomy. Fitzgerald (1966, 78) claims that
since emotional, energetic and logical interpretants are actual
effects, they must be seen as three sub-types of the dynamic
interpretant. This is because dynamic interpretants are described by
Peirce as the effect actually produced on the mind. Short (1981, 1996,
and 2004) thinks that each of the immediate, dynamic and final
interpretants may be further sub-divided into emotional, energetic and
logical. In particular, Short thinks that the immediate/dynamic/final
trichotomy describes the interpretant at some stage of an end-directed
semiotic process, whereas the emotional/energetic/logical trichotomy
describes the types of interpretant possible at any given stage.
 There are simple textual reasons that count against Fitzgerald's
claims. For instance, Peirce describes the dynamic interpretant as
deriving its character from action (CP8 .315 (1904)), but later says,
“action cannot be a logical interpretant” (CP5 .491
(1906)). This seems to make the two inconsistent. (See Liszka (1990,
21) for more on the problems with Fitzgerald's claim). Moreover, this
inconsistency seems to suggest a problem for Short's view since his
account also suggests that the dynamic interpretant should include the
logical interpretant as a subdivision (Short 1981, 213). Short,
however, claims textual support for his own view from instances where
Peirce mentions the emotional/energetic/logical trichotomy alongside
the apparently separate claim that signs have three
interpretants. (Short sites (CP8 .333 (1904)) and (CP4 .536
(1906)). Short takes this as suggesting that the two should be treated
as different and distinct trichotomies. (Short 2004, 235).
 How far the textual evidence on the matter will prove decisive is
unclear, especially given the fragmentary nature of Peirce's final
work on signs. However, one or two things militate in favor of the
“received view”. First, Peirce is notorious for experimenting with
terminology, especially when trying to pin down his own ideas, or
describe the same phenomenon from different angles. Second, it is
unclear why trichotomies like the
intentional/effectual/communicational should count as terminological
experiments whilst the emotional/energetic/logical counts as a
distinct division. And finally, there is little provision in Peirce's
projected sixty-six classes of signs for the kind of additional
classifications imposed by further subdivisions of the
interpretant. (For more on this discussion see, (Liszka 1990 and
1996), (Fitzgerald 1966), (Lalor 1997), (Short 1981, 1996, and
2004)).