Peter of Spain has been established as the medieval author of a work
that became widely known as Summule logicales magistri Petri
Hispani (Collection of Logic Matters of Master Peter of Spain).
The great number of manuscripts and printed editions is evidence of
the enormous success this work met with throughout European
universities well into the seventeenth century. An interpolated
version of his Tractatus, by then known as the Summulae
logicales, was used by John Buridan as a basic text to comment
upon. But finding out the true identity of the author of this
influential Tractatus has proved to be a difficult task. For
a long time it was assumed that he was a Portuguese who became Pope in
1276, under the name of John XXI. There is also another, earlier
tradition, according to which the author of the Tractatus was
regarded as Spanish, and a member of the Dominican order. Yet another
attribution, dating from the fifteenth century, was to a Petrus
Ferrandi Hispanus, who died between 1254 and 1259; this attribution
would be consistent with the idea that Peter’s works on logic
originated from the first half of the thirteenth century. According to
still another attribution, the Summule was compiled by a
Black Friar no earlier than in the late thirteenth or early fourteenth
century.
The ‘Dominican-thesis’ can be divided into three
traditions:
Current research on the identity of Peter of Spain has once again
taken up the idea that he must have been a member of the Dominican
Order instead of Pope John XXI (D’Ors 1997, 2001, 2003).
However, we are still in the dark about the true identity of Peter of
Spain. The most recent information we have on this score is that a
number of the Dominican candidates recently suggested as the author of
the Tractatus can be deleted from the list (Tugwell 1999,
2006). The lack of further information also makes it difficult to
establish the dates and specifics of his carreer.
It is still not possible to establish the date of origin of the
Tractatus, the work that has enjoyed such enormous success.
Recent scholarship suggests that it could have been written any time
between the 1220s and the 1250s (Ebbessen 2013, 68–69). It has
universally been recognised as a work by Peter of Spain. Another work
that has been identified as Peter of Spain’s is a
Syncategoreumata (Treatise on Syncategorematic Words), which
was probably written some years after the
 Tractatus.[2]
 Considering the fact that in all the thirteenth-century manuscripts
the Syncategoreumata directly follow the Tractatus,
and the number of similarities between doctrinal aspects of these two
works on logic, it is almost certain that they were written by the
same author. Both works seem to have originated from Southern France
or Northern Spain, the region where we also find the earliest
commentaries on these treatises.
Besides these works on logic, there are other works that have been
written by a Peter of Spain. In the Petrus Hispanus papa
tradition, he is the supposed author of a famous medical work
Thesaurus pauperum, as well as fourteen other works on
medicine. Other writings by (a) Peter of Spain include a Scientia
libri de anima, and commentaries on Aristotle’s De
anima, De morte et vita, De sensu et sensato,
De
 animalibus,[3.]
 and commentaries on works by pseudo-Denys the Areopagite. As yet
there is no certainty about whether the Peter of Spain who wrote these
treatises is the author of the Tractatus and the
Syncategoreumata, or about the dates of their origin.
Another Peter of Spain, referred to as Petrus Hispanus
non-papa, has been identified as the author of the Summa
‘Absoluta cuiuslibet’, a late twelfth-century
handbook on syntax closely linked with Priscian’s
Institutiones grammatice, libb. XVII and XVIII, which became
very popular later in the Middle Ages under the name Priscianus
minor (Kneepkens 1987). The chronology of this work seems to rule
out that this Peter of Spain is the same author as the author of the
Tractatus.
Peter’s logic seems to have its origin in the continental
tradition. Evidence of the educational carreer of the
Tractatus appears from two
 commentaries,[4]
 which contain short lemmata and a number of questions
(questiones) together with their solutions. The tracts as
contained in these texts are very similar to the ones in the
Tractatus. The Tractatus has features that are
typical of the Paris tradition, such as the separate treatment of
ampliation, restriction and distribution, as well as several other,
doctrinal
 elements.[5]
 We do not know whether Peter had any connection with Paris, nor can
we say anything definitive about the identity of Peter of
Spain’s teachers. Earlier sources for Peter’s works on
logic can be traced back to Boethian-Aristotelian logic, and
authorities in the field of grammar such as Priscian and Donatus.
Like the Tractatus, the Syncategoreumata also
displays a continental origin, and appears to have continued along the
lines of a similar work by Johannes Pagus (which has been dated
between 1225 and 1235), later on further developed by Nicholas of
Paris, who wrote his Syncategoreumata between 1240 and 1250
(see Braakhuis 1979, Vol. I, p. 248).
The Tractatus can be divided into two main parts. One part
deals with doctrines found in the so-called logica
antiquorum—i.e., the logica vetus (old logic) and
logica nova (new logic)—and the other contains
doctrines covered by the logica modernorum—viz. the
tracts that discuss the proprietates terminorum (properties
of terms).
The first main part of the Tractatus divides into five
tracts. The first tract, De introductionibus (On introductory
topics) explains the concepts used in traditional
logic—nomen (noun), verbum (verb),
oratio (phrase), propositio (proposition)—and
presents the divisions of and the (logical) relationships between
propositions. The second tract, De predicabilibus (On the
predicables) covers matters dealt with in Boethius’s accounts of
Porphyry’s Isagoge. It gives an account of the concept
predicabile and the five predicables—genus,
species, differentia, proprium,
accidens—i.e., the common features of and differences
between the predicables, as well as of the terms
‘predicatio’ and
‘denominativum’. Tract three, De
predicamentis (On the categories), discusses the ten Aristotelian
categories, as well as some items already dealt with in the previous
treatise. The fourth tract, De sillogismis (On syllogisms)
mainly goes back to Boethius’s De syllogismis
categoricis (On categorical syllogisms). It gives an explanation
of the basic element of the syllogism, i.e., propositio, and
of the syllogism, and then goes into mood and figure, the proper forms
of syllogisms, and briefly deals with what are called paralogisms. The
fifth tract, De locis (On topical relationships), is derived
from Boethius’s De topicis differentiis (On different
topical relationships) I and II. This tract starts off with an
explanation of the notions argumentum and
argumentatio, and then proceeds to deal with the species of
argumentation: syllogism, induction, enthymeme, and example. Next, it
gives a definition of locus (the Latin translation of the
Greek topos): a locus is the seat of an argument
(i.e., the locus is supposed to warrant the inference by
bringing it under some generic rule.) The intrinsic loci (=
the kind of locus that occurs when the argument is derived
from the substance of the thing involved) are covered first, followed
by the extrinsic loci (= the kind of locus that
occurs when the argument is derived from something that is completely
separate from the substance of the thing involved) and intermediary
loci (= the kind of locus that occurs when the
argument is taken from the things that partly share in the terms of
the problem and partly differ from it). Examples are:
intrinsic—the locus “from definition”:
‘a rational animal is running; therefore a man is
running’; extrinsic—the locus “from
opposites”: ‘Socrates is black; therefore he is not
white’; intermediary—‘the just is good; therefore
justice is good’.
The second part of the Tractatus comprises subjects that were
of major importance in the doctrine of the properties of terms. In the
sixth tract, De suppositionibus, the theory of supposition is
dealt with. The treatise begins with an exposition of
significatio. The definition of significatio runs:
significatio is the respresentation of a thing by means of a
word in accordance with convention. Next it gives a definition of the
related terms suppositio and copulatio, and the
differences between the terms significatio,
suppositio and copulatio. Of these three
suppositio and significatio are the most important
in Peter’s semantics. Suppositio is defined as the
acceptance of a substantive verb for some thing. Suppositio
is dependent on significatio, because supposition can only
occur via a term that already has some significatio. Put in
other words, significatio pertains to a word by itself, and
supposition to a term as actually used in some context.
The tract concludes with a division of suppositio. The first
division is into suppositio communis (common supposition) and
suppositio discreta (discrete supposition)—e.g., the
terms homo (man) and Sortes (Socrates)
respectively.
The second division, suppositio communis, is divided into
naturalis (natural) and accidentalis (coincidental).
Suppositio naturalis is described as the acceptance of a
common term for all those things that can share in the common
universal nature signified by the term in question—e.g.,
homo (‘man’) taken by itself by its very nature
is able to stand for all men, whether in the past, present or future;
suppositio accidentalis is the acceptance of a common term
for those things for which the term in question requires an additional
term—e.g., in homo est (‘A man is’) the
term homo stands for present men, whereas in homo
fuit (‘A man has been’) and in homo erit
(‘A man will be’) it stands for past men and future men
respectively, owing to the additional terms fuit and
erit.
The third division, suppositio accidentalis, is divided into
suppositio simplex (simple supposition) and suppositio
personalis (personal supposition). Suppositio simplex is
the acceptance of a term for the universal ‘thing’ it
signifies, as in homo est species (‘Man is a
species’, animal est genus (‘Animal is a
genus’), in which the substantive terms homo and
animal stand for the universal man and animal, and not any
one of their particulars. Suppositio simplex can occur both
in the subject- and in the predicate-term—e.g., homo est
species (‘Man is a species’) and omnis homo est
animal (‘Every man is an animal’) respectively.
Suppositio personalis is the acceptance of a common term for
one or more of its particulars, as in homo currit (‘A
man is running’).
The fourth division, suppositio personalis, is subdivided
into either derterminata (determinate = standing for a
certain particular) or confusa (confused = standing for any
individual falling under that name). Suppositio determinata
occurs when a common term is taken indefinitely or in combination with
a particular sign—e.g., homo currit (‘Man is
running’) or aliquis homo currit (‘A /some man is
running’). Suppositio confusa occurs when a common term
is taken in combination with a universal sign (’Every man is
running’).
The tract on supposition winds up with the discussion of a few
questions regarding the attribution of supposition in a few cases.
The seventh tract of the Tractatus, on fallacies, which forms
part of the Aristotelian-Boethian logic, is written in the tradition
of the Fallacie maiores (Major fallacies). The eighth tract,
De relativis (On relatives) deals with the relative pronouns
as defined by Priscian in his Institutiones grammaticae. The
relative pronouns are devided into: relatives of substance, such as
qui (who), ille (he), alius (another), and
relatives of accident, such as talis (of such a kind),
qualis (of what kind), tantus (so much),
quantus (how much). The former are subdivided into relatives
of identity (qui and ille) and relatives of
diversity (such as alter and reliquus, both of which
can be translated as ‘the other’). The relative of
identity is defined in terms of supposition as what refers to and
stands for the same thing. These relatives are either reciprocal or
non-reciprocal. With regard to the relatives of identity, Peter adds a
dicussion of a number of questions about the rationale for using
demonstrative pronouns, and some problems concerning how the fallacy
of a relative having two diverse referents comes about.
The tract on relatives continues with a brief discussion on the
relatives of diversity, accompanied by a rule about the supposition of
the relative when it is added to a superior and an inferior in a
premiss and a conclusion, as in aliud ab animali; ergo
aliud ab homine (‘Something other than an animal; therefore
something other than a man’). With regard to relatives of
identity a rule of the “ancients”, who deny that a
proposition introduced by a relative can have a contradictory
opposite, is discussed and rejected. Another rule is given about the
identity of supposition of a non-reciprocal relative and what it
refers to. The tract concludes with short accounts of relatives of
accident.
The ninth, tenth, eleventh, and twelfth tracts of the
Tractatus, i.e., the short tracts De ampliationibus
(On ampliation), De appellationibus (On appellation), De
restrictionibus (On restriction) and De distributionibus
(On distribution) are in fact elaborations of the theory of
supposition. Ampliation is an extension of the supposition of a term.
It occurs when an expression is combined with a modal term—e.g.
homo potest esse Antichristus (‘A man can be the
Antichrist’), and homo necessario est animal (‘A
man is necessarily an animal’)—in which case the
supposition of the term ‘man’ is extended to more than
just individuals existing in the present. The tract on
appellationes is very short: appellation is considered no
more than a special case of restriction, i.e., the restricted
supposition brought about by a present-tense verb. In this tract the
rules of appellation are in fact specific kinds of rules of
restriction. The subject of restriction in general is discussed in the
eleventh tract. The rules of restriction are the same ones as were
presented in the early Parisian textbooks on logic (see de Libera
1982, pp. 176–177). The final tract, on distribution, deals with
the multiplication of common terms as a result of their being combined
with universal signs. These universal signs are either distributive of
substance (such as omnis, nullus), or of accidents
(such as qualiscumque, quantuscumque). In this
description ‘substance’ is defined as substistent modes of
being, and ‘accident’ as accidental modes of being.
Separate attention is given to the universal sign omnis
(‘all’ or ‘every’) along with a discussion of
the common rule that the use of omnis requires three
appellata (particular things). The most frequently cited
example in these discussions in the thirteenth century was the
sophisma omnis phenix est (‘Every phoenix is’).
According to Peter of Spain, the use of omnis does not call
for at least three appellata; an exception to this rule is
found in cases in which there is only one appellatum, as is
the phoenix-case. The tract also pays attention to a number of
tongue-twisting sophisma-sentences.
Peter’s treatise on syncategorematic words forms part of a
separate genre that developed from the beginning of the thirteenth
century. The term syncategorema comes from a famous passage
of Priscian in his Institutiones grammatice II , 15, in which
a distinction is made between two types of wordclasses (partes
orationis) distinguished by logicians, viz. nouns and verbs on
the one hand, and syncategoremata, or
consignificantia, on the other. The latter are defined as
words that do not have a definitive meaning on their own, but acquire
one only in combination with other, categorematic words. 
Like the treatises of the Tractatus kind, the
Syncategoreumata were developed from the (twelfth-century)
theories on fallacies, as well as from grammatical doctrines (from the
same period). From the second half of the twelfth century, there was a
growing interest in the linguistic elements that are considered to lie
at the basis of ambiguity and fallacious reasoning. Hence the increase
of treatises presenting a systematic account of these terms. The
connection these treatises have with Priscian’s grammar can be
gathered from the attention different authors pay to the signa
quantitatis (or quantifiers), and the fact that considerable
attention is given to the meaning and function of syncategorematic
terms.
The list of words to be included among the syncategoreumata
was not always the same. Generally speaking it comprised exclusive
words tantum (only), solus (alone), exceptive words
such as preter (except), nisi (unless), consecutive
words such as si (if) and nisi (if not), the words
incipit (begins) and desinit (ceases), the modal
terms necessario (necessarily) and contingenter
(contingently), the conjunctives an (or), et (and),
nisi (unless), in eo quod (in that), and
quin (that not). In Peter’s work we also find a
discussion of the terms quanto (‘how much’ or
‘as much as’) quam (‘than’ or
‘as’) and quicquid (whatever). Unlike that of
some other authors (such as William of Sherwood and Robert Bacon), his
list does not include the word omnis.
In the opening of his Syncategoreumata, Peter presents his
rationale for this investigation, viz. that there is a close link
between the use of these kinds of words in sentences and their
truth-value. His idea is that the syncategoreumata must have some sort
of signification, but not the same as the categorematic words. For
this special kind of signification he uses the words
consignificatio and dispositio.
The first two separate chapters of the Syncategoreumata are
devoted to the words est and non, which are said to
be implied in all other syncategorematic words. Peter’s account
of the first word focuses on the notion of compositio
(composition), which is explained in great detail, by looking into the
signification of nouns and verbs (signifying a composition of a
quality with a substance, and that of an act with a substance
respectively). Considerable attention is given to the composition
featuring in the verb ‘is’, in the form of the question of
whether the composition involved can be counted among beings or not,
considering the fact that it can be used to express different kinds of
states of affairs. The chapter on negation introduces the important
distinction between an act as conceived of or in the manner of a
concept (ut concepta sive per modum conceptus) and as carried
out (ut exercita) (see Nuchelmans 1988). Among the former
type we find the noun ‘negation’ and the verb ‘to
deny’, whereas the latter is what is meant by the negative
particle ‘not’. The remainder of the chapter deals with
the function of the negation, which is to remove the composition found
in whatever it covers, and discusses some well-known
sophisma-sentences which turn on the specific function of
negation.
The third chapter of the Syncategoreumata discusses the
exclusive words solus and tantum. They are called
exclusives because they carry out an exclusion, not because they
signify one. An exclusion, furthermore, requires four things, namely,
what is excluded, what is excluded from, the respect in which it is
excluded, and the act of exclusion. The kinds of exclusion are divided
into general and specific: the former involves an exclusion from
something generic, whereas the latter from something specific.
Questions that come up in this section have to do with the results of
adding an exclusive term to different kinds of words, such as to a
term falling under the category of Substance: does it exclude only
other substances, or does it also exclude from things listed under
another category? And what if it is added to a term listed under the
category of Accident (such as colour, quantity, and so on)? The next
question deals with the sorts of terms that can be meaningfully
associated with an exclusion. For example, is it possible to exclude
something from ‘being’ (as in ‘Only being is,
therefore nothing other than being is’)? The tract proceeds with
the kinds of things that can qualify for an exclusion. The fourth
chapter, which deals with exceptive words, is compiled in a similar
manner.
The fifth chapter is about the word si, which is said to
signify causality in or via antecedence. The chapter also contains
discussions of the kinds of consecution or consequence, problems of
inference connected with the referents of terms used in consecutive
sentences, and also on how to contradict a conditional sentence.
Special attention is given to the problem whether from an impossible
antecedent anything follows.
The chapter on ‘begins’ and ‘ceases’ is a good
example of the way in which extra-logical considerations found their
way into medieval treatises on logic. Thus, apart from the semantics
and inferential problems connected with the use of these words in
propositions, the chapter also looks into the notions of motion and
time. An important part of Peter’s ontological views can be
gathered from chapter seven, which covers issues connected with the
use of modal terms. Chapter eight discusses the signification and use
of connectives, and the final chapter on syncategorematic words proper
is concerned with the expressions quanto, quam and
quicquid. A very short concluding chapter of Peter’s
Syncategoreumata deals with a somewhat isolated topic, i.e.
the proper modes of response in an argument. The topics looked into
are solution, the quantity and quality of syllogisms, and the ways to
go about proving a syllogism.
One of the most important elements in Peter’s logic concerns the
doctrine of supposition. The theory of supposition has its origins in
the twelfth century, when the medievals showed a growing interest in
the ways in which words function in different contexts. This way of
dealing with the semantics of terms has been dubbed the
“contextual approach” (see de Rijk 1962–67, Vol. II,
Part I, pp. 113–117).
The primary semantic property of a word is its significatio,
in Peter’s definition, the “representation of a thing by a
word in accordance with convention”. It is a natural property of
a word, the presentation of some (universal) content to the mind. The
significatio of a word depends on its imposition, i.e., the
application originally given to the word in question. A word can have
more than one significatio, if it was originally applied to
two or more distinct (universal) natures.
The counterpart of significatio, the formal constituent of
every meaning, is the word’s capacity to “stand for”
different things (even though its significatio remains the
same), depending on the context in which it is used. In the early
stages of the development of the theory on the properties of terms,
this feature of a word was called appellatio. For instance,
the words ‘man’ and ‘horse’ can be used to
stand for different individual men or horses. But they can also stand
for themselves, e.g., when they are used in sentences such as
‘man is a noun’, or ‘horse is a noun’.
Moreover, their meaning can differ according as the words are used in
combination with verbs of different tenses.
In the final stages of the development of the theory, the notion of
supposition becomes the general label that covers all the uses of a
noun (substantive or adjectival), to which other recognised properties
of terms (appellatio, ampliatio and
restrictio) are subordinated.
The theory of properties of terms shows a radical inconsistency, which
has been explained as “the persistent hesitation of medieval
logicians between the domains of connotation (universals) and
denotation (individuals)” (De Rijk 1982, pp. 167–168).
This inconsistency runs throughout Peter’s account of
supposition, and comes to the fore most prominently in what he says
about natural supposition (suppositio naturalis). The main
problem is in what way the property of natural supposition is related
to the term’s significatio, which was defined as the
acceptance of a word for a thing (res). By this definition,
the significatio of the term ‘man’ covers both
its intension and extension, i.e., the universal nature of man and the
individuals that have this nature in common. Suppositio
naturalis, on the other hand, is described as “the
acceptance of a common term for all those things that can share in a
common universal nature”; for example, the term
‘man’ when taken by itself by its very nature stands for
all the individuals that fall under it, whether they existed in the
past, exist in the present or will exist in the future. From this
definition and the example just presented it appears that the
extensional features of significatio and suppositio
naturalis overlap. The latter kind of suppositio has
been explained by interpreters as the natural capacity of a
significative word to stand for something.
There is a more telling difference between significatio and
suppositio naturalis, however. Significatio is the
natural property of any significative term to represent things, owing
to its original imposition, whereas a term’s supposition only
enters the scene when it is used. The expression “taken by
itself” (per se sumptus) found in Peter’s account
of suppositio naturalis, does not mean that no context is
required, as is the case in significatio, but it merely
indicates that for the moment the actual context is being disregarded.
The link between significatio and suppositio is the
following. When some word has acquired a signification by an
impositor (= someone who bestows a meaning upon a word), then
it connotes a univeral nature or essence, and acquires a natural
capacity to stand for all the actual and possible individuals that
share in this common nature; it owes this capacity to its
significatio. If, however, we disregard for a moment the
actual context in which the term in question is used and look upon the
term as taken by itself (per se sumptus), then its
supposition covers its entire extension. If we take the factual
context in which the term is used into consideration, then its
extension becomes limited, owing to the context. The context, or more
precisely, the added significative term, can be of three kinds: the
added significative term can be a predicate of a proposition in which
the term at issue occurs, the added significative term can be an
adjective, or the context can be of a social nature (De Rijk 1971. See
also de Rijk 1985, pp. 183–203). 
The distinction between significatio and suppositio
naturalis persisted throughout the thirteenth and fourteenth
centuries. Behind it is the fundamental view that regardless of
whether a word is used in some context or not, it always has a
significatum, i.e., the universal nature or essence it
signifies, which can be separated from what the word comes to mean in
a specific context.
Besides suppositio naturalis, Peter’s (and other
medievals’) conception of suppositio simplex also seems
to hover between connotation and denotation. In the expression
homo est species the term homo has suppositio
simplex, but this is precisely too what the term homo
signifies. So there scarcely seems reason to separate signification
from supposition on this score. The specific use of suppositio
simplex found in Peter of Spain and other medieval authors, as
the representation of a universal nature, is rejected later on by
authors such as William of Ockham. For the latter, the term
homo in the example just given has suppositio
simplex (for Ockham a special case of suppositio
materialis) in that it stands for the mental concept of man
(Kneale & Kneale 1978, pp. 268–269).
Peter of Spain’s logical works are commonly characterised as
revealing a moderately ‘realistic’ outlook. To explain the
contents of linguistic expressions and the function of logical terms,
he is inclined to focus on their relationships to some extra-mental
reality. This can be shown from the way in which he discusses the use
of the word est (is), his account of suppositio
simplex, and the way he analyses the occurrence of the word
‘necessarily’ in propositions. Moreover, his conception of
the consecutive expression ‘if’ clearly shows his tendency
to put the domains of reality and language on a par. (However, not all
linguistic expressions are connected with extramental reality.
Although ontology always plays a role in his accounts of language, it
would appear that Peter is especially interested in the contents of
linguistic epressions. In that regard it seems more appropriate to
speak of an intensionalist semantics.)
In his Syncategoreumata, Peter analyses the significative
function of the word ‘is’. To a certain extent his
findings are not confined to that term alone, but cover all verbs, in
which the verb ‘is’ is always understood. The most
remarkable feature about his discussion of ‘is’ is his
focus on the notion of composition. What he is particularly interested
in is the kinds of things affirmative propositions featuring that verb
can refer to, in his words, the type of composition involved in such
propositions.
The notion of ‘composition’ plays a prominent role in
Peter’s semantics. Before embarking on the specifics of the word
‘is’, he first looks into the compositiones
involved in the noun and the verb. When it comes to the composition
involved in the use of ‘is’, the starting-point for his
account is the question whether the expression ‘is’ in a
proposition of the form ‘S is P’ implies the
‘being’ of the composition. Whether it does or not depends
on how we consider the composition. If we are talking about any
composition whatsoever, in his words, the composition in general, the
composition can indiscriminately be connected with beings and
non-beings. This is because we can talk about both things that are and
things that are not by making use of the same affirmative
propositions. Hence anything expressed by a proposition of the form
‘S is P’ is a being in a certain sense (ens
quodammodo). The type of composition he is referring to here is
the mental content of some affirmation, which is something that only
has being to a certain degree. However, the composition in general,
that is, the state of affairs involved in such expressions, is
primarily connected with being rather than non-being. It is when we
talk about non-beings, such as chimaeras, that being in a certain
sense once again enters the scene. Hence a distinction of the types of
being referred to, or the types of composition involved in affirmative
propositions into being in the absolute sense (ens
simpliciter) and being in a certain sense (ens
quodammodo). The difference between these two types of being is
illustrated by the distinction between two types of inference: from
‘A man is an animal’, in which the composition involved is
a being in the absolute sense, it follows ‘Therefore a man
is’, but from ‘A chimaera is a non-being’, in which
the composition is a being in a certain sense only, it does not follow
‘Therefore a chimaera is’.
The counterpart of Peter’s discussion of composition is the
section on negation. Peter specifically goes into the question of what
it is the negation denies. In his words, the negation removes the
composition. The composition in this connection is identified with the
affirmed state of affairs (res affirmata). What the negation
removes is not the state of affairs, but the affirmation that goes
along with it. The basis of both composition and negation turns out to
be the same state of affairs, i.e., something that is formulated in
the mind, to which we can either assent or deny to be the case.
The focus on matters of ontology is evidenced in other portions of
Peter’s logic as well. For Peter, as for Henry of Ghent (who
also wrote a Syncategoreumata) the expression homo
(man) in homo est animal (‘Man is an animal’) has
simple supposition: it stands for the universal nature of humanity.
Accordingly, the expression is necessarily true, even if no man should
exist. The term ‘necessarily’ thus has ampliative force:
it enables the subject term ‘man’ to refer to individuals
not only existing in the present ( which is the normal case when a
present-tense verb is used), but also to those of the past and the
future. This analysis runs contrary to what is found in some other
Syncategoreumata authors, like Johannes Pagus and Nicholas of
Paris, who maintain that the term ‘necessarily’ does not
have ampliative force. Hence the expression homo necessario est
animal (‘A man is necessarily an animal’) is only
true on the condition that a man exists.
A similar point is made in connection with the use of modal terms. For
Peter of Spain, logical necessity is based upon ontological necessity,
or, the necessity of propositions has its foundation in the necessity
of the things spoken about. Necessity is associated with different
types of things, such as the relationships between certain concepts
(such as genera and species), and the specific things the notions of
which we come across in the different kinds of (scientific) knowledge
(such as mathematical entities and their properties). His outlook on
necessity is clearly revealed in his analysis of the inference
homo necessario est animal; ergo Sortes necessario est
animal (‘A man is necessarily an animal; therefore Socrates
is necessarily an animal’). In his view the inference is not
valid, because a transition is made from necessary being to a being at
a certain time. For Peter then, the notion of necessity ultimately
refers to a necessary state of affairs in reality, something that is
always the
 case.[6]
A fusion of the domains of language and reality also turns up in
Peter’s account of the consecutive ‘if’, which he
explains as signifying causality. Like his contemporaries he looks
into the question whether from something impossible anything follows.
In his account, the notion of ‘impossibility’ can be taken
in two ways, viz. impossibility as such (or absolute impossibility),
which amounts to nothing, or some impossible state of affairs, that is
a combination of notions that do have a real foundation but are
incompatible. From the latter type of impossibility, such as ‘A
man is an ass’, something, but not anything can follow, e.g.,
‘Therefore a man is an animal’. From impossibilities as
such, e.g., ‘You know that you are a stone’, nothing can
follow. The fundamental idea is that in order for something to follow
from an antecedent, the antecedent in the consecutive relationship
must be a something (res) of some sort (see Spruyt 1993, pp.
161–193).