One can get a bearing on the notion of pre-reflective
self-consciousness by contrasting it with reflective
self-consciousness. If you ask me to give you a description of the
pain I feel in my right foot, or of what I was just thinking about, I
would reflect on it and thereby take up a certain perspective that was
one order removed from the pain or the thought. Thus, reflective
self-consciousness is at least a second-order cognition. It may be the
basis for a report on one’s experience, although not all reports
involve a significant amount of reflection.
In contrast, pre-reflective self-consciousness is pre-reflective in
the sense that (1) it is an awareness we have before we do any
reflecting on our experience; (2) it is an implicit and first-order
awareness rather than an explicit or higher-order form of
self-consciousness. Indeed, an explicit reflective self-consciousness
is possible only because there is a pre-reflective self-awareness that
is an on-going and more primary kind of self-consciousness. Although
phenomenologists do not always agree on important questions about
method, focus, or even whether there is an ego or self, they are in
close to unanimous agreement about the idea that the experiential
dimension always involves such an implicit pre-reflective
 self-awareness.[1]
 In line with Edmund Husserl (1959, 189, 412), who maintains that
consciousness always involves a self-appearance
(Für-sich-selbst-erscheinens), and in agreement with
Michel Henry (1963, 1965), who notes that experience is always
self-manifesting, and with Maurice Merleau-Ponty who states that
consciousness is always given to itself and that the word
‘consciousness’ has no meaning independently of this
self-givenness (Merleau-Ponty 1945, 488), Jean-Paul Sartre writes that
pre-reflective self-consciousness is not simply a quality added to the
experience, an accessory; rather, it constitutes the very mode of
being of the experience:
In short, unless a mental process is pre-reflectively self-conscious
there will be nothing it is like to undergo the process, and it
therefore cannot be a phenomenally conscious process (Zahavi 1999,
2005, 2014). An implication of this is obviously that the
self-consciousness in question is so fundamental and basic that it can
be ascribed to all creatures that are phenomenally conscious,
including various non-human animals.
The notion of pre-reflective self-awareness is related to the idea
that experiences have a subjective ‘feel’ to them, a
certain (phenomenal) quality of ‘what it is like’ or what
it ‘feels’ like to have them. As it is usually expressed
outside of phenomenological texts, to undergo a conscious experience
necessarily means that there is something it is like for the subject
to have that experience (Nagel 1974; Searle 1992). This is obviously
true of bodily sensations like pain. But it is also the case for
perceptual experiences, experiences of desiring, feeling, and
thinking. There is something it is like to taste chocolate, and this
is different from what it is like to remember or imagine what it is
like to taste chocolate, or to smell vanilla, to run, to stand still,
to feel envious, nervous, depressed or happy, or to entertain an
abstract belief.
All of these different experiences are, however, also characterized by
their distinct first-personal character. The what-it-is-likeness of
phenomenal episodes is properly speaking a
what-it-is-like-for-me-ness. This for-me-ness doesn’t refer
to a specific experiential quality like sour or soft, rather it refers
to the distinct first-personal givenness of experience. It refers to
the fact that the experiences I am living through are given
differently (but not necessarily better) to me than to anybody else. I
may see that you are sad, but my seeing your sadness is qualitatively
different from my living through my sadness. It could consequently be
claimed that anybody who denies the for-me-ness of experience simply
fails to recognize an essential constitutive aspect of experience.
Such a denial would be tantamount to a denial of the first-person
perspective. It would entail the view that my own mind is either not
given to me at all—I would be mind- or self-blind—or is presented
to me in exactly the same way as the minds of others.
One sometimes distinguishes two uses of the term
‘conscious’, a transitive and an intransitive use. On the
one hand, we can speak of our being conscious of something, be
it x, y, or z. On the other, we can speak of our
being conscious simpliciter (rather than non-conscious). For
some time a widespread way to account for intransitive consciousness
in cognitive science and analytic philosophy of mind has been by means
of some kind of higher-order theory. The distinction between conscious
and non-conscious mental states has been taken to rest upon the
presence or absence of a relevant meta-mental state (e.g., Armstrong
1968; Carruthers 1996, 2000; Lycan 1987, 1996; Rosenthal 1997). Thus,
intransitive consciousness has been taken to depend upon the mind
directing its intentional aim at its own states and operations. As
Carruthers puts it, the subjective feel of experience presupposes a
capacity for higher-order awareness: “such self-awareness is a
conceptually necessary condition for an organism to be a subject of
phenomenal feelings, or for there to be anything that its experiences
are like” (1996, 152). But for Carruthers, the self-awareness in
question is a type of reflection. In his view, a creature must be
capable of reflecting upon, thinking about, and hence conceptualizing
its own mental states if those mental states are to be states of which
the creature is aware (1996, 155, 157).
One might share the view that there is a close link between
consciousness and self-consciousness and still disagree about the
nature of the link. And although the phenomenological view might
superficially resemble the view of the higher-order theories, we are
ultimately confronted with two quite different accounts. The
phenomenologists explicitly deny that the self-consciousness that is
present the moment I consciously experience something is to be
understood in terms of some kind of higher-order monitoring. It does
not involve an additional mental state, but is rather to be understood
as an intrinsic feature of the primary experience. That is, in
contrast to higher-order accounts of consciousness that claim that
consciousness is an extrinsic or relational property of those mental
states that have it, a property bestowed upon them from without by
some further state, the phenomenologists would typically argue that
the feature in virtue of which a mental state is conscious is an
intrinsic property of those mental states that have it. Moreover, the
phenomenologists also reject the attempt to construe intransitive
consciousness in terms of transitive consciousness, that is, they
reject the view that a conscious state is a state we are conscious of
as object. To put it differently, not only do they reject the view
that a mental state becomes conscious by being taken as an object by a
higher-order state, they also reject the view (generally associated
with Brentano) according to which a mental state becomes conscious by
taking itself as an object (cf. Zahavi 2004; 2014).
What arguments support the phenomenological claims, however?
Phenomenologists don’t simply appeal to a correct phenomenological
description but provide additional, more theoretical, arguments. One
line of reasoning found in virtually all of the phenomenologists is
the view that the attempt to let (intransitive) consciousness be a
result of a higher-order monitoring will generate an infinite regress.
On the face of it, this is a rather old idea. Typically, the regress
argument has been understood in the following manner. If all occurrent
mental states are conscious in the sense of being taken as objects by
occurrent second-order mental states, then these second-order mental
states must themselves be taken as objects by occurrent third-order
mental states, and so forth ad infinitum. The standard
response to this objection is that the regress can easily be avoided
by accepting the existence of non-conscious mental states. This is
precisely the position adopted by the defenders of higher-order
theory. For them a second-order perception or thought does not have to
be conscious. It would be conscious only if accompanied by a
(non-conscious) third-order thought or perception (Rosenthal 1997,
745). The phenomenological reply to this solution is rather
straightforward, however. The phenomenologists would concede that it
is possible to halt the regress by postulating the existence of
non-conscious mental states, but they would maintain that such an
appeal to the non-conscious leaves us with a case of explanatory
vacuity. That is, they would find it quite unclear why the relation
between two otherwise non-conscious processes should make one of them
conscious. Or to put it differently, they would be quite unconvinced
by the claim that a state without subjective or phenomenal qualities
can be transformed into one with such qualities, i.e., into an
experience with first-personal character, by the mere addition of a
non-conscious meta-state having the first-state as its intentional
object.
The phenomenological alternative avoids the regress. As Sartre writes:
“[T]here is no infinite regress here, since a consciousness has no
need at all of a reflecting [higher-order] consciousness in order to
be conscious of itself. It simply does not posit itself as an
object” (1936, 29 [1957, 45]). That is, pre-reflective
self-consciousness is not transitive in relation to the state (of)
which it is aware. It is, as Sartre puts it, the mode of existence of
consciousness itself. This does not mean that a higher-order
meta-consciousness is impossible, but merely that it always
presupposes the existence of a prior non-objectifying, pre-reflective
self-consciousness as its condition of possibility. To quote Sartre
again, “it is the non-reflective consciousness which renders the
reflection [and any higher-order representation of it] possible”
(1943, 20 [1956, liii]). 
There are also lines of argumentation in contemporary analytical
philosophy of mind that are close to and consistent with the
phenomenological conception of pre-reflective self-awareness. Alvin
Goldman provides an example:
A similar view has been defended by Owen Flanagan, who not only argues
that consciousness involves self-consciousness in the weak sense that
there is something it is like for the subject to have the experience,
but also speaks of the low-level self-consciousness involved in
experiencing my experiences as mine (Flanagan 1992, 194). As Flanagan
quite correctly points out, this primary type of self-consciousness
should not be confused with the much stronger notion of
self-consciousness that is in play when we are thinking about our own
narrative self. The latter form of reflective self-consciousness
presupposes both conceptual knowledge and narrative competence. It
requires maturation and socialization, and the ability to access and
issue reports about the states, traits, dispositions that make one the
person one is. Other philosophers who have defended comparable views,
include José Luis Bermúdez (1998), who has argued that that
there are a variety of nonconceptual forms of self-consciousness that
are “logically and ontogenetically more primitive than the higher
forms of self-consciousness that are usually the focus of
philosophical debate” (1998, 274; also see Poellner 2003), and Uriah
Kriegel (2009) who has defended the existence of a type of
self-consciousness that is intrinsic to and inherent in phenomenal
consciousness. Across a variety of philosophical studies, then, one
finds support for the phenomenological conception of pre-reflective
self-awareness.
That pre-reflective self-awareness is implicit, then, means that I am
not confronted with a thematic or explicit awareness of the experience
as belonging to myself. Rather we are dealing with a non-observational
self-acquaintance. Here is how Heidegger and Sartre put the point:
In other words, every positional consciousness of an object is at the
same time a non-positional consciousness of itself. If I count the
cigarettes which are in that case, I have the impression of disclosing
an objective property of this collection of cigarettes: they are a
dozen. This property appears to my consciousness as a property
existing in the world. It is very possible that I have no positional
consciousness of counting them. Then I do not know myself as counting.
Yet at the moment when these cigarettes are revealed to me as a dozen,
I have a non-thetic consciousness of my adding activity. If anyone
questioned me, indeed, if anyone should ask, “What are you doing
there?” I should reply at once, “I am counting.”
(Sartre 1943, 19–20 [1956, liii]).
It might be clarifying to compare the phenomenological notion of
pre-reflective self-consciousness with the one defended by Brentano.
According to Brentano as I listen to a melody I am aware that I am
listening to the melody. He acknowledges that I do not have two
different mental states: my consciousness of the melody is one and the
same as my awareness of perceiving it; they constitute one single
psychical phenomenon. On this point, and in opposition to higher-order
representation theories, Brentano and the phenomenologists are in
general agreement. But for Brentano, by means of this unified mental
state, I have an awareness of two objects: the melody and my
perceptual experience. 
Husserl disagrees on just this point, as do Sartre and Heidegger: my
awareness of my experience is not an awareness of it as an
 object.[2]
 My awareness is non-objectifying in the sense that I do not occupy
the position or perspective of a spectator or in(tro)spector who
attends to this experience in a thematic way. That a psychological
state is experienced, “and is in this sense conscious, does not
and cannot mean that this is the object of an act of consciousness, in
the sense that a perception, a presentation or a judgment is directed
upon it” (Husserl 1984a, 165 [2001, I, 273]). In pre-reflective
self-awareness, experience is given, not as an object, but precisely
as subjective experience. For phenomenologists, intentional experience
is lived through (erlebt), but does not appear in an
objectified manner. Experience is conscious of itself without being
the intentional object of consciousness (Husserl 1984b, 399; Sartre
1936, 28–29). That we are aware of our lived experiences even if
we do not direct our attention towards them is not to deny that we can
direct our attention towards our experiences, and thereby take them as
objects of reflection (Husserl 1984b, 424).
To be self-aware is not to capture a pure self or self-object that
exists separately from the stream of experience, rather it is to be
conscious of one’s experience in its intrinsic first-person mode
of givenness. When Hume, in a famous passage in A Treatise of
Human Nature (1739), declares that he cannot find a self when he
searches his experiences, but finds only particular perceptions or
feelings, it could be argued that he overlooks something in his
analysis, namely the specific givenness of his own experiences.
Indeed, he was looking only among his own experiences, and
seemingly recognized them as his own, and could do so only on the
basis of that immediate self-awareness that he seemed to miss. As C.O.
Evans puts it: “[F]rom the fact that the self is not an object
of experience it does not follow that it is non-experiential”
(Evans 1970, 145). Accordingly, we should not think of the self, in
this most basic sense, as a substance, or as some kind of ineffable
transcendental precondition, or as a social construct that gets
generated through time; rather it is an integral aspect of conscious
life, and involves this immediate experiential character.
One advantage of the phenomenological view is that it is capable of
accounting for some degree of diachronic unity, without actually
having to posit the self as a separate entity over and above the
stream of consciousness (see the discussion of time-consciousness in
Section 3 below). Although we live through a number of different
experiences, the experiencing itself remains a constant in regard to
whose experience it is. This is not accounted for by a substantial
self or a mental theater. On this point Hume was right. There is no
pure or empty field of consciousness upon which the concrete
experiences subsequently make their entry. The field of experiencing
is nothing apart from the specific experiences. Yet we are naturally
inclined to distinguish the strict singularity of an experience from
the continuous stream of changing experiences. What remains constant
and consistent across these changes is the sense of for-me-ness (or
perspectival ownership) constituted by pre-reflective self-awareness.
Only a being with this sense of ownership could go on to form concepts
about herself, consider her own aims, ideals, and aspirations as her
own, construct stories about herself, and plan and execute actions for
which she will take responsibility. 
The concept of pre-reflective self-awareness is related to a variety
of philosophical issues, including epistemic asymmetry, immunity to
error through misidentification and self-reference. We will examine
these issues each in turn.
It seems clear that the objects of my visual perception are
intersubjectively accessible in the sense that they can in principle
be the objects of another’s perception. A subject’s
perceptual experience itself, however, is given in a unique way to the
subject herself. Although two people, A and B, can
perceive a numerically identical object, they each have their own
distinct perceptual experience of it; just as they cannot share each
other’s pain, they cannot literally share these perceptual
experiences. Their experiences are epistemically asymmetrical in this
regard. B might realize that A is in pain; he might
sympathize with A, he might even have the same kind of pain
(same qualitative aspects, same intensity, same proprioceptive
location), but he cannot literally feel A’s pain the
same way A does. The subject’s epistemic access to her
own experience, whether it is a pain or a perceptual experience, is
primarily a matter of pre-reflective self-awareness. If secondarily,
in an act of introspective reflection I begin to examine my perceptual
experience, I will recognize it as my perceptual experience only
because I have been pre-reflectively aware of it, as I have been
living through it. Thus, phenomenology maintains, the access that
reflective self-consciousness has to first-order phenomenal experience
is routed through pre-reflective consciousness, for if we were not
pre-reflectively aware of our experience, our reflection on it would
never be motivated. When I do reflect, I reflect on something with
which I am already experientially familiar.
The ease with which we self-ascribe experiences is partially to be
explained by appeal to pre-reflective self-awareness. It is important
to emphasize, however, that pre-reflective self-awareness is only a
necessary and not a sufficient condition for reflective
self-ascription and first-person knowledge. Many animals who possess
pre-reflective self-consciousness obviously lack the cognitive
resources needed for reflective self-ascriptions. 
When I experience an occurrent pain, perception, or thought, the
experience in question is given immediately and noninferentially. I do
not have to judge or appeal to some criteria in order to identify it
as my experience. There are no free-floating experiences;
even the experience of freely-floating belongs to someone. As William
James (1890) put it, all experience is “personal.” Even in
pathological cases, as in depersonalization or schizophrenic symptoms
of delusions of control or thought insertion, a feeling or experience
that the subject claims not to be his is nonetheless experienced by
him as being part of his stream of consciousness. The complaint of
thought insertion, for example, necessarily acknowledges that the
inserted thoughts are thoughts that belong to the subject’s
experience, even as the agency for such thoughts are attributed to
others. This first-person character entails an implicit experiential
self-reference. If I feel hungry or see my friend, I cannot be
mistaken about who the subject of that experience is, even if I can be
mistaken about it being hunger (perhaps it’s really thirst), or
about it being my friend (perhaps it’s his twin), or even about
whether I am actually seeing him (I may be hallucinating). As
Wittgenstein (1958), Shoemaker (1968), and others have pointed out, it
is nonsensical to ask whether I am sure that I am the one who
feels hungry. This is the phenomenon known as “immunity to error
through misidentification relative to the first-person pronoun.”
To this idea of immunity to error through misidentification, the
phenomenologist adds that whether a certain experience is experienced
as mine, or not, does not depend upon something apart from the
experience, but depends precisely upon the pre-reflective givenness
that belongs to the structure of the experience (Husserl 1959, 175;
Husserl 1973a, 28, 56, 307, 443; see Zahavi 1999, 6ff.).
Some philosophers who are inclined to take self-consciousness to be
intrinsically linked to the issue of self-reference would argue that
the latter depends on a first-person concept. One attains
self-consciousness only when one can conceive of oneself
as oneself, and has the linguistic ability to use the
first-person pronoun to refer to oneself (Baker 2000, 68; cf. Lowe
2000, 264). On this view, self-consciousness is something that emerges
in the course of a developmental process, and depends on the
acquisition of concepts and language. Accordingly, some philosophers
deny that young children are capable of self-consciousness (Carruthers
1996; Dennett 1976; Wilkes 1988; also see Flavell 1993). Evidence from
developmental psychology and ecological psychology, however, suggests
that there is a primitive, proprioceptive form of self-consciousness
already in place from
 birth.[3]
 This primitive self-awareness precedes the mastery of language and
the ability to form conceptually informed judgments, and it may serve
as a basis for more advanced types of self-consciousness (see, e.g.,
Butterworth 1995, 1999; Gibson 1986; Meltzoff 1990a, 1990b; Neisser
1988; and Stern 1985). The phenomenological view is consistent with
such findings.
The notion of pre-reflective self-awareness is much
more accepted today than it was 20 years ago and has become part of
the standard repertoire in philosophy of mind. The notion’s
increasing popularity not surprisingly has also led to an increasing
amount of criticism. One line of attack has focused on what might be
called the universality question. Is it truly the case that all
conscious mental states involve pre-reflective self-awareness,
for-me-ness, and a sense of ownership? Does the link hold by necessity
such that it characterizes all experiences, however primitive or
disordered they might be, or might it, for instance, be something that
only holds true for a more limited group of experiences, say, normal,
adult, experiences (Lane 2012; Dainton 2016; Guillot 2017; Howell
& Thompson 2017). Whether infantile or pathological or
hallucinogenic experiences constitute relevant exceptions, i.e.,
experiences that lack pre-reflective self-awareness, for-me-ness and
sense of ownership, is to a large extent dependent upon how robustly
one interprets these notions. If pre-reflective self-awareness is
interpreted simply as a non-inferential awareness of the experience
one is having rather than as an awareness of some self-object, and if
for-me-ness and sense of ownership are interpreted not as involving an
awareness of the possessive relation between oneself and the
experience, but rather as the distinct perspectival givenness or
first-personal presence of experience, it is far from obvious that
there really are exceptions to be found (Zahavi 2014, 2018, 2019).
Some critics have also claimed that the sense of ownership is a
by-product of reflective or introspective processes (e.g., Bermúdez
2011; 2018; Dainton 2007). They insist that there is nothing like a
pre-reflective sense of ownership that is “something over and above
the changing stream of thought, perception, volition, emotion, memory,
bodily sensation, and so on” (Dainton 2007, 240; emphasis added).
But as should already be clear, phenomenologists do not claim that
pre-reflective self-awareness or the sense of ownership is something
“over and above” experience, something extra that is added as a
second experience. Rather, the claim is that it is an intrinsic
feature of experience itself. In this respect, the phenomenological
claim is as deflationary as the critics would want (Gallagher 2017a).
Although, as pre-reflectively self-aware of my experience I am not
unconscious of it, I do not attend to it; rather I tend to overlook it
in favor of the object that I am perceiving, the thing I am
remembering, etc. In my everyday life, I am absorbed by and
preoccupied with projects and objects in the world, and as such I do
not attend to my experiential life. Therefore, this pervasive
pre-reflective self-consciousness is not to be understood as complete
self-comprehension. One can accept the notion of a pervasive
self-consciousness and still accept the existence of the unconscious
in the sense of subjective components which remain ambiguous, obscure,
and resistant to comprehension. Thus, one should distinguish between
the claim that consciousness is characterized by an immediate
first-person character and the claim that consciousness is
characterized by total self-transparency. One can easily accept the
first and reject the latter (Ricoeur 1950, 354–355). 
In contrast to pre-reflective self-consciousness, which delivers an
implicit sense of self at an experiential or phenomenal level,
reflective self-consciousness is an explicit, conceptual, and
objectifying awareness that takes a lower-order consciousness as its
attentional theme. I am able at any time to attend directly to the
cognitive experience itself, turning my experience itself into the
object of my consideration.
Phenomenologists do not claim the infallible authority of reflection
over subjective experience. There are no epistemic guarantees
connected with self-consciousness other than immunity to error through
misidentification. If I cannot be wrong about who is living through my
experiences, I can be wrong about all kinds of other things about my
experiences. A brief consideration of the phenomenology of temporality
will help to explain this, namely, why reflective self-consciousness
is characterized by certain limitations. It will also help to clarify
how pre-reflective self-consciousness, as a mode of existence, is
possible in the first place, as well as elucidate the phenomenological
account of diachronic unity, an account that does not posit something
called the “self” as a separate entity over and above the
stream of consciousness (cf. Zahavi 2014).
According to Husserl’s analysis, experience of any sort
(perception, memory, imagination, etc.) has a common temporal
structure such that any moment of experience contains a retentional
reference to past moments of experience, a current openness (primal
impression) to what is present, and a protentional anticipation of the
moments of experience that are just about to happen (Husserl 1966; see
Gallagher 1998). The retentional structure of experience, that is, the
fact that when I am experiencing something, each passing moment of
consciousness does not simply disappear at the next moment but is kept
in intentional currency, constitutes a coherency that stretches over
an experienced temporal duration. Husserl’s favorite example is
a melody. When I experience a melody, I don’t simply experience
a knife-edge presentation (primal impression) of one note, which is
then completely washed away and replaced with the next discrete
knife-edge presentation of the next note. Rather, consciousness
retains the sense of the first note as just past, as I hear the second
note, a hearing that is also enriched by an anticipation (protention)
of the next note (or at least, in case I do not know the melody, a
sense that there will be a next note, or some next auditory event).
Husserl claims that we actually do perceive melodies—in
opposition to an earlier view propounded by Brentano, viz., that with
the help of our imagination or recollection we construct or
reconstruct such unities out of a synthesis of mental acts. That we
actually perceive melodies (without first constructing them using
memory and imagination) is possible only because consciousness is so
structured to allow for this temporal presentation.
Importantly, the temporal (retentional-impressional-protentional)
structure of consciousness not only allows for the experience of
temporally extended objects or intentional contents, but also entails
the self-manifestation of consciousness, that is, its pre-reflective
self-awareness. The retention of past notes of the melody is
accomplished, not by a “real” or literal re-presentation
of the notes (as if I were hearing them a second time and
simultaneously with the current note), but by an intentional retaining
of my just past experience of the melody as just past. This
means that this retentional structure gives me an immediate awareness
of my ongoing experience in the ongoing flow of experience, a
self-awareness that is implicit in my experience of the object. At the
same time that I am aware of a melody, for example, I am co-aware of
my ongoing experience of the melody through the retentional structure
of that very experience—and this just is the pre-reflective
self-awareness of experience (see Zahavi 1999, 2003).
The temporal structure that accounts for pre-reflective self-awareness
is also the structural feature that accounts for the limitations
imposed on reflective self-consciousness. Reflective
self-consciousness yields knowledge of pre-reflective subjectivity
that is always after the fact. Reflective self-consciousness, which
takes pre-reflective experience as its object, is itself (like any
conscious experience) characterized by the same temporal structure. In
principle, however, the retentional-impressional-protentional
structure of reflection cannot overlay the
retentional-impressional-protentional structure of pre-reflective
experience in complete simultaneity. There is always a slight delay
between reflection and the pre-reflective object of reflection. One
might say that the pre-reflective experience must first be there if I
am to turn my reflective attention to it and make it an object of
reflection. Husserl writes: “When I say I, I grasp
myself in a simple reflection. But this self-experience
[Selbsterfahrung] is like every experience
[Erfahrung], and in particular every perception, a mere
directing myself towards something that was already there for me, that
was already conscious, but not thematically experienced, not
noticed” (Husserl 1973b, 492–493). This delay is one of
the reasons why there remains a difference or distance between the
reflecting subject and the reflected object, even though the reflected
object is my own experience. As a reflecting subject, I never fully
coincide with myself.
As Merleau-Ponty puts it, our temporal existence is both a condition
for and an obstacle to our self-comprehension. Temporality contains an
internal fracture that permits us to return to our past experiences in
order to investigate them reflectively, but this very fracture also
prevents us from fully coinciding with ourselves. There will always
remain a difference between the lived and the understood
(Merleau-Ponty 1945, 76, 397, 399, 460). Self-consciousness provides
us with the sense that we are always already in play. This leads some
phenomenologists to note that we are born (or “thrown”
into the world) and not self-generated. We are caught up in a life
that is in excess of our full comprehension (Heidegger 1986). There is
always something about ourselves that we cannot fully capture in the
moment of self-conscious reflection.
If reflective self-consciousness is limited in this way, this should
not prevent us from exercising it. Indeed, reflective
self-consciousness is a necessary condition for moral
self-responsibility, as Husserl points out. Reflection is a
precondition for self-critical deliberation. If we are to subject our
different beliefs and desires to a critical, normative evaluation, it
is not sufficient simply to have immediate first-personal access to
the states in question. 
Self-consciousness is, therefore, not epiphenomenal. Our ability to
make reflective judgments about our own beliefs and desires also
allows us to modify them.
One might see the position of Husserl, Sartre and Merleau-Ponty as
being situated between two extremes. On the one hand, we have the view
that reflection merely copies or mirrors pre-reflective experience
faithfully, and on the other hand we have the view that reflection
distorts lived experience. The middle course is to recognize that
reflection involves a gain and a loss. For Husserl, Sartre, and
Merleau-Ponty, reflection is constrained by what is pre-reflectively
lived through. It is answerable to experiential facts and is not
constitutively self-fulfilling. At the same time, however, they
recognized that reflection qua thematic self-experience does not
simply reproduce the lived experiences unaltered and that this is
precisely what makes reflection cognitively valuable. The experiences
reflected upon are transformed in the process, to various degrees and
manners depending upon the type of reflection at work. Subjectivity
consequently seems to be constituted in such a fashion that it can
and, at times, must relate to itself in an “othering”
manner. This self-alteration is something inherent to reflection; it
is not something that reflection can overcome.
Much of what we have said about self-consciousness may still seem
overly mentalistic. It is important to note that for phenomenologists
like Husserl and Merleau-Ponty, pre-reflective self-awareness is both
embodied and embedded in the world. The first-person point of view on
the world is never a view from nowhere; it is always defined by the
situation of the perceiver’s body, which concerns not simply
location and posture, but action in pragmatic contexts and interaction
with other people. Pre-reflective self-awareness includes aspects that
are both bodily and intersubjective.
The claim is not simply that the perceiver/actor is objectively
embodied, but that the body is in some fashion experientially present
in the perception or action. Phenomenologists distinguish the
pre-reflective body-awareness that accompanies and shapes every
spatial experience, from a reflective consciousness of the body. To
capture this difference, Husserl introduced a terminological
distinction between Leib and Körper, that is,
between the pre-reflectively lived body, i.e., the body as an embodied
first-person perspective, and the subsequent thematic experience
of the body as an object (Husserl 1973a, 57). Pre-reflective
body- (Leib-) awareness is not a type of object-perception,
but it is an essential element of every such perception. If I reach
for a tool, I know where to reach because I have a sense of where it
is in relation to myself. I also sense that I will be able to reach
it, or that I will have to take two steps towards it. My perception of
the tool must involve proprioceptive and kinaesthetic information
about my bodily situation and the position of my limbs, otherwise I
would not be able to reach for it or use it. If in such cases, we want
to say that I have an awareness of my body, such bodily awareness is
quite different from the perception that I have of the tool. I may
have to look or feel around in order to find where the tool is; but,
under normal circumstances, I never have to do that in regard to my
body. I am tacitly aware, not only of where my hands and feet are, but
also of what I can do with them. This tacit awareness of my body
always registers as an “I can” (or “I can’t,” as the
case may be). Primarily, my body is experienced, not as an object, but
as a field of activity and affectivity, as a potentiality of mobility
and volition, as an “I do” and “I can.” 
The body provides not only the egocentric spatial framework for
orientation towards the world, but also the constitutive contribution
of its mobility. Perception does not involve a passive reception, but
an active exploration of the environment. Husserl calls attention to
the importance of bodily movements (the movements of the eye,
manipulations by the hand, the locomotion of the body, etc.) for the
experience of space and spatial objects. He further claims that
perception is correlated to and accompanied by
proprioceptive-kinaesthetic self-sensation or self-affection (Husserl
1973c). Every visual or tactile appearance is given in correlation to
a kinaesthetic experience. When I touch a shaped surface, it is given
in conjunction with a sensation of finger movements. When I watch the
flight of a bird, the moving bird is given in conjunction with the
kinaesthetic sensations of eye movement and perhaps neck movement.
Such kinaesthetic activation during perception produces an implicit
and pervasive reference to one’s own body. The implicit
self-awareness of the actual and possible movements of my body helps
shape the experience that I have of the world. To be clear, however,
bodily self-awareness is not an awareness of the body in isolation
from the world; it is embedded in action and perception. We do not
first become aware of the body and subsequently use it to engage with
the world. We experience the world bodily, and the body is revealed to
us in our exploration of the world. Primarily, the body attains
self-awareness in action (or in our dispositions to action, or in our
action possibilities) when it relates to something, uses something, or
moves through the
 world.[4]
Bodily self-awareness, like self-consciousness more generally, has
limitations. I am never fully aware of everything that is going on
with my body. Indeed, my body tends to efface itself as I perceive and
act in the world. When I jump to catch a ball that is thrown over my
head, I certainly have a sense of what I can do, but I am not aware of
my precise movements or postures—for example, that my right leg
bends at a certain angle as I reach with my left hand. I can execute
movements without being explicitly conscious of them, and even what I
am tacitly aware of is somewhat limited—for example, I am not
aware of the shape of my grasp as I reach to grab the ball. Although I
may not be aware of certain details about my bodily performance, this
does not mean however that I am unconscious of my body. Rather it
means that the way that I am aware of my body is fully integrated with
the intentional action that I am performing. I know that I am jumping
to catch the ball, and implicit in that, as an immediate sense rather
than an inference, I experience my body jumping to catch the ball.
Furthermore, experiential aspects of my embodiment permeate my
pre-reflective self-consciousness. There is something it is like to
jump to catch a ball, and part of what it is like is that I am in fact
jumping. There is something different about what it is like to sit and
imagine (or remember) myself jumping to catch the ball, and at least
part of that difference has to do with the fact that I am sitting
rather than jumping, although none of this may be explicit in my
experience.
Another way to think of the self-awareness involved in action is to
consider the sense of agency that is normally an aspect of
pre-reflective self-awareness in action. If, as I am walking down the
street, I am pushed from behind, I am instantly aware of my body
moving in a way that I did not intend. The fact that I feel a loss of
control over my actions suggests that there had been an implicit sense
of agency or control in my walking prior to being pushed. In voluntary
action, I experience the movements of my body as my own actions, and
this is replaced by a feeling of loss of bodily control in the case of
involuntary movement. Voluntary actions feel different from
involuntary actions, and this difference depends respectively, on the
experience of agency or the experience of a lack of agency—as
the case may be if my body is being moved by someone
 else.[5]
Hubert Dreyfus has famously argued that in the case of expert
performance we are not self-conscious, but rather “usually involved
in coping in a mindless way” (Dreyfus 2007a, 356). On his account,
our immersed bodily life is so completely and totally world-engaged
that it is entirely oblivious to itself. Indeed, in total absorption,
one ceases being a subject altogether (Dreyfus 2007b, 373). It is only
when this bodily absorption is interrupted that something like
self-consciousness emerges. Dreyfus consequently doesn’t deny the
existence of self-consciousness, but he definitely wants to see it as
a capacity that is only exercised or actualized on special occasions.
Moreover, when this capacity is exercised it necessarily disrupts our
coping and radically transform the kind of affordances that are given
to it (Dreyfus 2005, 61; 2007, 354). A number of theorists, however,
have taken issue with this characterization of expert performance and
have argued that in the performing arts (e.g., in dance, musical
performance) and in athletics (e.g., baseball, cricket) expert
performers may employ an enhanced but still pre-reflective awareness
(Legrand 2007), a heedful consciousness of the situation (e.g., Sutton
et al. 2011), or even a skillful reflective monitoring (Montero 2010;
2014), or some variable combination of these (Høffding 2018), and
that such consciousness does not impede performance but improves it.
A focus on embodied self-experience inevitably leads to a decisive
widening of the discussion. The externality of embodiment puts me, and
my actions, in the public sphere. Self-consciousness, which involves
an ability to make reflective judgments about our own beliefs and
desires, is always shaped by others and what we have learned from
others. This intersubjective or social influence can also affect
pre-reflective self-awareness, including my sense of embodied
agency.
I can become aware of myself through the eyes of other people, and
this can happen in a number of different ways. Thus, embodiment brings
intersubjectivity and sociality into the picture, and draws attention
to the question of how certain forms of self-consciousness are
intersubjectively mediated, and may depend on one’s social
relations to others. My awareness of myself as one person among
others, an awareness that I may frame from the perspective of others,
attempting to see myself as they see me, involves a change in the
attitude of self-consciousness. Within this attitude, judgments that I
make about myself are constrained by social expectations and cultural
values. This kind of social self-consciousness is always
contextualized, as I try to understand how I appear to others, both in
the way I look, and in the meaning of my actions. I find myself in
particular contexts, with specific capabilities and dispositions,
habits and convictions, and I express myself in a way that is
reflected off of others, in relevant (socially defined) roles through
my language and my actions.
The role of the other in this mode of self-consciousness is not
unessential. According to Husserl, I become aware of myself
specifically as a human person only in such intersubjective relations
(Husserl 1973b, 175; 1952, 204–05; see Hart 1992, 71; Zahavi
1999, 157ff. Also see Taylor 1989, 34–36 for a similar idea).
Thus Husserl distinguishes the subject taken in its bare formality
from the personalized subject and claims that the origin and status of
being a person must be located in the social dimension. I am a person,
socially contextualized, with abilities, dispositions, habits,
interests, character traits, and convictions, all of which have been
developed through my interactions with others. When considering the
fullness of human selfhood, the idea of an isolated, pure and formal
subject of experience is an abstraction (Husserl 1968, 210). Given the
right conditions and circumstances, the self acquires a personalizing
self-apprehension, i.e., it develops into a person and as a person
(cf. Husserl 1952, 265). And this development depends heavily upon
social interaction (Husserl 1973b, 170–171). 
This kind of self-consciousness also opens up the possibility of
self-alienation, famously explicated by Sartre in terms of the
other’s gaze. For Sartre, because “our being, along with
its being-for-itself, is also for-others; the being which is revealed
to the reflective consciousness is for-itself-for-others” (1956,
282). On this view, the primary experience of the other is not that I
perceive her as some kind of object in which I must find a person, but
I perceive the other as a subject who perceives me as an object. My
experience of the other is at the same time an experience that
involves my own self-consciousness, a self-consciousness in which I am
pre-reflectively aware that I am an object for another. This
experience can further motivate a reflective self-consciousness, as I
consider how I must appear to the other.
Merleau-Ponty (1945, 415) suggests that the other’s gaze can
motivate this kind of self-consciousness only if I already have a
sense of my own visibility to the other. This sense of my own
visibility, however, is immediately linked with the pre-reflective,
proprioceptive-kinaesthetic sense of my body, an insight that goes
back to Husserl’s analysis (mentioned above). Merleau-Ponty
notes its connection to the infant’s capability for imitation,
and this is carried forward to more recent advances in developmental
psychology (see Merleau-Ponty, 1945, 165, 404–405; 2010; Gallagher and
Zahavi 2012; Zahavi 1999, 171–72). Indeed, although much emphasis has
fallen on vision and the gaze of the other in phenomenological
accounts of self-consciousness, proprioceptive and tactile experiences
have a developmental primacy and emerge in the pre-natal environment
in ways that allow for very basic relational experiences of
self-movement versus movement of the mother’s body (Lymer 2010;
2014; Ciaunica & Crucianelli 2019; Ciaunica & Fotopoulou
2016), and continue to play a significant role in embodied
interactions with caregivers during early infancy. In this respect,
intersubjective/intercorporeal experiences can affect pre-reflective
body self-awareness. This complicates any claim that the
pre-reflective experience of body ownership is primarily for
self-preservation (Ciaunica & Crucianelli 2019; de Vignemont
2018).
This is not the place to enter into a detailed discussion of these
rich and complex issues, issues that extend to analyses of phenomena
such as empathy, shame, guilt, and so on (see Zahavi 2010, 2014). But
it is important to realize that self-consciousness is a multifaceted
concept. It is not something that can be exhaustively analyzed simply
by examining the inner workings of the mind. 
The notion of self-consciousness has been the subject of a rich and
complex analysis in the phenomenological tradition. Aspects of the
phenomenological analysis also show up in other areas of research,
including feminism (Stawarska 2006; Young 2005; Heinämaa 2003),
ecological psychology (Gibson 1966), and recent analyses of enactive
perception (Gallagher 2017b; Noë 2004; Thompson 2008). The
recognition of the existence of a primitive form of pre-reflective
self-consciousness is an important starting point for an understanding
of more elaborate forms of self-consciousness that are concept- and
language-dependent. Phenomenological analyses show these processes to
be more than purely mental or cognitive events since they integrally
involve embodiment and intersubjective dimensions. 