It is impossible to give precise dates for Philo’s birth. The
consensus is that he lived between the end of the first century BCE
and the middle of the first century CE, during a period of acute
agitation and interethnic tensions in Alexandria. The Romans, with
their universal ambitions, had replaced the Macedonians, leaving to
the Greeks only the pride of their identity and some fiscal
advantages. The Greeks in turn pretended to be the only citizens of
the city of Alexandria, refusing citizenship to the Jews with very few
exceptions, among which was Alexander the Alabarch (tax collector),
Philo’s brother. Alexander’s son, in turn, became one of
the famous apostates in the history of Judaism, becoming prefect of
Egypt in 66–69 CE and serving as Emperor Titus’
second-in-command at the siege of Jerusalem in 70 CE. The history of
the apostate within his family was certainly a problem for Philo, who
tried to raise the issue with his nephew in the (De
providentia 2 and in the De
animalibus. Though he never
specified his own political status, Philo was likely a citizen of this
prestigious city. Finally, the native Egyptians were despised by both
Greeks and Jews. The Egyptians didn’t all remain passive,
however; Manetho (Stern 1974, texts n.19–21), an Egyptian
priest, wrote a parody of the Exodus, transforming the liberation of
Israel into the ignominious expulsion of a disabled and dishonest
people. This topos won great favor among Greek intellectuals
like Philo’s contemporary, Apion, against whom Flavius Josephus
wrote his famous apology of the Jewish people. This tension erupted
into the Alexandria riots of 38 CE, the first major pogrom in the
history of Jewish people, leading in turn to the installation of a
ghetto, murders, tortures, humiliations, and mockeries of Agrippa I,
the king of Judaea. We must keep all this in mind in order not to
imagine Philo merely as a scholar burrowed away in the Great Library,
nor as a rabbi lecturing peacefully in the synagogues. In Spec.
3.1, he wistfully remembers a
time when he could devote himself to study and contemplation, probably
before the disasters of 38 CE: 
There was a time when I had leisure for philosophy and for the
contemplation of the universe and its contents, when I made its spirit
my own in all its beauty and loveliness and true blessedness, when my
constant companions were divine themes and verities, when I rejoiced
with a joy that never cloyed or sated. 
But just after, he evokes the violent envy of those who plunged him
“in[to] the ocean of civil cares”, likely an allusion to
the many difficulties created by the hostility of Greeks and Egyptians
(Spec. 3.1). Even before this violence, however, the
environment he faced was a hostile and resentful one. Philo considered
the Egyptians, his “ultimate other” (Niehoff 2001), the
most disgusting of polytheists because of their zoolatry. He was full
of reverence and fear toward the Romans, or at least pretends as such
in his two books on the pogrom of 38 CE: the In
Flaccum, which is against the
Roman prefect in Alexandria at the moment of the pogrom, and the Legatio
(Smallwood 1961) in which he
narrates his own experience of the embassy sent to the Emperor
Caligula by the Jews of Alexandria after the riot. Recently Niehoff
stressed the idea that Roman culture had become an important element
of Philo’s identity. Nevertheless, he was first and foremost a
Jew of the Septuagint, the Greek translation of the Bible (ca
270 BCE). That is to say, however distinctive his views, he was a
sincerely pious Jew. He knew very little Hebrew, though he went to
Jerusalem to pray and offer sacrifices in the Temple (Prov.
2.107), and he thought that the
Bible written in Greek was perfectly equivalent to the Hebrew one
(Mos. 2.40). His
paideia or Greek education was excellent, both in philosophy
and the liberal arts, as he says in Congr.
79–80: 
For instance when first I was incited by the goads of philosophy to
desire her I consorted in early youth with one of her handmaids,
Grammar, and all that I begat by her, writing, reading and study of
the writings of the poets, I dedicated to her mistress.
By this period in Alexandria, the spirit of mutual comprehension that
marked the beginning of the Ptolemaic epoch (ca 332
BCE–30 BCE) had faded away. In his own person, Philo brought
together two elements that the Greek elite now held to be
incompatible: paideia, Greek education, and Judaism. He
studied and commented on the Bible in the synagogues, which he
describes as “schools of virtue”. His understanding of
rhetoric was not merely theoretical. He was probably a great orator.
The addressees of his treatises were foremost the Jews, both believers
and unbelievers. He may have had a second, much more hypothetical,
audience in mind as well: Greek philosophers and intellectuals more
generally. However, to the best of our knowledge, this latter group
paid scant attention to Philo’s writings. In the fragments of
Greek and Roman writers carefully collected by Menahem Stern (1974),
we find two kinds of Greek reactions towards Judaism. In the earlier
period, they received some sympathy from philosophers; Theophrastus,
the main disciple of Aristotle, writes in a famous fragment that Jews
are “philosophers by race”, saying about them: 
they converse with each other about the deity, and at night-time they
make observations of the stars, gazing at them and calling on God by
prayer. (quoted in Diodorus Siculus, Bibliotheca Historica,
40.3.1–3) 
From the end of the second century BCE, however, many philosophers
were active propagandists for
 antisemitism.[1]
 One might have expected that Stoicism, with its cosmopolitism and
rational humanism, would have avoided this kind of attitude. In fact,
as we can see in Posidonius, Seneca, or Chaeremon, Stoic antisemitism
was a product not of racism, but of an erroneous understanding of
rationalism and universalism. For these men, the Jews were a very
superstitious nation, blemished by strange habits and strong animosity
towards foreigners. Except for the case of Varro, the Roman scholar of
the first century BCE who appreciated Jews for their refusal of
images, it would be impossible to give an example of a Greek or Latin
text of this period showing sympathy or even interest toward the Jews.
This was a condition of which Philo could not have been ignorant. In
the background of his life and of his work lay an antisemitism growing
more and more violent. In contrast to Flavius, who decades later wrote
the Against Apion in order to
refute Greek antisemitism, Philo seems to have preferred to extol the
virtues of Judaism than to fight against the adversaries of Jews, as
we can see in the extant fragments of his Hypotetica.
Philo’s work does not form a well-organized corpus. During
Philo’s time, the work was larger than the corpus we now have.
The relation of Philo to the Hebrew exegetical traditions of his time
is an important and controversial question. One of the major paradoxes
for his posterity is that his work was ignored by Jews and saved by
Christians, some of whom thought that he was himself a Christian. In
233 CE the entire corpus was brought to Caesarea, a city that became
the main center of its transmission, though some papyri suggest the
circulation of at least some of his treatises in Egypt. The more or
less generally accepted classification is that of Massebiau (1889),
completed by Cohn (1899). It is divided into five principal
categories:
No definite chronology of the works was established until the very
recent book of Niehoff (2018). Philo gives very few hints regarding
his process of composition, offering only a few remarks about the
structure and divisions of his treatises. Regarding the strange fact
that these Greek treatises bear Latin titles, Monique Alexandre (1997)
conducted a complete study in which she examines a complex
philological process from Antiquity to the nineteenth century through
the humanists of the Renaissance and their immediate successors.
On the meaning of philosophy for Philo, see
see the supplement on 
 The Meanings of Philosophy in Philo of Alexandria.
 His five philosophical works are De
providentia 1 and 2, De
animalibus, De
aeternitate and Quod omnis
probus. The two latter works are the only ones for which
we have Greek texts. With the exception of a few rare references to
the Bible, these texts could well have been written by a pagan
philosopher. This is why some scholars thought they were products of
Philo’s paideia, his classical Greek education. Today,
there is a tendency to believe that Philo’s extant texts were
written near the end of his life. If this is the case, the reason for
writing, in the atmosphere of great cultural and political rivalry of
the epoch, could have been to demonstrate that a Jew was as able to
compose a philosophy as “pure” as any Greek. In any case,
the most discussed problem today is the skepticism regarding the
authenticity of the De
aeternitate, the treatise in which we find the most
explicit references to philosophy and philosophers. Since
Runia’s seminal article in 1981, a majority of scholars seems to
have distanced themselves from thinking the text is inauthentic. For
Runia, there is no contradiction in the fact that Philo goes against
the biblical tradition and defends the eternity of the world not only
in the future but also in the past. The second part of Philo’s
treatise, now lost, would have contained the refutation of this
unorthodox—at least from a Jewish point of view—thesis. It
is probable that Philo, who seems to have had good knowledge of
skeptical methods, was trained to argue both pro and
contra of a thesis, a dialectical technique of which the
De aeternitate is probably the
best illustration. We will return to the question of the authenticity
in the supplemenary document 
  About the De aeternitate and the De providentia.
We have little information about Jewish intellectuals in the
Hellenistic epoch. One of our main sources is the Sentences
of Pseudo-Phocylides, most
likely written in Alexandria by a Jew. They show an interesting mix of
Jewish and Greek elements: an absence of attacks against polytheism,
some popular Stoic themes, and a rather soft affirmation of the
monotheistic faith. It is not easy, however, to date these Sentences.
The most probable date
would be somewhere between 30 BCE and 40 CE, but other dates are
possible. Regardless, the Sentences
provides an image of what
could have been a Jewish openness towards pagan culture if relations
were calmer. According to a well-attested tradition, some Jews posited
that Plato had taken his inspiration from Moses, an idea that seems to
have been popularized by Aristobulus of Paneas, a Jewish philosopher
who lived in the first half of second century BCE. Philo, who lived in
a more unstable period, employs this kind of assertion with prudence
(Spec. 2.164–167). He
himself sometimes alludes to his immediate predecessors, which is the
topic of Goulet’s book (1987). Goulet’s central thesis is
that the primary source of Philo’s allegories was a Jewish
commentary that used Stoic methods of interpretation to attempt a
wholly rationalist exegesis of the Bible devoid of any notion of
transcendence. In fact, there is only one clear allusion to these
phusiologoi, i.e., rationalist allegorists. It is likely that
in Alexandria there were Jews who attempted to interpret the Bible as
the Stoics had interpreted Homer (Niehoff 2011). It is unclear whether
their interpretation was integrated into a comprehensive system of
rationalism. The allegoric interpretation did not prevent Stoics from
defending divination, a practice that was considered absurd by their
opponents. One could add that this evolution towards a more religious
cast of mind was not a distinctive characteristic of Philo, but rather
a hallmark of the Middle-Platonist period as a whole.
Named references to philosophers in Philo’s work are rather
rare, and often the cited names are not those that one would expect.
For example, he never mentions Posidonius, one of the greatest names
of Stoicism, who was the first to attempt a reconciliation of at least
some Stoic and Platonic themes. There are reasons to think Philo read
this Rhodian philosopher, but he is silent about Posidonius. One could
surmise that his clearly anti-Jewish position was one possible reason
for Philo’s silence. However, Philo is also silent regarding
thinkers of the New Academy, Arcesilas and Carneades. He was clearly
acquainted with these Academics, since there are some rather clear
allusions in his work to their brand of skepticism. It is therefore
curious that he gives the first version of the Skeptical tropes
without any allusion to Aenesidemus, who developed them a century
before. Leaving aside the contested De
aeternitate, we notice that Philo fails to mention
Aristotle even once. While Stoicism plays a leading role in most
Philonian treatises, we only find four allusions to Zeno, the founder
of the doctrine. They are all in the Probus,
a treatise with strong Stoic
features. There is only a single mention of Epicurus, in Post.
2. Plato is mentioned twice
each in the De opificio and the
De uita contemplativa, and once
in the Probus. Only three
mentions of Socrates are found, but surprisingly, the presocratic
thinkers are quoted much more than one would have thought: fourteen
references to Pythagoras (with some uncertainties, since some of them
are to be found in fragments), six to Heraclitus, and one each to
Anaxagoras and Democritus. The De
aeternitate is striking because Aristotle is mentioned
four times. In this treatise, Philo cites a book written by the
Pythagorean Ocellos of Lucania, who established the eternity of the
world in a way that Philo seems to find satisfactory. This, notably,
is the only time when he mentions a specific text and explicitly
affirms having read it.
One might wonder whether there is a logic to Philo’s explicit
references to philosophers.
Several elements point us toward a more complete understanding. First,
Philo evidently prefers indirect allusions to direct citations.
Philosophical concepts are necessary to the elaboration of exegesis,
but too many precise mentions of philosophers would have presented
Philo as subordinate not to the Word of God but to the doctrines of
philosophers. He is still more silent about the great rabbis he would
have certainly met in Alexandria and perhaps in Jerusalem. In his
philosophical references, it is clear that he prefers to evoke the
presocratic thinkers and the classical period of philosophy than the
Hellenistic one. This is paradoxical since he was deeply marked by
Hellenistic philosophy, which was the natural environment of his
education. It must be added that his prose is also generally
classical, reluctant to admit neologisms and technical vocabulary. He
certainly wanted to appear in all areas a man of tradition.
Did Philo think that philosophy was a Greek monopoly, only shared with
some Jews?
In recent years, the temptation has been great among some scholars to
imagine that he had at least some knowledge of non-Greek thinkers such
as Cicero and Seneca. The problem remains that we have no evidence of
this hypothesis. Philo never evoked Roman philosophers, so we cannot
pass beyond statements of probability. More generally, what can be
said about Philo’s attitude towards “barbarian”
wisdom can be summarized in three points:
Jewish wisdom surpasses all other wisdom, both Greek and barbarian,
because it is the only one inspired by God. In Mos.
2.12, Philo makes no attempt to
hide that when the Bible was first translated into Greek, the Word of
God was considered by many an expression of barbarian wisdom. The
Septuagint is implicitly presented as proof that the distinction
between Greek and barbarian could be abolished, though for Greek
civilization this distinction had great ontological weight.
Even Greek education, despite its exceptional prestige, is unable to
provide access to the truth. A learned man according to the criterion
of the paideia is no more able than anyone else to say what
the world truly is.
Philo did not deny that barbarians were able to create sophisticated
forms of sciences and culture. Despite his own contempt for the
Egyptians, he stresses that Moses himself received an education in
which Egyptian sciences were included. Furthermore, he argues that
many barbarians, though untutored in philosophy, have a natural
intuition of how to live in agreement with virtue. In Somn.
2.56, the Indian ascetics (“gymnosophists”) appear as the
barbarian form of the Cynic life, lacking any form of luxury or
material comfort, and in Probus
96, the letter of the ascetic Calanos to Alexander [now known
to be fake] provides the best evidence that some barbarians could
practice a perfectly philosophical life without ever having received a
Greek education.
Through the many studies Manuel Alexandre (1999) devoted to
Philo’s rhetoric, we can more precisely gauge Philo’s
position in this central debate within Greek culture: the conflict
between philosophy and rhetoric, or better, between philosophers and
rhetors. Philo displays a sound knowledge of rhetoric. His affinity
with Platonism impelled him to address very harsh critics of the
“lesser” rhetoric, that of sophists, who represent the
opposite pole of his own thought. Sophisteia, sophistry, is
in Philo a frequent concept attached to a range of negative meanings.
But, as in Plato (where Socrates opposes the idea of a greater
rhetoric to Gorgias’ lesser rhetoric in the Phaedrus),
in Philo we see the
possibility of a positive use of rhetoric. For Philo, rhetoric is
neither an activity nor an abstract ideal but a human reality, the
nature of which is laid out in the Bible. Moses is the man who saw God
in the Sinai, but he by himself would have been unable to speak to
Pharaoh and persuade him to let his people go. Moses needed the
presence of Aaron in order to obtain what he sought. Moses represents
the metaphysical truth, Aaron its implementation in reality, akin to
the two faces of logos: while the
logos prophorikos is that of communication, the logos
endiathetos is the internal world of thoughts, and each is
impossible without the other. It can be added that Abraham is said by
Philo (Mut. 66) to have been
the “father of the sounds”, a strange expression that,
alongside many similar allusions to music, shows that Philo was not
the philosopher of sight alone. Another path of research is that of
parrêsia, a complex term of political origin that
appeared in the context of the Athenian democracy. In literary and
philosophical texts, it means freedom of speech, frankness, and
honesty. For Philo, however, parrêsia is neither a
political ideal nor an individual achievement, but something given by
God; and it must be used without harming relatives or friends.
Philo had no philosophical affiliation. To say that he was a
Pythagorean, a Platonist, or a Stoic would have been for him to admit
that he sought truth in spaces outside the Bible. Was he an Eclectic?
The concept of eclecticism is a complicated one. If it means that
Philo used different philosophers as sources of inspiration and
expression in order to elaborate his work, this cannot be denied. On
the other hand, if one means that he built a specific philosophical
identity for himself by associating with different doctrines, that
seems far from the truth. It would mean that he was in search of an
autonomous ego, a perspective at odds with his denial of the
possibility for an individual to exist truly on his own, i.e., without
God’s help. More exactly, if Philo asserted his own
individuality, it was in the free modification and criticism of all
philosophical doctrines around him, sometimes using them as their
creators would never have imagined possible.
As Roskam (2011: 35) underscored, 
the period of Middle Platonism is particularly interesting because it
is in this period that Aristotle begins to receive more and more
attention in the circles of a systematised Platonism. 
This does not mean that the rivalry between Platonists and
Aristotelians was over, but rather that Aristotle, who seems to have
been largely ignored by Neo-Academic philosophers during the
Hellenistic period, emerged again as a reference and a point of
discussion. Philo is full of praise towards the Stagirite in the De
aeternitate, a puzzling text. He
was himself a Creationist while Aristotle asserted the eternity of the
world. This does not mean that his admiration was unbounded,
especially if the original treatise had been in the form of an
antilogy, a disputatio in utramque partem. Today, some
scholars try to demonstrate that Aristotle, and not Plato, lay at the
core of Philo’s thought. It can be objected that the dogmatic
Academic Antiochus of Ascalon (ca 140/130–60 BCE), a
philosopher that Philo certainly had read, did much to intertwine
Platonic, Stoic, and Aristotelian ideas. The influence of Antiochus on
the Alexandrian philosophical milieu is a controversial question.
Despite the efforts of Andronicus of Rhodes (first editor of the
Aristotelian corpus) to organize the corpus, some of the texts used
Aristotelian elements in a spirit quite different from what we now
understand by Aristotelianism. This can shed light on our
understanding of Philo’s Aristotelianism and on the comparison
of his Aristotelian passages with the pseudo-Aristotelian ones, a
point on which many have commented. Antiochus was not the only one to
shift the borders between these doctrines. The Stoic Posidonius also
played a role in Philo’s elaboration of an unorthodox form of
Aristotelianism.
Even if one is persuaded of the authenticity of Philo’s
Aristotelianism in the De aeternitate
mundi, the compliments towards Aristotle at the beginning
of the treatise are surprising and do not exactly fit within the
traditional frame of a disputatio pro and contra.
The most probable thesis was put in second position, as we can see in
the Ciceronian antilogy on justice in the third book of the De
re publica. Another ambiguity is
that Aristotle is praised here for having referred to the visible God,
while Philo says many times elsewhere that God is invisible. Of this
oddity two contradictory interpretations may be given: either Philo
means that Aristotle as a philosopher is what Israel is among the
nations, the one able to see God, an etymology of which Philo is fond;
or the reference to the “visible God”, without any
reference to His essence, means that Aristotle is only able to see the
visible aspects of Him. This would be an implicit criticism of the
Stagirite’s incapacity to perceive God’s transcendental
and divine Nature.
The above is but one example of the difficulties inherent to the
interpretation of Aristotelian elements in Philo’s corpus, at
least regarding cosmological and metaphysical problems. Things are
perhaps clearer concerning Aristotle’s influence on
Philo’s ethics. The term mesotès (middle way),
which has special importance in Aristotelian ethics, is used by Philo
once, in Migr. 147. In this
passage, the Alexandrine argues that the “royal road” is
the middle way. But this assertion is not an unrestricted sign of
approval of Aristotle’s ethics. In the desert, there is no way
at all—and the desert was the exact place where Israel received
the Revelation and achieved its liberty. The middle way may play a
positive role in reining in debauchery, but for Philo, it has no
absolute value. In Leg. 3.20,
Laban asks Jacob why he fled instead of remaining faithful to the
doctrine that recognizes the goods of the body and external
possessions. Here is evidence of Philo’s refusal to accept
Aristotle’s doctrine of the three kinds of goods. In Det.
8, it is said that corporeal and
external goods are assets in name only, and in Somn.
2.9, he criticizes those who
upheld the tripartition of human goods and contrasts them with those
for whom virtue was the only good. To summarize, Philo could
occasionally borrow some elements of Peripatetic doctrine, but he
never believed them to be an expression of higher truth. He reveals a
particular sort of coherence with regard to Aristotelianism: it
consists in demonstrating through exegesis that Aristotle’s
prudent philosophy could not entirely coincide with the Bible’s
spiritual wisdom.
Philo was probably the non-Stoic thinker who most frequently drew upon
both Stoic themes and vocabulary. Many scholars have noticed the
strong influence of Stoicism on Philo, and he is described frequently
as a Platonizing Stoic. However, matters are a bit more complex. Given
his Jewish faith, he couldn’t refuse the Stoic conception of a
perfectly organized world in which mankind had a privileged status
among all other living creatures. One can add that the specific
vocabulary of Stoicism had become a kind of lingua franca of
intellectual discourse, used even by those who had no special
affinity with the Stoics. At the same time, Philo was aware that the
Stoic refusal of transcendence created an unbridgeable gap between his
own spiritual identity and Stoicism. There is a huge debt of Philo
towards Stoicism, but at the same time, he could claim to have repaid
this debt by bringing Stoicism in the direction of truth. Philo never
says exactly the same things as the Stoics. Despite their apparent
similarities, there always remains a difference–sometimes barely
perceptible, but always highly significant—between his doctrines
and those of the Stoics. These differences can be distributed into
four categories:
Doctrinal differences: for the Stoics, logos
was equally reason (individual and
universal), nature, and God, while for Philo, logos
is not ultimate reality but merely
what we can see and understand of God, who is Himself very far from
human comprehension. In Stoicism, logos
is God; in Philo it corresponds to
his specific doctrine of the dunameis, the powers of God who
created the world and governs it.
An inverse relation between the individual and the universal:
for Stoic philosophers, natural law is the logos
in its function of commanding what
must be done or avoided. No particular human law corresponds with the
natural law, though Cicero tried to demonstrate that Roman religious
law could coincide at least partly with the law of nature. In
Philo’s thought, the Torah is described as containing many
elements of natural law, and its claims to universality were
concretized in the Greek of the Septuagint.
The refusal of essential Stoic concepts: Philo only uses the
word sunkatathesis twice in his entire corpus, a key term
defining the human ability to accept or refuse information given by
the senses and the capacity to transform decisions into action. He
uses sometimes oikeiôsis, another Stoic keyword, but
never with the meaning the Stoics lent to this concept. In brief,
Stoic oikeiôsis expresses the idea that Nature gives to
every living being from birth an indication of what its supreme
purpose in life will be. In the case of mankind, things are a little
more complex. The first impulse is, as in the case of all animals, the
impulse to survive, but after this comes the impulse toward a rational
life, a privilege that human beings alone share with God. All this was
unacceptable to Philo, both the idea that human beings could at their
birth be submitted to the same law as animals, and the definition of
telos, the supreme human good (Besnier 1999), as the capacity
of making choices in accordance with nature.
Substitutions and additions: It has been correctly observed
that psychology, and especially psychology of the passions, is one of
the fields in which Stoic influence is most visible in the Philonian
corpus. It is perfectly true that he employs many Stoic elements in
his psychological commentaries, but in contrast to Chrysippean
monistic doctrine, Philo never insists that the soul could be
exclusively rational. Philo’s own stance is to invoke a Platonic
dualism when arguing that the soul is exiled in the body and
consequently in the world, and invoke Stoic psychological descriptions
when describing the multiplicity of mental activities. Because he used
these two levels—one metaphysical and ethical, the other
descriptive and functionalist—he could give the impression of
having avoided the contradictions between the two doctrines.
Bréhier, a great French name in Philonian studies, wrote that
Philo’s thoughts aligned much closer to Platonism than to
Skepticism (Bréhier 1908 [1925: 214]). That assertion is
characteristic of an epoch in which these two doctrines were
considered to be radically different. More recent studies have
demonstrated that things are much more complex. Middle Platonist
philosophers like Plutarch, Favorinus, or Alcinoos integrated many
elements of Skepticism to their dogmas, especially in order to
undermine Hellenistic naturalism and redirect attention to an idea of
transcendence. Philo himself knew the existence of two kinds of
Skepticism: New Academic and Neopyrrhonian. The former school seems to
have disappeared as a structured institution by his lifetime. The
latter came to prominence in the middle of the first century BCE, with
Enesidemus criticizing New Academic philosophers, and especially those
of his age, on the grounds that they had conceded far too much to
Stoic dogma. Philo seems to have paid little attention to New Academic
sceptics, but was acquainted at least with some of their principal
doctrines. By contrast, he is the first to have used the tropes, i.e.,
the system of Sceptic arguments, elaborated by Enesidemus, which
remained for centuries a kind of manifesto of Skepticism. At the
beginning of the twentieth century and for many years after, scholars
paid great attention to the passage of the De ebrietate where
Philo uses these tropes. Today, however, it is commonplace to say that
the connection was a weak one, and that Philo had his own interests
instead. Of course he did, but Sextus Empircus himself, now considered
the most reliable source, had his own interests as well as being a
physician, and it is rash at least to neglect the Philonian testimony,
closer to Enesidemus from both a geographical and chronological point
of view. Philo uses Sceptic methods to demonstrate that even with the
aid of education, the paideia of which he was so proud, human
beings are unable to find the truth. Skepticism thus appears as the
best means to awaken mankind to its oudeneia and to open the
path toward transcendence.
“Was Philo a Middle Platonist?” is the title David Runia
gave to one of his articles (1993). There is at least one point of
consensus among the scholars, i.e., that Philo’s Platonism
accurately reflected the Platonist interpretations circulating in
Alexandria at the time. Very useful comparisons have been made with
Eudorus, a contemporary and compatriot, and with Plutarch. It is most
probable that Pythagoreanism played a great role in Philo’s
development of negative theology; it certainly did so in his doctrine
of the first principle. At the same time, Philo makes extensive use of
Plato as well despite the difficulty of reconciling this doctrine with
more classical Platonic themes. The presence of the Timaeus
in the De
opificio mundi is massive, as
demonstrated by Runia (2001). Philo’s many allusions to the
theme of “assimilation to God” prove how conscious he was
of the difference between Stoic immanence and Platonic transcendence.
At the core of Stoic ethics lay the concept of
oikeiôsis, which required both adaptation to Nature and
absolute obedience to her guidance. The word oikeiôsis
derives from oikos, meaning house. The goal of a
Stoic’s life was to know every hidden recess of
“Nature’s house” and to dwell respectfully therein.
On the contrary, for Middle Platonists who were readers and
commentators of the Theaetetus,
the goal was to depart from nature, a dwelling of sensations and
injustice, in order to become as similar as possible to God. Another
major theme that Philo shares with other Middle Platonists is that of
Ideas as divine thoughts, one of the features of Imperial Platonism.
Unlike Plato in the Timaeus,
Philo does not assert that the Ideas are exterior to the Creator. For
him God is, through his logos, the
only active cause. The world of the Ideas, the noètos
kosmos, is that of God’s thoughts. Despite many nuances,
variations, and even contradictions, there is in Philo the same triple
structure common to many Middle Platonic texts: the God/Demiurge, the
first principle; the Ideas and powers by which God acts on matter; and
matter itself. However, it must be added that in Philo everything is
both similar and different. His God is not the Demiurge; he does not
define powers and Ideas with reference to mathematical principles,
though arithmology is quite present in his commentaries; and his
conception of matter, despite many allusions to the philosophical
doctrine of the dyad (the formless and unlimited base), has deep
Biblical roots. 
It may be useful at this point to address the question of Pythagorean
influence on Philo. In Probus
2, he speaks of the “holiest sect” of the
Pythagoreans, a highly admiring expression. In fact, the quite
numerous mentions of this “sect” in his treatises are a
confirmation of his fascination for it. He admires Pythagorean elitism
(Probus 2), and sees in the ban
against pronouncing their Master’s name something akin to the
Jewish idea of divine ineffability (QG
1.99). He explicitly mentions twice Pythagorean sources: in
Aet. 2, where he says, as we
have seen, that he read a treatise of Ocellus; and in Opif.
100, there is a complex passage
about the number seven, likened by the Pythagoreans to Zeus, the
“Director and Ruler of all things”. In QG
2.12, arithmology is explicitly
evoked as a Pythagorean science. Nevertheless, his allusions to
Pythagorean themes are often vague and merit further analysis. As an
example, Philo is often willing to use adjectives by which
Pythagoreans characterized the dyad but reluctant to use the word
itself. And when he does so, he clarifies in a very personal manner
that “the monad is the image of the first Cause”
and the dyad that of “the matter passive and indivisible”
(Spec. 3.180). Monad and dyad
serve Philo as exegetical tools, not actual substitutes for the
narrative of Creation in the Bible. It is as if the imperative not to
coincide exactly with Greek philosophical doctrine was for Philo an
obligation of identity.
Evidently, Philo felt no sympathy towards Epicureanism, an exclusively
materialistic doctrine which denied the existence of Providence and
defined pleasure both as the first motivator of human actions and as
the supreme good. As if this was not enough, Epicureans also described
gods as taking human form, which was for Philo an indisputable case of
idolatry. Nevertheless, his attitude towards Epicureanism is at times
more complex than one might expect. In the first instance, his
condemnation of Epicureanism is clear. In the same sentence at Post.
2, he castigates Epicurean
impiety alongside Egyptian atheism. In De
providentia as well we find strong elements of a
refutation of Epicurean denial of Providence. And in Aet.
6–8, he draws a clear
contrast between Epicureans who believe in the genesis and dissolution
of worlds created by the chance of atomic collisions, and the Stoics,
who despite being materialists themselves, claim that the world is
single and governed by Reason. In addition, atomism becomes an
allegorical instrument in the splendid exegesis of Moses killing the
Egyptian (Fug. 148), where this
episode becomes the symbol of the confrontation between the doctrines
of unity and of extreme fragmentation. The Egyptian, who symbolizes
pleasure, is buried in the sand, symbol of atoms. Nothing in all this
is truly unexpected. More surprising, however, is the inclusion of the
most complete exposition of the Epicurean version of
oikeiôsis in Opif.
161, the doctrine of first adaptation to nature, probably of
Stoic origin but also adopted by other schools. Moreover, despite many
appearances, Philo does not consider pleasure an absolute evil. For
him, it has a place in the divine program of Creation since it plays
an essential role in procreation. The error lay with those who would
transform a relative good into a perfect one.
Philo’s name has almost become a byword for allegory. There are
many arguments to defend this association, but it would be an error to
affirm that he was merely an allegorist. In many passages he defines
with precision what can be called his methodology of allegory. In
Praem. 61–65, he says
that there are secret meanings, reachable only with God’s help.
He distinguishes three cases by which a secret meaning may be
ascertained: (a) directly by divine illumination, or (b1) indirectly
in the shadow of literal interpretation, and/or (b2) by allegorical
interpretation. It must be added that he not only uses the word
allegoria, but also uponoia, a Platonic term which
by this time may have been somewhat archaic. The two terms are not
exactly synonymous for him. In Opif.
157, he posits that Biblical tales are not the kind of myths in
which poets and sophists rejoice but are in fact “indications of
character types which invite allegorical interpretation through the
explanation of hidden meanings”. Nevertheless, according to
Philo, it is an error to exclude literal meanings. As he notes in
Migr. 89–93, 
there are some who, regarding laws in their literal sense in the light
of symbols of matters belonging to the intellect, are over punctilious
about the latter, while treating the former with easy-going neglect.
Such men I for my part should blame for handling the matter in too
easy and off-hand a manner: they ought to have given careful attention
to both aims, to a more full and exact investigations of what is not
seen and in what is seen to be stewards without reproach. 
For him, allegory assumes importance when literal interpretation
encounters difficulty, for example, when it suggests conclusions in
contradiction with God’s absolute perfection. In Leg.
2.19, he does not hesitate to
say that the creation of Eve from one of Adam’s ribs was a most
improbable myth, if taken literally. It becomes likely only if one
understands that “ribs” are in fact the powers of
Adam’s mind. It has been amply demonstrated that Philo’s
use of allegory was not born ex nihilo. For example, an
allegorical interpretation of the garment of the high priest (Mos.
2.117) as a microcosmic
reproduction of the universe is found in 
Wisdom of Solomon 18:24, probably written at the end of the
first century BCE. This suggests a Jewish source. On the other hand,
many examples evince Philo’s perfect knowledge of Greek
allegories in the interpretation of Homeric and Hesiodic myths. He
does not hesitate to evoke some of these by name. For example,
speaking about the earth in Aet.
63, he says that she was rightly called Pandora, since she
gives to living things all that is useful. In Greek
dôron means a present. The allegorical interpretation
is here based on etymology, as are those of the greatest Stoic
allegorist of the imperial period, Cornutus. Researchers have recently
shown great interest in Philo’s linguistic remarks. Most of the
time, however, he adapts classical allegorical interpretations to a
Jewish context. For example, in Conf.
170 he quotes Homer, Iliad
2.204–205, two verses in which the poet praises the power
of a single man. Philo denies that this should be interpreted as a
general principle of politics; under his own interpretation, it is
instead a poetic reference to almighty God. In one of his most famous
passages, Philo interprets the tale of Mambre, in Genesis
18:1–15, where Abraham receives
three men he initially believed to be foreigners. The author reminds
his readers (QG 4.2) that
Homer, who in recounting Odysseus’ homecoming, says that gods
often disguise themselves in order not to be immediately recognized by
humans (Odyssey
17.483–487).
A central problem in Philo’s use of allegory is the nature of
the debt he owes to those he calls fusikoi. Since he evokes
them regarding the interpretation of some Biblical difficulties, they
were most likely Jewish exegetes using Stoic methods in which, at
least at that time, etymology played a strong role. For Long (1992),
there is a big difference between Stoic “allegory”, based
on etymological and, more generally, linguistic bases, and the
allegories of Philo. Stoic allegoresis, he says, 
was not an attempt like [Philo’s], to distinguish figurative
from literal meaning, but an effort to normalize language and remove
ambiguity according to their own understanding of the empirical world.
(1992 [1996: 210]) 
In fact, the problem of the exact nature of Stoic allegoresis is
controversial. It can be remarked that Philo’s allegory is not
merely symbolic. Especially when mentioning the fusikoi, he
himself draws upon etymology, for example, about Sara whose name in
the Chaldean language (i.e., in Hebrew) means “the ruler”
(Abr. 99), and for whom nothing
is more dominant than virtue (80). If it
is probable that in Alexandria at this time there were a great variety
of allegorists blending literary, philosophical, and spiritual
currents, then we can say that Philo was very skillful in drawing upon
each of these. To this observation, let us add a Philonian conception
of allegory that appears not to have interested later scholars: in his
interpretation of one of Joseph’s dreams in Somn.
2.8, Philo states that he will
follow the method of allegory which he calls a “wise
architect”. This expression is a “hapax”, i.e., an
isolated case. The best way to understand the meaning of this phrase
is given by Plutarch when he says that Alexander, seeking the proper
place for the Egyptian city destined to bear his name, had a vision
(Life of Alexander 26). In it,
Homer recites two verses for him in which he mentioned the island of
Paros (Odyssey 4.354–55).
Alexander declares to his friends that he will follow Homer’s
advice since he was the wisest architect—an already well-known
story in Alexandria to which Philo alludes in his own way. The
difference between Philo’s reference to Alexander and
Plutarch’s is itself interesting. In the latter case, Homer is
not only the greatest poet but also the father of all science. In the
former, it is not the poet but the exegete that unveils the meanings
of dreams. And dreams sent by God always reveal something about the
truth of the world.
Philo is also considered the founder of negative theology in the
history of monotheistic faith. Given the association of his faith with
contemporary forms of Skepticism, he was also the founder of at least
a kind of fideism, i.e., a doctrine in which faith is the foundation
of all essential truths. His apparent versatility in exegesis can give
the impression that his only purpose is to make philosophical themes
and words coincide with the text of Bible. However, though Philo is
not as systematic as Plotinus, there is much more coherence in his
physics and metaphysics than one might think. Even John Dillon, hardly
an unconditional admirer of Philo, argues that “he follows a
system in which the supreme principle is the One”, meaning not
the God of philosophers but the personal God of Judaism (1977: 155).
The problem of possible philosophical antecedents to Philo’s
conception of an unknowable and ineffable God is a complex one. Such a
hypothesis cannot be dismissed, but there is no clear evidence of its
truth. In any case, negativity is, par excellence, the manner
of speaking in the best way possible about God. It is not the only
one; there is also the possibility of declaring His perfection and
infinite glory. And metaphors, like those of monarchy, the sower, and
the sun, are still different. But the uiae negationis,
eminentiae (all that is good has its origin in God), and
analogiae (there is a kind of analogy of being between
Creator and creature), though perfectly compatible with each other,
are only poor human means to suggest Him who can’t be seen,
named, nor known. Nevertheless, one of the most interesting
comparative means to evoke man’s relation to God is the
vocabulary of mysteries, for example when Philo says in Cher.
49: 
I myself was initiated under Moses the God-beloved into his great
mysteries, yet when I saw the prophet Jeremiah and knew him to be not
only himself enlightened, but a worthy minister of the holy secrets, I
was not slow to become his disciple. 
The comparison with the Eleusinian mysteries is so precise that Moses
is often called “hierophantos”, initiated in the
Sinai to mysteries most obscure. As it had held in Eleusis, Philo
speaks of “little mysteries” and “great
mysteries”, the former leading to liberation from passions, the
latter from sensations. Many other elements, especially those of the
sacred banquet, resonate with the theme of the mysteries. Many
scholars suggested that Philo situated himself in the Platonic
tradition of philosophically transposing the Eleusinian mysteries. In
this perspective, the mystery is the allegoric method itself.
However, one could object to this interpretation that the meaning of a
metaphor is not monolithic. It depends in great part on the identity
of the addressee, about which we know little. Indeed, there was at
least one ambiguity: did Philo want to prove to hypothetic Greek
readers that Eleusinian mysteries were shadowy images of the only true
mysteries, the Jewish ones? Was he using a kind of spiritual
lingua franca elaborated during the pluralistic honeymoon at
the beginning of the Ptolemaic period? Still, no element of the
mysteries’ lexicon could trace a shift with regard to the theme
of the impossibility of knowing God.
Even the man who was the closest to God, Moses, could not see Him in
the Sinai. God is “ineffable, inconceivable and
incomprehensible” (Mut.
15). This means that without Revelation, it would be impossible
to say anything about Him that bore relation with truth. At the same
time, the absolute transcendence of God, as theorized by Philo, could
have implied His perfect indifference to the world of matter, time,
and sensibility. Yet, through His providence, God is present in the
world He created. From a philosophical point of view, the problem of
what Radice calls “the antinomy of transcendence and
providence” played a great role even in the period before Middle
Platonism (2009: 128). The return to Platonic transcendence was the
major philosophical characteristic of Philo’s age. It is highly
improbable, however, that philosophy had a determining role in shaping
his faith and beliefs. More probable is that he perceived himself in
the tradition of biblical translators, the Septuagint being so highly
praised by him in the Vita
Mosis. In a time when Egypt was Ptolemaic, these
translations had both political and cultural purposes. In
Philo’s time, the main center of Greek power was cultural. To
comment upon the Bible with philosophical concepts was, in a certain
way, to translate it into the language of the new cultural elite, the
Roman as well as Greek. Regardless, the central idea was that the word
of God had to be mediated to become accessible outside of Israel. From
this point of view, mediation was a central Philonian concept, not
only linguistically and culturally, but also ontologically: in Somn.
1.62, he says that God
fulfilled His Word with His incorporeal powers.
One of the main Philonian concepts, power, is all the more complex
given the varieties in Philo’s prose when discussing it (Termini
2000). These variations were probably a means to avoid the implication
that these powers had an ontological autonomy. Their nature, rather,
is merely linguistic and functionalist. The number of God’s
power is not fixed and their relation to the logos
is evoked vaguely or not at all. From
a philosophical point of view, the genealogy of dunamis is
incredibly rich since each great Greek philosopher used it with his
own semantic specificity. In the Bible, God is omnipotent but there is
no systematic presentation of His powers. Just before the apparition
of Middle Platonism, dunamis was present in Stoic doctrine,
but with a more reduced range of meaning. The question of
Philo’s source(s) on this point is very controversial, but the
general structure is quite clear. His two main powers are the
“creative power” (theos) and “regal
power” (kyrios) (Cher.
27–8). The beneficent and the legislative powers are
subordinated to them, but in Spec.
1.45, Philo uses a Platonic metaphor to assert that God is
surrounded by a great number of powers who are like His bodyguards.
Before trying to specify the relation between these powers and the
logos, it is necessary to add that
dunamis is not only a metaphysical term. It bears a
psychological meaning as well, for example at Opif.
67 when Philo evokes the
division of the soul in a context both Aristotelian and Stoic. In
Leg. 1.11, the division is more
clearly Stoic, with its seven traditional parts (the five senses,
reproduction and speech) but at the same time, Philo seems to adopt a
dualistic position, distinguishing a rational and irrational part of
the soul. The main problem, in human psychology as with the divine
powers, lies in their relation to the logos.
It seems that Philo did his utmost to make the relation between God
and the logos as complex as possible.
As an example of these difficulties, in Leg.
2.86, God is said to be the
supreme genus and His logos
the second one. Other things, Philo adds, only exist in speech and
sometimes amount to mere nothingness. In the third book of the same
treatise (Leg. 3.175–6),
the logos is defined as the
“ti”, i.e., the all-encompassing genus in the
Stoic system. To explain this definition, Philo specifies that
God’s logos is the supreme
genus of everything that was born. From a philosophical point of view,
if somebody remains in the world of immanence, he can refer to the
universal logos, and only to him. But
to see the logos as the ultimate
expression of the absolute is for Philo an absolute impiety. In fact,
the logos is only God’s shadow,
His image, the instrument by which He created the world, or in a more
anthropomorphic way, His “first-born son” or His deputy
(Agr. 51). In Fug.
109, the logos
is said to be “the Son of God
and Sophia”. The Pythagorean-Platonic model of Creation acting
on undefined matter is thus both preserved and richly transformed.
God is unity, and only unity. It is the logos
which carries in itself the principle
of contraries, mixing good and evil. This leads in turn to a
distinction between ontology and methodology. Anyone who divinizes the
world, seeing it as the most perfect expression of the logos,
is deeply wrong, since he omits God,
the truly supreme genus and the only one not to have been created. At
the same time, the exegete of God’s word can occasionally lead
to his commentary focusing on the logos,
creating a false resemblance to
Stoicism. However, the theologian is, mutatis mutandis, like
the biologist who today chooses some cells to place under his
microscope. This act, of course, does not imply that the biologist
forgets the tissue of which these cells are a part. Similarly,
Philo’s focus on logos should
never suggest that he feels a temptation toward Stoicism. Themes and
language of immanence are for him only a means to better understand
the world created by God. When he praises the philosophers who
recommend “living according to nature”, he uses a famous
Stoic formula, but immediately after explains that this means
“to follow God” (Migr.
128). For a Stoic, the two formulae were strictly synonymous.
In Philo’s thought, the former is valid only if it is followed
by a reference to God, who is transcendent by definition.
The intermediary status of the logos
and the many nuances in the expression of its nature do not prevent
Philo from providing a more or less systematic framework.
The logos, God’s
organon in the creation of the world, is described in Opif.
20 as “the place of the
Ideas”, a metaphoric expression since for Philo the intelligible
world could not be contained in a place. While the demiurge
contemplates the Ideas in order to create the World in the Timaeus,
in the De
opificio, God not only creates the
Ideas but organizes them into an intelligible world. In Her.
119, the divine logos
is said to be both sower and creator.
The former word refers to a Stoic concept, that of spermatikoi
logoi, defined as the rational patterns inherent in the
principles of organization of the world, but which Philo preferred not
to use with precision. The Quis
heres is probably the treatise in which Philo’s
reflection on the logos’ way of action is most
complete, through the concept of logos
divider (tomeus). In
Stoicism, one of the main functions of the logos
is to establish the principle of the
idiôs poion, that is to say, the absolute specificity
of each being in the world. In the Quis
heres, perhaps under the influence of a Stoicized
interpretation of the Timaeus,
Philo explains how God created the four elements from undifferentiated
matter, then individual beings, by mixing these elements together.
As was said rightly by Radice, the 
philosophical doctrine of the powers… allowed Philo to maintain
both the oneness of God despite His many names and epithets, and the
transcendence of God despite His action on the world. (2009: 136)
The relation between the logos and
the law of Nature is an interesting topic since it shows the different
perspectives of Philo’s thought and Stoic doctrine despite their
many similarities (Najman 1999). For the Stoics, the logos
and the law of Nature are perfectly
synonymous. In their definition, the law of Nature is the command of
the logos as to what must be done and
what avoided. Philo’s thought of the law is different. In Opif.
143, Philo alludes to
man’s original ancestor as living in a world governed by a
constitution, i.e., “the right reason of nature”, which is
named with more appropriate title “ordinance”, a divine
law according to which obligations and rights have been distributed to
each creature. The vocabulary is Stoic, but with an interesting
nuance: Philo speaks about “the right reason of nature”
instead of “the law of nature”. This is perhaps more than
a stylistic variation; instead, it may have served to reveal a
distance with regard to the canonical doctrine of the law of Nature.
This distance appears to be essential, despite many variations and
occasional contradictions. First of all, while Stoic natural law is
affirmed by Cicero to be “the same in Athens and in Rome”,
but without any precise formulation, the Torah, specific law of the
people of Israel, is posited by Philo to be unique, since it is both
concrete and eternal. The law of Moses thus has an ambiguous status,
since it is sometimes said to be the Natural Law itself, and sometimes
an image, eikôn, of it. It is a controversial point
whether the term “image” means an ontological degradation
or a perfect identity of one with the other. Last but not least, Philo
emphasizes the fact that before the Torah, the patriarchs were
unwritten incarnations of the law of Nature. Admittedly, his task
bordered on the impossible. He had to take into account both the
historicity of the Torah and its eternity, its universality, and its
institutional status as law of Israel. It is not impossible that he
had in mind a model similar to the translation of the Torah into
Greek. In the Vita Mosis, he
emphasizes the fact that the Greek translation and the Hebrew (he says
“Chaldean”) original are perfectly identical and
equivalent. There is a plasticity of the law of Nature, at first
incarnated by the patriarchs, then written; and a plasticity of the
Torah, first in Hebrew, then in Greek. At the same time, their
underlying function is always the same: defining a principle of
ethical responsibility not exclusively from the rationality of the
world but by reference to a personal God who chose Israel to incarnate
and bear witness to this principle in its different forms.
The De opificio was often
defined as a Jewish version of the Timaeus.
In this treatise, Philo
proclaims, against Aristotelianism and Stoicism, that God is the
unique Creator both of the models for the world and of the world
itself. That does not prevent him from drawing upon patterns
elaborated in the somewhat confused but rich period at the end of the
first century BCE. The evaluation of the most common model of
cosmological creation in the De
opificio, that of an active power acting on unqualified
matter, is difficult since Philo seems to affirm that God created the
world ex nihilo in some passages. It is probable that there
was no significant difference between unqualified matter and pure void
for him. God’s first task—though Philo refuses to admit
the historicity of Creation (Runia 2001: 156–162)—was
acting as architect to elaborate His project, i.e., to structure the
intelligible world, conceived as the model of the corporeal one and
established in the logos. The chief
contents of the incorporeal cosmos were heaven, an invisible earth,
air and void, water, spirit, and light. After the creation of the
firmament and of the earth, on the fourth day God proceeded to order
the heaven and to adorn it with splendid heavenly bodies. The
explanation of this fourth day is especially interesting given the
following elements:
God has absolute liberty, and creates the less-important earth before
the more-important celestial bodies.
He knows what the then non-existent human beings will think and wants
to prevent them from thinking that the movement of the celestial
bodies is the cause of everything. This could be called the Chaldean
temptation, not without similarities to Stoicism, and is an obsessive
fear of Philo’s.
At this point he begins an extensive section on Pythagorean
arithmology, including a meditation on the perfection of the number
four.
On the fifth day, God creates the living beings according to a
scala naturae replete with Platonic, Aristotelian, and Stoic
echoes. As has been remarked, there is a crucial difference between
Plato and Philo on this point (Runia 2001: 213). While “the
creational sequence” is descending in the former, in the
Alexandrian exegetes—who aim to defend the Biblical
account—it ascends. Between the fishes, which are the first
created, and man, crown of Creation, are birds and land animals. The
creation of man, on the sixth day, is for Philo an occasion to develop
some of his main themes: the resemblance of the human being to God,
based on the Platonic and Stoic idea that the intellect holds the same
position in the human being that the Great Creator holds in the
cosmos; the concept of the powers of God, introduced with his exegesis
of the words, “let us make a human being after our image and
likeness”. In fact, argues Philo, God needed no one to create
the human being, but preferred that human sins not be attributed to
Him. In addition, he cites the Platonic idea of contemplation leading
to philosophy, a risky idea since it could lead to such a fascination
with worldly things that the Creator would be forgotten and denied, as
was the case with the Chaldeans. After a long arithmologic meditation
on the hebdomad, the seventh day or Shabbat, Philo arrives at original
sin. It is said that the first man (the name Adam is never evoked) was
most excellent in his body as well as his soul. He lived in perfect
harmony with nature, homeless, but the cosmos was his home and city,
where he resided with complete safety. God ascribed to the first man
the imposition of names, a philosophical theme with strong Platonic
connotations. In the following paragraphs Philo explains his descent
into wickedness by the creation of woman. The sentence “woman
becomes for him the starting point of a blameworthy life” has
aroused many criticisms of misogyny on Philo’s part. It would be
absurd to deny that there are many offensive assertions regarding
women in his work. Woman is the symbol of sensation, man that of
reason. These problems are essential in that they deal with sexuality,
ethics and ontology alike. Without trying to defend Philo
systematically, one must however emphasize the first sentence of Opif.
151: 
But since nothing is stable in the world of becoming, mortal beings
necessarily undergo reverses and changes, the first human being too
had to enjoy some ill fortune. 
The word “necessarily” means that human responsibility is
much more relative than absolute. The first man could not eternally
have a perfect life in a world which was not the intelligible one. In
Stoic doctrine, the similarity between the sage and God is a permanent
one. Philo is much more cautious when saying at Opif.
151: 
As long as he was single, he resembled God and the cosmos in his
solitariness, receiving the delineations of his soul, not all of them
but as many as a mortal constitution could contain. 
Eve’s role was inscribed in Adam’s ontological
instability. In Philo’s allegorical interpretation, defined not
as a certainty but a conjecture, the serpent is the symbol of
pleasure. It cannot be said, however, that pleasure is an absolute
evil in Philo’s thought. It is necessary in the created world
and it is said in Leg. 2.17
that the new born child makes use of it. The defenders of pleasure are
not absolutely wrong when they say that offspring feel an affinity
with it. Their error is not in defending pleasure but in transforming
its auxiliary role into the alpha and omega of ethics. The moment of
humankind’s fall is neither the triumph of evil, nor a victory
of individual perversity, but rather the appearance of a contrast
between the first man in his initial perfection and a world which,
being created on the basis of the intelligible one, could not itself
be perfect.
In a huge catalogue of philosophical opinions, which is of
considerable interest, Philo begins by demonstrating how little we
know about heaven, then arrives at the human being about whom he says
that he/she has four parts: body, sensibility, speech, intellect
(nous) (Somn. 1.25).
He exposes all that we know about the first three, for example, that
body has three dimensions and six ways of moving. But about the
intellect, he says that it is absolutely unintelligible. Nothing is
known about its nature, its way of arriving in the body, or its place.
As with the place of heaven in the world, we are unable to say
anything about it. But in contrast with this scientific and
philosophical ignorance, the Bible gives its reader true information.
The intellect is a divine emanation (Somn.
1.34, Genesis
2:7), and the human being is the one
who received the privilege of worshipping God, the One Being. There
are grounding elements of the problem: what must the human being do in
the face of such problems? Philo’s answer is both philosophical
and theological. She must, like Socrates or like Terah (father of
Abraham) in the Torah, make a constant effort to have better
self-knowledge. Socrates is the man who had no other philosophy than
to know himself, while Terah is the very idea of knowing oneself. What
does it mean to know oneself? Essentially, to have a clearer idea of
one’s position with respect to God and His powers in order to
have the means of becoming wiser, and therefore better. The human
being has no other personal good than reason. The paradoxical aim of
reason is to perceive the distance between God and His creation (Somn.
1.66) and so to understand how
far He is from human comprehension.
To know oneself does not mean to have a perfect science of what a soul
is. Philo knows all the suppositions elaborated by philosophers and he
uses many of them, but without ever saying that he is in possession of
knowledge of the soul. It has been rightly said that his purpose was
not to build a scientific but a “religious psychology”. In
this kind of psychology, it was not essential to know if a soul has
seven components besides reason, as it is said by the Stoics, or
three, like in the Platonic division, or if it contains, besides
reason, nutritive and sensitive parts like in Aristotelianism. Here
I’ll give a few examples of his varieties of uses. In Opif.
117, soul is compared to a
puppet show, the seven puppets being manipulated by the
hègemonikon, the central rational element. This
metaphor strongly reminds us of the Stoic comparison with the octopus,
but is also very different from this image. The octopus is a living
unity, while the puppet master is essentially different from his
puppets. The Stoic metaphor of the octopus is a monist one, but the
Philonian image, inspired from Plato (Laws
644d), is strongly dualistic.
The puppets are not even irrational beings as they are mere objects.
But it is true that in Leg.
1.28, the image of the source and the stream could have been
used by the most orthodox of the Stoics if separated from its context.
In 1.29, Philo says that the intellect
(nous, note that he does not use the Stoic word logos)
is like a source going to the
senses. There is, however, no contradiction in all this. In 1.30,
Philo uses a strictly Stoic definition:
the living being is characterized by representation and impulse. But
when he arrives to the human being at 1.31,
Stoicism is completed by a Biblical
quotation (Genesis 2:7). A Stoic image
is a good way to speak about living beings, but it is not enough when
the narrative is about humans. That is why Philo often uses the
distinction between rational and irrational beings with an opposition
between the hègemonikon, unique and rational, and the
other parts of soul, divided in seven and irrational. However, it must
be added that in Philo, dualistic images do not imply the division of
the soul. In Leg. 2.8, he
asserts that sensation and passions are like parts and products of a
unified soul. Such are the multi-layered levels of language Philo is
capable of using at every page. For him, it is impossible to know what
a human soul is, but it is not necessary to have this kind of
knowledge in order to try to understand what the meaning of the word
of the Lord is. To be conscious of her ignorance in the field of
psychology, far from being an obstacle, actually helps to have a
better perception of the limitations inherent to human nature. But
this consciousness itself necessarily rises from the confrontation of
the philosophical doctrines.
It would be an error to affirm that Philo despises and hates the body.
Even if he is often very harsh towards it, he never forgets that when
God created the first human being, He made him not only spiritually
perfect, but also physically beautiful. He does not see any
inconvenience in emphasizing the perfection of sensation or sexuality.
It is said in Opif. 136 that
the first human being was truly and really kalos kagathos,
beautiful and good. It is strange to find in a Jewish biblical
commentator the explicit expression of this Greek ideal of humanity.
At the same time, it could mean that for Philo the Greek conception of
this expression was an erroneous one, since it did not imply an
immediate link with divine transcendence. God, Philo says, was a good
technitès, both of the body and the soul. The beauty
of the body is in Opif. 138
explained in specific Greek terms, symmetry, beauty of the flesh, and
color. All these concepts can be found in Plato, Aristotle, and the
Stoics, but it does not mean that Philo uses them in the same way. In
Philo, the body is not a principle of evil, though it can be used as
an instrument of perversion when the human being focuses more on
himself than on the powers of God. We find in Leg.
3.71, however, the assertion
that the body is bad by nature, ponèron fusei. The
meaning of the expression is perfectly clear, but it is also necessary
to remember the context. Philo is commenting on Genesis
38:7, where it is said that God killed
Er without any justified reason. According to Philo, “ER”
means in Hebrew the flesh, the body which is a threat for the soul.
But at the same time Philo specifies that to create the best things,
God had to create less good things. This can lead to the conclusion
that the ponèron fusei means not absolute but relative
perversion since the body is necessary to demonstrate, by contrast,
the beauty of soul. Creation is good by nature (fusei) and
the body is an element of the Creation. The example of Issachar in
Leg. 1.83 shows how necessary
the body is for ethical progress. But at the same time, the knowledge
of the body can be only phenomenological, while real research is
ontological. This can explain Philo’s violent attacks on the
body: it is a tomb (following the Platonic play on words comparing the
body to a tomb), a nosèma (disease), a vase unable to
contain its desire, and most frequently a burden of flesh. But all
this verbal violence is addressed more to human error on the value of
the body than to the body itself created by God.
One major intellectual revolution in the passage from the Hellenistic
period to Middle Platonism was a relative abandoning of the concept of
oikeiôsis (natural kinship) which, originating with the
Stoics, became a foundation of ethics not only in Stoicism but also in
Epicureanism and the late Aristotelianism of Antiochus of Ascalon. The
Hellenistic period was that of a naturalism that only the sceptic
Academy undertook to fight it. The great change brought by Middle
Platonism was the irruption of transcendence which seemed to have been
forgotten for at least two centuries. And in the case of Philo,
transcendence was not only philosophical, but also religious, mainly
that of the God of the Bible. Philo sometimes uses the term
oikeiôsis, but never in the Stoic meaning, always with
semantic transformations. He could not accept the idea, central in the
dogma of oikeiôsis, that children as well as animals
are the image of nature. His own description of the world of childhood
is a frightening one, a description Sigmund Freud would not have
spurned. For him the main ethical purpose is to become closer and
closer to God, and so to be in a spiritual kinship with Him. At this
point, Philonian oikeiôsis is not different from the
Platonic omoiôsis. It is not, as in Stoicism, an
initial impulse, indicating the path of nature, but the result of a
pious asceticism, getting rid of desire and passionate impulses. It
has been suggested that the resemblance to God did not have in Philo
any concrete social or ethical consequences, but things are much more
complex. He says in Decalogo
133 that murder is forbidden because of the common resemblance
(omoiôsis) of all men to God, but it is true that he
does not develop extensively the consequences of this
omoiôsis. In Stoicism, there is a kind of family
relationship between human beings, since they alone (among animals)
share reason in a world which is itself exclusively rational. Philo
puts great weight on the specific status of Israel as the only people
able to see God, an etymology of which he is very fond. In Alexandria,
anti-Semitic propagandists accused Jews of being a group unified
through their hatred of other nations, and today in the scholarship,
the problem of universalism in Philo is much discussed (Berthelot
2003). However, it is necessary to distinguish between the ontological
level and the ethical level. Because of its specific relation with
God, Israel is the priest of the Nations, for whom it prays and offers
sacrifices (Abr. 98; Somn.
2.163; Mos.
2.133–135). At the same
time, Philo never denied that non-Jews could reach wisdom. For him, as
well as Jews, Greeks and Barbarians could be ascetics of wisdom.
Jewish superiority lies in the unique capacity to articulate the three
levels: human individual perfection, with the examples of the
patriarchs and Moses; social perfection, that of a society ruled by
the laws of Moses; and ontological specificity, due to a deep kinship
with God.
Philo’s general vision of mankind is often pessimistic. In Ios.
30, he uses the Stoic metaphor
of the world as a huge city, but a city ruled by violence and hatred.
The main cause of this disaster is the reign of passion, a theme very
often evoked in the philosophy of his time. In his exegesis of the
Biblical passages relating to human errors, Philo uses many
philosophical terms and metaphors. Sometimes, he uses a Platonizing
description of passion, recalling the description of the winged team
of horses in Phaedrus 253
c–e. At the same time, in many texts, he refers to the
Stoic division of passions, with four bad passions
(pathê): desire, fear, sadness, and pleasure, and three
good passions, joy, caution, and will. But his use of this Stoic
division is not strictly faithful to the original. In his allegorical
interpretation of Det.
119–120, Philo contrasts bad and good passions, but he
introduces hope and repentance, biblical virtues, among the latter. It
was not simply a terminological change, but the sign of a deep
ontological change. In Stoic doctrine, only the present exists. To be
a sage means to understand that the past and the future have no real
existence, but are mainly spaces of projection for passions. By
introducing hope and repentance among good passions, Philo, without
renouncing a complete, or at least as complete as possible, control of
bad passions, opened a path going from psychology to transcendentalist
ethics. 
Philo, without giving a precise and irreversible definition of the
nature of soul, recommends the radical excision of passions in Leg.
3.129, arguing that no
moderation of them could be satisfactory. The model is a medical one
of major surgery, which will also be used by Seneca. In the fight
against passions, enkrateia (self-control) and
karteria (endurance) play a decisive role. However, only the
sage can live without any passion in Stoicism, and everyone knows that
the Stoic sage is extremely rare in the history of mankind. It was
impossible for Philo to admit that a human being could be perfect.
However, it is said in Deus 67 that Moses aimed at the
disappearance of the passions, but did he succeed in it? There are
many similarities between Philo’s attitude towards passions and
that of the Stoics, but there is also a fundamental difference. For
him it is impossible to become free from passion without divine Grace.
That does not mean that one has to become passive and wait for
God’s intervention. Enkrateia and karteria are
individual qualities that are encouraged by the rules of life included
in the laws of Moses. However, even before the Law was given to Moses,
faith was the condition sine qua non to escape the process of
passion. When Abraham received the order to sacrifice his son, he
obeyed without any emotion. “He admitted no swerving of body nor
mind” (Abr. 175). His
faith was so absolute that at no moment did he try to revolt. But
there is yet another difference with Stoicism. In this doctrine, the
sage cannot lose his perfection, and he remains always in his
apatheia (perfect serenity) even if he has reflex reactions
(propatheiai) of which his judgment is not responsible. On
the contrary, at the death of Sarah, Abraham avoids the two attitudes
considered erroneous by Philo. He did not grieve over-bitterly nor did
he assume indifference (apatheia) as if nothing painful had
occurred. On this occasion, the patriarch chose the
metriopatheia, the middle way, which, in philosophy,
corresponds to Aristotelian doctrine. Unlike the Stoics, Philo does
not try to present apatheia as a kind of ethical heroism.
Unlike the Peripatetics, he does not think that ethics always requires
reasonable aims. He considers the human being able to transform bad
passions into good ones and affirms that there are no natural limits
to his perfectibility when he accepts to submit himself to the power
of God.
Most philosophical themes related to virtue are present in the
Philonian treatises. The four traditional virtues (phronesis
[prudence], sôphrosynè [temperance],
andreia [courage], dikaiosunè [justice]) are
completed through enkrateia which pertains more specifically
to the Cynic-Stoic tradition as the science of that which appears in
line with right reason. In Spec.
4.135, we find a different definition of the four cardinal
virtues: eusebeia (piety, sanctity) is defined as “the
queen of virtues”, and wisdom, temperance, and justice
following. In the treatise De
virtutibus, metanoia (repentance) and
eugeneia (nobility) have special importance. The first
concept, considered an unhappy passion by the Stoics, is the
equivalent of the Jewish concept of teshuva. In Philo, it
expresses the strong connection between theological and moral
reflection. Eugeneia has nothing of a racist concept, since
all those who are temperate and just are truly noble (Virt.
189). Abraham, son of a
Chaldean astrologist, becomes the symbol of true nobility when he
emigrated from polytheism to monotheism.
One of the most interesting elements in the Philonian presentation of
virtues is the understanding of matriarchs as allegorical symbols of
virtues. Gender differences are a complex and interesting aspect of
the Alexandrine’s thought. One cannot deny his misogyny, which,
however, is not common since it is expressed through rather
sophisticated semantic webs. Virtue is, on his view, masculine in its
essence, since it is powerful and active. The realm of reason is
masculine, “for nature is the law of men, and to follow nature
is the mark of a strong and truly masculine reason” (Ebr.
54–5). Why, then, are
women, the matriarchs, chosen as symbols of virtues? The answer given
in Fug. 51 is that God used a
feminine appearance so that even the most perfect human qualities
would be imperfect. Each matriarch has her allegorical peculiarities.
Sarah, for example, is said to have nothing to do with the world of
women and to be born, like Athena, from the father of everything
(Ebr. 60–1). At the same
time, she unites with Abraham to give birth to Isaac, who is the
allegory of joy, one of the three Stoic good passions
(eupatheiai) which also include will (boulèsis)
and caution (eulabeia).
In Stoicism, virtue, or human perfection, is the natural end
(telos) of the programming of mankind by Providence. In
Philo, things are more complex because of Original Sin. For the
Stoics, there was no ontologisation of evil in a world which was
entirely rational, and to become as perfect as God was not an absurd
project. Philo lived in a period when most philosophers chose a more
modest purpose: to become like God as far as possible by flying from
the earthly sphere to the heavenly realm (Plato, Theaetetus
176 a–b). To live in the
least imperfect way was the goal, a goal which had some similarities
with the Stoic figure of the prokoptôn, the person
making moral progress. Philo knew the different aspects of this figure
and gave his own interpretation of it in Agr.
15. The striving towards a
lesser imperfection could take three forms, a division with
Platonic/Pythagorean origin but embodied by the example of the
patriarchs. Abraham embodies the effort to know, in traveling from
astrology to real comprehension of nature, then from the comprehension
of nature to “the maker and father of the world”; Isaac
symbolizes the happy nature, “the new race, superior to reason
and truly divine” (Fug.
168); and Jacob, the struggle against senses and passions.
Philo stresses the fact that each of these three types is present in
the other two (Abr.
52–53). From a formal point of view, the relation among
the three types is not fundamentally different from that of the
virtues in the Stoic system which aims to reconcile the unity of the
whole and the specificity of each element.
There is an element which differentiates Philo from his contemporary
philosophers and rabbis: the absence of a master. It is impossible to
find in his vast corpus the name of someone who initiated him to
philosophy or to Biblical exegesis. Why this silence about his
masters? One possible explanation is that for Philo, transmission is
greater than the transmitters. He is consistent regarding this
position when he speaks very little of himself. His main idea is that
“the only good that is infallible and firm is faith in
God” (Abr. 268). The
human being can improve herself, and she can have a clear conscience
(suneidêsis is a key word of Philo’s ethical
vocabulary) of the ethical issues, but this does not allow her to
assert her real existence.
Almost all the details that we know of Philo’s life are in
relation to his political activity. Though he himself has a clear
preference for theoretical and mystical life, he played an important
role in the Jewish community of Alexandria. This is one of the great
paradoxes of his life. He thought that it was necessary to engage in
political affairs before attempting the contemplative life, but the
tragic situation of the Alexandrine community obliged him to commit to
public life in order to defend his coreligionists. Nevertheless, he
never considered politics a field without interest. His treatises are
full of remarks about the origin of society, or about the functioning
of human society. Stasis, violent sedition in the city, was
one of his main concerns, certainly based on his own experience. He
was perfectly aware of the Stoic doctrine of the social
oikeiôsis, which affirmed that the whole of mankind was
a natural community, arranged in concentric circles (family, nation,
humankind as a whole). He did not deny the existence of kinship among
human beings, even if “malignant covetousness” is always a
source of hatred. He tried to give a concrete shape to the natural
link by encouraging philanthropy and demanding humane treatment of
slaves. He did not hesitate in advocating their emancipation. He even
asserts that their emancipation “granted freedom to him who is
naturally free” (Spec.
2.84). At the same time, he describes mankind as being deeply
divided by passions, wars, and all kinds of violence. He has the same
optimistic vision of human nature, at least in principle, as the
Stoics, while he also adopted the pessimistic view of the Neo-Academic
Carneades in his critique of Stoicism. One of his most original ideas
to transcend this duality was that individual political regimes were
“additions to the one natural regime” (Ios.
28–31). The dispersion of
humanity and the strength of the passions have as consequence that
harmonious coexistence of nations, though theoretically possible, is
in reality impossible. Because there is, in politics, a permanent
antagonism between individual passions and natural reason, the figure
of the politician is himself varied and contradictory. Moses is not a
politician, but at once the figure of the philosopher-king, the sage,
the priest, and the prophet. Even before receiving the Law, he is the
incarnation of the law (nomos empsychos), as were the
patriarchs (Abr. 3–5).
Joseph, the best politician, is not a constant object of Philo’s
admiration. Even though a recent paper (Frazier 2002) tried to give
evidence of a greater coherence between the two treatises, in the
De Iosepho Joseph is described
as a responsible and courageous man, while in the De
somniis he is said to be mainly
desperate for glory. For Philo, monotheism would imply the superiority
of monarchy, but with the exception of Moses, most human beings are
too weak and inconsistent to ensure stable monarchy. In fact, his
political thought is profoundly influenced by the Hellenistic idea of
anacyclôsis, the natural instability of the three
elementary constitutions (monarchy, aristocracy, and democracy). The
Greek historian Polybius had thought that a mixed constitution would
be the guarantee against this instability, and he saw in the Roman
constitution the paradigm of this stability. In a certain sense, for
Philo, the city of Moses is the model of a new kind of constitution:
it associates transcendence with law of nature, particularism and
universalism, monarchy, aristocracy and democracy. Was it for him, as
it said by Carlier (2008: 433) “un modèle concurrentiel
à la civitas romana” (i.e., a competitive model
to Rome)? Certainly it was for him a model of a different kind, a
radically different kind of exemplarity. In this perspective, the
famous and controversial passage about the Essenians (Probus
75–92) can be read as
the demonstration that this model was not a utopian one.
For Cicero, who has many common points with Philo despite fundamental
differences, the problem of the choice of life (theoretical,
political, or mixed) is one of the most frequent themes of his
philosophical reflection. For him, it was essentially a matter of
personal choice. In the case of Philo, as it was underlined by Calabi
(2011, 2013: 87), the commandment to observe the Sabbath establishes a
structural organization of time, which must include at least a part of
theoretical life. Philo stresses the fact that in all the Jewish
communities Sabbath was a day for praying and also for devoting
oneself to philosophy (Spec.
2.62), that is, the study of the Torah. Does the De
uita contemplativa, with its long
description of the life of the Therapeuts of Alexandria, mean that the
theoretical life was for Philo the best kind of life, or only a
philosopher’s dream? There are many declarations of Philo
asserting the superiority of the theoretical life. At the same time,
he does not imagine this life as an isolated one. To live in the
desert does not necessarily mean to live alone. In fact, the desert is
the place where the double aspect of virtue appears most clearly,
which is reflection and action at the same time. This duality is once
again a common point between Philo and the Stoics, but also an element
of difference, because no Stoic showed the slightest interest for kind
of life of the Therapeuts.
The Quod omnis probus is one of
the most puzzling Philonian treatises. Despite the fact that Eusebius
included it in his catalogue of the works of Philo, the question of
its authenticity was often discussed from the middle of the
19th century. The main arguments against its authenticity
were the massive presence of Stoicism and the lack of any allegoric
commentary. Biblical references are rare, only five quotations used
for an apologetic purpose. From a philosophical point of view, it is
not easy to understand how Philo, who was a major user of Stoic
topoi, but always showing distance towards them, seems to
have fully adopted the paradox of the perfect liberty of the sage,
even when he is in a situation of slavery. Did Philo adopt the Stoic
view that the sage embodies the perfection of human nature? And how
could he reconcile this with the Jewish conception of a human being
marked by Original Sin? More generally, between Stoicism affirming
that the wise man is the equal of God and Plato proposing that man
assimilate to God to the furthest extent possible, where did Philo
stand? The first remark is that Philo does not consider Stoicism an
autonomous thought in the Probus.
According to Philo—if
he really was the author of the treatise—Zeno, the creator of
the Stoa, most likely found his doctrine of human liberty in the
Bible, more precisely in Genesis 27:40, the story of two brothers, one
moderate, the other shameless. Their father wanted the shameless to be
the slave of the moderate one in order to improve the shameless one.
The perfection of the sage in the Probus
is always subordinated to that
of God, who is infinitely superior. In Stoic doctrine, God is the
logos, and that means that He and the
human being have the same nature, perfect in the first case,
perfectible in the second one. In Philo’s interpretation of the
Bible, the distance between the two is infinite. Even if man is
created in the image of God, the Philonian negative theology affirms
that we know nothing about Him. Philo says in the Probus
20 that only he who has no
other master than God is free. He adds that this man is also the
master of other human beings, the deadly vicar of a Grand Immortal
King. In Stoic doctrine, the Sage is the King and the next best human
beings are his ministers. There is no mention of a mightier king. But
how can Philo say that a human being is divine?
Litwa (2014) focuses on the deification of Moses. In conclusion, Litwa
affirms that “Moses is deified by participating in the logos,
the Mind of God, and Philo’s
‘second God’” (2014: 27). God is the King and God of
gods, while Moses is only a god with regard to mankind. It can only be
added that if the Sage embodies the exceptional fulfillment of the
human nature in Stoicism, in Somn.
2.234, the perfect man is said to be neither of an ungenerated
nature nor a mortal one. Not only the context of Middle Platonism but
also the beginning of the deification of the princeps in the
Roman empire can help understand why Philo so easily expressed the
idea of the man-god, which seemed to be far from his own convictions.
Another long article would be necessary to address the Christian
reception of Philo. Many books and articles provide precious
information on this point (Van den Hoek 1988; Runia 1993, 2009;
Sterling 1998). Philo’s thought was used by the Christian
fathers in many different ways. Their attitude towards him ranged from
the passionate interest of Origen to the accurate attention of Clemens
to the somewhat stubborn and hostile attitude of Ambrose, who in many
places plagiarizes Philo. Today, Philo is included in the modern
categories of “Middle Platonism” and, still more recent,
“Middle Judaism”. In his case these expressions are
meaningful. He spent his life “in the middle of”
antagonistic cultures, violent conflicts, and contrasting
philosophical and religious theories. His main legacy in philosophy
was the idea that in the face of many harsh human attitudes, there
were two complementary ways of remaining free and lucid. The main
model was for him, as it was constantly asserted by Nikiprowetzky, the
flight, not exactly the Platonic flight of the Theaetetus,
but that of Exodus, both
a spatial, historical, and vertical flight, the most perfect example
of the presence of Transcendence in the world. While the cause of
Abraham’s flight was his rejection of idolatry, Moses’
project was far more ambitious: not only to escape from Egypt, but to
build a nation by giving it the Word of God as a constitution. But it
must be added that there was for Philo also a kind of Exodus of words.
He gathers concepts and themes of philosophy to free them, i.e., to
bring them into the light of the God of the Torah. Like Moses who knew
all the foreign sciences, Philo learned almost everything of
philosophy, not in order to be a professional philosopher, but to
demonstrate that the truth the Greeks looked for was where they did
not imagine it to be. Philo’s conception of oudeneia,
the human nothingness, had nothing to do with nihilism. It was
the affirmation of the centrality of God instead of the centrality of
the self. One could say that this was theology much more than
philosophy. But, at the same time, it would be an error to say that
philosophy remained the same before and after Philo. 