Systems biology and synthetic biology are relatively recent
interdisciplinary approaches that aim to improve our ability to
understand, predict, and control living systems. They both capitalize
on large-scale data production in genomics and related fields and
explore new paths of cross-fertilization between biology and
non-biological disciplines such as physics, computer science,
mathematics, chemistry, and engineering. Systems and synthetic biology
are often described as ‘sister-disciplines’ or
‘cousins’, focusing on the complementary and interrelated
aims of understanding (systems biology) and
designing (synthetic biology) living systems. Accordingly,
they have been associated with knowledge-driven versus
application-driven epistemologies, or with the aims of analysis versus
synthesis. Philosophers of science examining the research practice
have, however, argued that understanding and design are often
interdependent, and that no simple distinction between basic and
applied science can be made in this context (O’Malley 2009;
Kastenhofer 2013a,b; Knuuttila & Loettgers 2013a). Moreover, the
notions of systems and synthetic biology cover broad and highly
diverse spectra of interdisciplinary hybrids (Calvert & Fujimura
2011; Gramelsberger et al. 2013). This entry will therefore aim to
reach a balance between displaying the methodological flexibility and
variability within these fields and highlighting common themes.
Systems biology can be interpreted as a response to limitations of
research strategies investigating molecules and pathways in isolation.
To clarify the significance of their approach, systems biologists
often stress the need to complement or go beyond what is perceived as
reductionist strategies in molecular biology (cf., De Backer et al.
2004; van Regenmortel 2004; Wolkenhauer & Green 2013). The
contrast between systems biology and molecular biology should not be
overstated (see also
 Section 4.1).
 However, the often cited comparison reveals how systems biology is
motivated by the need for mathematical and computational modeling
frameworks that are better suited for studying the dynamics and
organization of many interconnected components (Boogerd et al. 2007;
Kitano 2001).
Molecular biology has been extremely successful in generating
knowledge on biological mechanisms through the twin strategies of
decomposition and localization of component parts and molecular
operations (Bechtel & Richardson 1993 [2010]). But the very
success of the detailed study of molecular pathways has also revealed
dynamic interfaces and crosslinks between processes and components
that were previously assigned to distinct mechanisms or subsystems. To
account for a vast number of interacting components and multiple
feedback loops dynamic modeling is needed (Bechtel & Abrahamsen
2012). Network modeling and computational simulations in systems
biology allow for the study of larger integrated systems and thus
provide strategies for recomposing the findings in the
context of larger systems (Bechtel 2016; Gross & Green
forthcoming). Systems in this context thus generally refer to
large networks of integrated components exhibiting non-linear
dynamics. However, there is no unified view of what constitutes a
systems-approach (Calvert 2010; Calvert & Fujimura 2011). As
clarified below, systems biology comprises different research
practices with different ties to molecular biology, genomics, as well
as to non-biological disciplines (see also Krohs & Callebaut
2007).
Systems biology research is sometimes divided into a
systems-theoretical and a pragmatic stream
(O’Malley and Dupré 2005). The former is historically
related to the initial use of the term ‘systems biology’
in 1968, denoting the merging of systems theory and biology
(Mesarović
 1968).[1]
 This definition has been taken up as providing a theoretical vision
and reorientation also for modern systems biology (Wolkenhauer &
Mesarović 2005; Drack & Wolkenhauer 2011).
Systems-theoretical proponents view systems biology as an opportunity
to revive important theoretical questions that for half a century
stood in the shade of the success of experimental biology. Examples of
such questions are what characterizes living systems and whether
generic organizational principles can be identified (see
 Section 3.2).
 In contrast, the pragmatic stream views systems biology as a
successor of genomics and as a powerful extension of molecular
biology. This stream is sometimes referred to as molecular systems
biology (De Backer et al. 2010), and practitioners within this field
relate the emergence of systems biology to the production of data
within genomics and other high-throughput technologies from the late
1990s and onwards (Güttinger & Dupré 2016).
Krohs and Callebaut (2007) consider omics-disciplines a third
dimension or root of systems biology due to the impact of data-rich
modeling strategies on the development of the
 approach.[2]
 Omics fields allowed for large-scale measurements of co-expression
between vast number of genes or associated protein concentrations.
Since modeling tools in molecular biology were considered limited for
handling large quantitative datasets, researchers turned to the
exploration and further development of mathematical and computational
strategies developed in engineering and physics (Alberghina &
Westerhoff 2005). Although not all systems biologists put equal
emphasis on the prospects of big data, they share the view that
mathematical and computational approaches are required to account for
biological complexity.
The first international conference on systems biology was held in 2000
(at the first Systems Biology Institute in Tokyo), and thematic
journal issues and dedicated journals quickly followed (Kitano
2002a,b). Since then, many systems biology research institutions have
emerged, and large-scale international collaborations have been
initiated.
Research practices in systems biology can in part be understood
through an examination of characteristics and implications of
different styles of representation. Whereas textbooks and research
papers in molecular and cell biology typically contain mechanistic
diagrams tracking interactions between specific genes and proteins,
representations in systems biology often display interactions between
a vast number of molecular components as abstract networks of
interconnected nodes and links. This difference in representational
style is epistemically significant, because it highlights an
increasing focus on the organizational structure of the system as a
whole.
By conducting correlation-based studies of how multiple genes and
proteins are associated with each other, and how these are connected
to specific biological processes, systems biology research has
revealed common patterns in biological networks such as scale-free
network architectures and multi-level hierarchies (Ravasz et al.
2002). Systems biologists often distinguish between two major classes
of networks based on their connectivity distribution (how components,
or nodes, in the network are connected to other nodes).
Exponential and scale-free network structures are
illustrated on
 Figure 1
 (for details on the differences, see Albert et al. 2000). An
exponential network is largely homogeneous with approximately the same
number of links per node, and it is unlikely to find nodes with many
links. In contrast, scale-free networks are inhomogeneous. Most nodes
have only a few links but some nodes (called hubs) have a large number
of
 connections.[3]
Figure 1: An example of a network
representation in systems biology, showing the difference between an
exponential network and a scale-free network. Red
nodes are the five nodes with most links, green nodes are the first
neighbors of red nodes (from Albert et al. 2000: 379, reprinted by
permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature, copyright 2000).
Interestingly, many real-world networks such as social networks, the
World Wide Web, and regulatory networks in biology display scale-free
architectures. This raises important questions about whether
real-world networks can be related to more generic structural types
with characteristic functional capacities. The scale-free structure
makes the average path length between any two nodes in the network
small, and this structure has therefore been associated with
capacities for coordinated regulation throughout the network (Albert
et al. 2000). Moreover, scale-free networks exhibit a high error
tolerance, understood as robustness against failure of random
nodes and links (e.g., random gene deletion). These functional
properties are not shared by exponential networks. However, the
functional importance of hubs in scale-free networks at the same time
results in fragility to attacks on central notes (Albert et al. 2000;
Barabási & Oltvai 2004). Similarly, a multi-layered network
structure called a bow-tie network connects many inputs and
outputs through a central core (the knot of the bow-tie) that consists
of a small number of elements (Kitano & Oda 2006). This structure
has been associated with efficient information flow, but also with
fragility towards perturbations of the intermediate nodes in the core
of the network.
Some systems biologists examine network architectures in the hope that
smaller functional units or patterns can be identified that are akin
to modules in electronic networks (Hartwell et al. 1999). One example
of pattern-detection within large datasets has received special
attention from philosophers of science, namely research on so-called
network motifs.
Network motifs are defined as “patterns of interaction that
recurs in a network in many contexts” (Alon 2007: 268). By
comparing the gene regulatory network of the bacterium E.
coli to random networks, it was discovered that a few circuit
patterns occurred more frequently than expected by chance (Shen-Orr et
al. 2002). Statistically significant circuits were defined as network
motifs. Two examples of network motifs are shown in
 Figure 2,
 called coherent and incoherent feedforward loops (cFFL and iFFL).
Figure 2: Two examples of network motifs, the
coherent and incoherent feedforward loop (cFFL and iFFL). The diagrams
represent the regulation of a gene Z, via a direct path between a
transcription factor X to Z, and an indirect connection from X via
another gene or transcription factor Y to Z. Arrows represent gene
activation (+) and a vertical bar inactivation (-). In a coherent
feedforward loop (cFFL), all connections are activating. In the
incoherent feedforward loop (iFFL), the path from Y to Z inhibites
gene expression. (Adapted from Alon 2007: 47).
Akin to common circuit types in electronic networks, it was
hypothesized that the recurring wiring patterns may indicate
generalizable functional behaviors. Mathematical analysis suggested
that the cFFL may function as a sign-sensitive delay element that
filters out noisy inputs for gene activation (e.g., sporadic levels of
nutrients in the environment). In contrast, the regulatory function of
the iFFL was hypothesized to be an accelerator that creates a rapid
pulse of gene expression in response to an activation signal. These
predicted functions have been experimentally demonstrated in living
bacteria (Mangan et al. 2003). Moreover, similar and additional
network motifs have been found in other species and in other
regulatory networks important to cell-signaling, metabolism, and
developmental processes (Alves & Sorribas 2011; Peter &
Davidson 2015; Tyson & Novák 2010). Such results have
sparked interesting debates on whether network motifs could be seen as
design principles, whose functions are generalizable across
different biological contexts (see
 Section 2.3).
Philosophers and scientists alike have debated the implications of
research focusing on generic properties of biological networks, rather
than the properties of specific molecular components (e.g.,
Barabási 2002; Bechtel 2015a,b; Craver 2016). Among the
controversial issues is how the enhanced focus on topological
properties relates to more traditional mechanistic explanations in
biology
 (Section 4.2).
 A related issue is whether functional capacities can be derived from
an analysis of network architectures alone. Some systems biologists
and philosophers have pointed to the limitations and possible biases
associated with inferences of functions from automated
pattern-detection in datasets (Calvert 2012; Keller 2005; Krohs 2012;
see also Prill et al. 2010). Specifically, some have called for a more
dynamic approach that can account for the context of the whole network
and how it changes over time.
Network approaches have recently been extended to also study temporal
aspects of coordinated protein-protein interactions in cell cycles and
evolutionary dynamics (de Lichtenberg et al. 2005; Hogeweg 2012;
Knight & Pinney 2009). Of scientific as well as philosophical
relevance is whether and how these approaches can extend mechanistic
strategies in molecular biology by identifying how multiple biological
processes are organized and coordinated in time (Green et al.
forthcoming), and how network analysis can inform evolutionary biology
 (Section 3.3).
Whereas engineering-inspired systems biologists search for functional
units or modules in biological networks, another line of research
emphasizes the need for a ‘global’ approach inspired by
dynamical systems theory (Huang et al. 2009; Jaeger & Crombach
2012). Drawing on Waddington’s idea of the epigenetic landscape
of cell differentiation, the global approach represents dynamical
states in a network through vectors, attractors, and trajectories in a
state space (Huang 2012; for a philosophical analysis, see Fagan
2012). The framework explores how inherent mathematical properties of
the network architectures may constrain developmental and evolutionary
processes, in a way analogous to how laws of motion constrain the
possible planetary movements (Goodwin et al. 1993). The global
approach is sometimes highlighted as being in opposition to
mechanistic or “modular” engineering approaches (Huang
2011; Fagan 2016). Controversies of this kind can reveal interesting
differences in research aims as well as different standards for models
and explanation present in systems biology
 (Section 5.1).
Systems biologists often describe their approach as one occupied with
functional, rather than evolutionary questions (Boogerd et
al. 2007; Hofmeyr 2007). By stressing the autonomy of functional
biology, philosophy of systems biology can help balance the extensive
emphasis on evolutionary biology in philosophy of biology (Pradeu
2016). At the same time, evolutionary systems biology has
recently emerged as a new research approach aiming to extend both
systems biology and evolutionary biology
 (Section 3.3).
Another recent extension of systems biology is the emergence of
systems medicine, the medical application of systems biology.
Systems biology has from the outset been associated with ambitiouns to
solve grand societal challenges. Examples are the aims to provide a
better understanding of complex diseases like cancer, and the vision
of developing patient-specific models that will allow for
individualized disease prediction and prevention
 (Section 5.3).
The aforementioned aims are often pursued through large-scale
international collaborations where many research teams provide data
and models to be integrated in complex models of whole cells (e.g.,
The Virtual Cell Project), whole organs (e.g., the
Virtual Liver Project), and even the whole human body (e.g.,
The Virtual Physiological Human and the Physiome
Project). Such projects raise new exciting questions for
philosophy of science concerning strategies for model building and
model validation (Carusi 2014). Moreover, they provide new sources for
philosophical discussions on reduction and explanation
 (Section 4)
 and on the societal applications of big data biology
 (Section 5).
The term synthetic biology was used already in the 1970s and 1980s,
but the development of synthetic biology in its modern context is also
connected to genomics (Morange 2009; O’Malley 2009; Gelfert
2013). In the wake of big data production around year 2000,
comprehensive gene regulatory networks could be constructed that
allowed for more systematic and ambitious design projects. Just like
systems biologists commonly define their approach in opposition to the
focus on isolated molecules or pathways in molecular biology, so is
synthetic biology sometimes framed as a system-oriented approach that
moves beyond isolationist approaches in genetic engineering
(O’Malley et al. 2008). Also in this context, however, the ties
to precursors are diverse, and there are different views on whether
modular approaches are compatible with biological complexity (see
below).
The term synthetic biology became an official label with the first
Synthetic Biology Conference in 2004, organized by Drew Endy and Tom
Knight at MIT (Bensaude-Vincent 2013). Drew Endy’s
BioBrickTM standard has become a paradigm example of the
aim to realize an engineering program by designing and assembling
modular parts (Endy 2005). But the relation to engineering is complex,
and synthetic biology displays a plurality of epistemic aims, visions
and methodological frameworks.
A central research aim in synthetic biology is to modify metabolic
pathways so as to control biochemical reactions and produce chemicals
of societal value. Examples are biofuels, oils, rubber, biomedical
compounds, and flavoring substances such as vanillin (Jensen &
Keasling 2015). Synthetic organisms may also be designed for
bioremediation. Genetically modified microorganisms can for instance
work as biosensors that detect toxic chemicals or help clean up
contaminated soil and water by metabolizing toxic compounds (Khalil
& Collins 2010). Many efforts are also directed towards
improvements of biomedical research and clinical practices, e.g.,
through synthetic vaccines, diagnostic tools, and personalized cancer
treatments (Christiansen 2016b).
Much of synthetic biology research can be characterized as
application-oriented innovations that utilize and modify biological
structures. But not all practices fit this description. Some synthetic
biologists pursue a basic science approach to understand the origin of
life or the conditions for minimal life
 (Section 3.2).
 Others are driven by the wish to create artificial life in the lab,
inspired by von Neumann’s (1966) vision of a self-reproducing
automaton. This aim may be achieved through the design of macroscale
‘living technology’ (Bedau 2009). Examples are 3D printers
that can print biological tissue structures and perhaps—with
time—also replicate
 themselves.[4]
 Thus, synthetic biology is an umbrella term covering very diverse
research practices.
Examining the diversity of knowledge-making practices in synthetic
biology, O’Malley et al. (2008) suggest a distinction between
DNA-based device construction, genome-driven cell
engineering, and protocell creation.
DNA-based device construction, or what Benner and Sismour
(2005) characterize more broadly as the engineering trend, explores
the extent to which interchangeable and functionally distinct
components can be designed and implemented in a modular fashion. The
BioBrick Foundation is a paradigmatic example of this approach
(biobricks.org). The guiding principles for this approach are
standardization, decoupling, and abstraction of parts and functional
descriptions (Endy 2005). Examples of DNA-based devices are the
repressilator (Elowitz & Leibler 2000, see
 Section 2.1),
 the synthetic toggle switch (Gardner et al. 2000; see
 Section 2.3),
 as well as production of synthetic artemisinin for antimalarial drugs
(Keasling 2010). The orientation towards functional devices and
machine-like control is also explicit in the so-called iGEM
competition (Genetically Engineered Machine) where student teams
compete in the task of constructing genetically engineered biological
systems to address societal problems. Whether the ideal of
constructing standardized and replaceable parts is compatible with
biological complexity is an ongoing topic of debate
 (Sections 2
 and
 3).
Genome-driven cell engineering in synthetic biology departs
from the modularity assumption held by practitioners of DNA-based
device construction by focusing on the functioning of whole genomes or
whole cells (O’Malley et al. 2008). This practice includes
transplantation of foreign or modified genomes into empty
‘chassis cells’ to acquire new functions (Chan et al.
2005), and synthesizing minimal genomes (Andrianantoandro et al.
2006). The notion of a minimal genome highlights the idea
that existing organisms may have genomes more complex than necessary
for the basic functions of survival and reproduction. The human
parasite Mycoplasma genitalium has been considered a model
organism for the exploration of such questions due to its small
genome, and it has also been the target for the first whole-cell model
in systems biology (Karr et al. 2012). In 2010, scientists at the J.
Craig Venter Institute (JCVI) created a synthetic genome of another
bacterial species of the same genus, Mycoplasma mycoides
(Gibson et al. 2010). From the synthetic DNA sequence, the researchers
could partly control the production of new Mycoplasma
mycoides cells. This genome was recently further reduced to a
working approximation for the simplest synthetic minimal genome
(JCVI-syn 3.0), allowing cells to function and reproduce with only 473
genes (Hutchison et al. 2016; see also Sung et al. 2016). At the same
time as lower boundaries for biological complexity are explored, other
synthetic biologists aim to manipulate and control the functions of
genomes of more complex species, such as yeast and algae (Calvert
& Frow 2015; Georgianna & Mayfield 2012).
The third category of synthetic biology, protocell creation,
takes on the ambitious aim to construct simple approximations of
living cells de novo (O’Malley et al. 2008).
Researchers within this stream are often interested in the fundamental
question of what life is, and the notion of applied science may not be
an appropriate description of this research approach (see
 Section 3.2).
 Historically, the theoretical discussion of what life is has often
been coupled to wet-lab synthesis of compounds associated with early
or minimal
 life.[5]
 Synthetic biology takes this approach further through synthesis and
manipulation of vesicles resembling primitive cells, as well as
through advanced computational simulations of gene regulatory networks
(Luisi 2006; Kauffman 2015). This research practice connects to
projects within genome-driven cell engineering investigating the
minimal requirements for a living system to function, survive, and
reproduce. Research on protocells may focus primarily on understanding
the origin of life as we know it, or aim to create synthetic life
forms in other and simpler ways (Rasmussen et al. 2008).
Deplazes (2009) has suggested the following extended classification of
practices within synthetic biology: i) bioengineering, ii) synthetic
genomics, iii) protocell synthetic biology, iv) unnatural molecular
biology, and v) in silico approaches (see
 Figure 3).
 While the categories of work on protocells and synthetic genomes
overlap with the categorization by O’Malley et al. (2008),
DNA-based device construction is here further divided into
bioengineering (exemplified by assembly standards like
BioBricksTM) and unnatural molecular biology.
Unnatural molecular biology aims to create systems with different
components, e.g., artificial nucleic acids based on a different coding
system. Philosophers have debated whether the term
‘unnatural’ distinguishes practices in synthetic biology
from other bioengineering approaches (Lewens 2013; Preston 2013). But
the emphasis on synthetic artifacts underscores the affinity to
synthetic chemistry and perhaps also to the ‘chemist style of
thinking’, emphasizing synthesis and invention in addition to
analysis and discovery (Bensaude-Vincent 2009, 2013, 2015).
Figure 3: Schematic representation of
the five categories of synthetic biology and their connections. (From
Deplazes 2009: 431, Copyright 2009 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
reprinted by permission of John Wiley & Sons, Inc.).
Deplazes’ fifth category, in silico synthetic biology,
focuses on the development and practical implementation of computer
simulations. Deplazes argues that in silico synthetic
modeling should be a distinct category because many of the
computational models have “little or no direct reference to
living organisms” (Deplazes 2009: 430). As
 Figure 3
 illustrates, computer simulations are central to all research
practices in synthetic biology. But the characteristics of various
roles of simulations can shed new light on philosophical discussions
of the relation between models and target systems, and between
modeling, experimentation, and synthesis (Knuuttila & Loettgers
2013a,b; Carusi et al. 2012).
Abstracting from the variety of research practices, a distinctive
feature of synthetic biology is that it aims “to go beyond mere
modeling and to treat biological systems as fully constructible
objects” (O’Malley 2009: 381; see also Schyfter 2013).
Thus, synthetic biology opens new philosophical questions concerning
the relation between synthesis and analysis, between artificial and
natural target systems, and between machine and organism (Holm &
Powell 2013; Nordman 2015).
Systems and synthetic biology offer new opportunities to reconsider
the relative prospects and limitations of engineering approaches for
biological research (Braillard 2015; Calcott et al. 2015). Engineering
approaches are often considered inadequate to grasp biological
complexity. Specifically, design thinking has often been associated
with adaptationism, i.e., the assumption that biological traits are
optimally “designed” by natural selection (Orzack &
Forber 2010). Accordingly, critics have argued that the engineering
approach may lead to a simplified understanding of evolution as driven
solely by natural selection (Lynch 2007). But whereas some approaches
in systems biology can be described as adaptationist (Green 2014), it
cannot be assumed that design approaches always entail adaptationist
implications. It has been argued that systems biologists typically
adopt a ‘thin’ notion of design focusing primarily on the
relations between structures and functions (Green et al. 2015b).
Because research in systems and synthetic biology often is often
dissociated from evolutionary considerations, these research practices
may force philosophers to reexamine the concepts of biological
function and design beyond traditional aetiological
accounts (Holm 2012; Preston 2008).
It is, however, still debatable whether the thin notion of design is
compatible with biological complexity. Some scholars have raised
concerns that the machine-view of organisms may lead to a neglect of
distinct biological features such as autonomy, evolvability, and
intrinsic purposiveness (Nicholson 2013: 669; see also Jacob 1977;
Kogge & Richter 2013). Design approaches may implicitly enforce
the view that operations and outputs of specific parts are stable and
predictable across different contexts. In biology, context-sensitivity
and degeneracy between genotype-phenotype-relations provide severe
limitations to the utility of this heuristic (Boudry & Pigliucci
2013; Güttinger 2013; see also
 Section 3.1).
 Yet, as outlined in the following sections, the ties to engineering
are multi-faceted in both systems and synthetic biology.
Feynman’s ‘last blackboard’ statement in 1988 that
“what I cannot create, I do not understand” is often cited
in the context of synthetic biology and has sparked philosophical
reflections on the relation between understanding and design
(O’Malley 2009; Holm 2012; Calvert & Frow 2013). Although
synthetic biology is distinct from systems biology in the explicit aim
to design synthetic systems, it is often described as a practice
relying on systems biology as a theoretical foundation for design
(Barrett et al. 2006).
Synthetic and systems biology are sometimes described through the
complementary aims of forward and reverse engineering. Forward
engineering refers to the design of systems with novel functions,
often by drawing on an existing high-level model (e.g., an existing
code or living cell). Forward engineering, or re-engineering, can lead
to more complex systems, but simplicity may also be pursued through
implementation of a more abstract coding language or through reduction
or rewiring of (genetic) circuits. Reverse engineering refers
to the aim to understand the functioning of a system
‘backwards’ by examining an existing system in contexts
where consulting a design protocol is not an option. The search for
recurring network motifs
 (Section 1.1.1)
 is an example of how systems biologists may reverse engineer the
structure of a system to understand its functional capacities. Because
functional features such as robustness are not only important to the
survival oforganisms but also to design problems in engineering,
reverse engineering of organizational features that underpin such
capacities is an important aim in both fields (Hartwell et al. 1999;
Csete & Doyle 2002; Kitano 2004; Stelling et al. 2004).
In engineering, the notion of reverse engineering is often associated
with the aim to identify generic features of system design, or
design principles, that can be reused in new systems.
Similarly, the notion of reverse engineering is often used in research
contexts in systems biology where the aim is to identify biological
design principles that can increase the understanding of
structure-function relations across different systems (Csete &
Doyle 2002; Doyle & Stelling 2006; Voit 2003).
Systems and synthetic biology not only adopt mathematical tools from
electronic and control engineering but also a conceptual framework in
which biological functions are understood in terms of control
principles and generic representations such as feedback control
(Gramelsberger 2013; MacLeod & Nersessian 2013a,b). The search for
functional principles, with applications to different systems in
biology and engineering, dates back to the ideals of cybernetics and
biochemical systems theory (Wiener 1948; Savageau 1976). Negative
feedback control has long been a central principle in mechanical and
electronic engineering to maintain stable concentrations and minimize
fluctuations. An important insight from cybernetics is that the same
formalization can also describe biological processes, e.g., where a
reaction is inhibited as a result of accumulation of the product of
the same reaction. An abstract model of negative feedback can
therefore denote a functional principle that holds for a larger class
of systems (Green & Wolkenhauer 2013).
Characteristic of the search for design principles in modern systems
biology is that the strategy is enforced through automated
pattern-detection in network models based on large biological
datasets, as exemplified by the search for network motifs
 (Section 1.1.1).
 The hope is that simple control principles, using e.g., positive and
negative feedback, can make up basic building blocks of biological
functioning such as filters, switches, oscillators, amplifiers,
detectors etc. (Alon 2007; Tyson et al. 2003). One such example is the
so-called toggle-switch, a simple regulatory circuit that is
considered a design principle in both systems and synthetic
biology.
Like a toggle-switch that turns an electrical device ON or OFF,
genetic toggle-switches have been found to regulate many biological
processes such as the cell cycle of budding yeast and developmental
processes in fruit flies (Tyson et al. 2003; Jaeger & Crombach
2012). A genetic toggle-switch is a double-negative feedback loop that
shifts the system between two distinct stable states of gene
expression—allowing synthesis of one protein while another is
repressed. Synthetic biologists have succeeded in constructing a
synthetic toggle switch in E. coli (Gardner et al. 2000), and
the toggle switch is now considered part of the design composites or
‘computational templates’ for building new synthetic
systems (Choffnes et al. 2011; Humphreys 2004). The dynamic behavior
of genetic toggle-switches have also been investigated in studies of
parameter spaces for robust functioning of network motifs (Tyson &
Novák 2010), and in approaches combining the modeling framework
of dynamical systems theory with reverse engineering of gene
regulatory networks from experimental data (Huang et al. 2009; Jaeger
& Crombach 2012).
Because of the abstract nature of proposed design principles, an
interesting philosophical question is how such strategies relate to
discussions about the possibilities of laws in biology. Biological
systems are often taken to be too contingent, diverse, and
context-dependent to allow for derivation of laws or general
principles akin to those found in physics (Burian et al. 1996). The
quest for design principles in biology is therefore an interesting
test case to explore whether more abstract descriptions of generic
features of functional organization can be formulated also in the
context of biology (Green 2015b). A related question is how the
enhanced focus on generic principles and topological features of
biological networks relates to mechanistic accounts of biological
explanation
 (Section 4.2).
An important question for such debates is whether generalizable
functions can be inferred from organizational structures, relatively
independently of cellular, organismal, and environmental contexts.
Commenting on the proposal of network motifs as design principles,
some systems biologists have questioned whether functional
‘units’ can be meaningfully isolated from the workings of
the network as a whole (Huang 2011; Isalan et al. 2008). The search
for network motifs and other functional units make apparent that
systems biology research does not necessarily give up assumptions of
modularity. Rather, than departing from strategies of decomposition
(Bechtel & Richardson 1993 [2010]; see
 Section 1),
 the notion of modularity may be reconfigured via strategies for
structural decomposition of larger networks (Alon 2007).
Whether systems biology presents more holistic approach to biological
complexity is therefore an issue of debate in both philosophy of
science and systems biology itself.
Engineering is often promoted through the idea of rational design.
Some synthetic biologists have adopted a similar vision of synthetic
organisms as structures that can be assembled via replaceable and
standardized components, akin to Lego-bricks (front cover of
Science, 2 September 2011 [333(6047)]). Yet, philosophers
have argued that the actual research practices in synthetic and
systems biology paint a different picture (Knuuttila & Loettgers
2013a, 2014).
Rather than following a fixed design protocol, research in synthetic
biology often progresses through what is taken to be the opposite of
rational design, namely kludging: a solution that is klumsy,
lame, ugly, dumb but good
enough (O’Malley 2009, 2011b). The research process can
perhaps be described as reverse and forward tinkering, in
which opportunities for modular decomposition and recomposition are
explored in iterative cycles to arrive at piecemeal solutions. Some
have argued that synthetic biology exhibits a reflexive double bind to
engineering, because the design assumptions guiding the construction
of the synthetic systems are continuously reevaluated (Knuuttila &
Loettgers 2013a). That is, synthetic biology does not only progress
through similarities between biology and engineering. Through the
exploration of engineering approaches, important differences (or
negative analogies) between biological and engineered systems
are discovered (Knuuttila & Loettgers 2014)
An example of a possible negative analogy discussed in this context is
the role of noise in biological versus engineered systems. In
engineering, oscillations are often associated with noise and lack of
precision, but oscillatory dynamics are characteristic of many
biological processes including metabolism and day and night rhythms
(Knuuttila & Loettgers 2013a; see also Bechtel 2016). To study
oscillations in gene expression, synthetic biologists at the Elowitz
lab constructed a synthetic genetic circuit called the
repressilator (Elowitz & Leibler 2000). The repressilator
was designed to test whether the oscillatory dynamics of gene
expression could be mathematically described via connected feedback
loops in a simple regulatory circuit and implemented in a synthetic
model.
Interestingly, important insights resulted from the repressilator
because it failed to produce regular oscillations as
predicted by the underlying mathematical model. The mismatch between
the mathematical and synthetic model led to a reevaluation of the
assumptions underlying the deterministic mathematical model (Knuuttila
& Loettgers 2013a, 2014). Subsequent investigation of the dynamics
of a stochastic version of the same model suggested that noise may be
an inherent feature of oscillations in gene expression in living
cells. The exploration of the functional role of noise and the
potentials for stochastic modeling has since developed into an
important research program of interest to biologists and engineers
alike (Briat et al. 2016; Munsky et al. 2009; O’Malley 2011b).
The repressilator and similar examples also sparked debates on whether
design procedures in synthetic biology need to account for cellular
contexts, distributed organization of functions, and other features
that are unlike modular machines (Güttinger
 2013).[6]
To what extent the ideal of precision engineering is pursued in
synthetic biology is therefore debatable. Some have stressed the
centrality of the engineering perspective because the construction of
synthetic models is guided by knowledge on which design principles can
be expected to create specific dynamic behaviors (e.g., Gramelsberger
2013). Others have emphasized that synthetic modeling, as a kind of
material recomposition strategy, offer material constraints
that always involve open-ended aspects (Knuuttila & Loettgers
2013b). The latter view highlights exploratory features of the
triangulation of mathematical, computational, and synthetic
approaches. The notion of exploratory experimentation has
also been used to characterize research processes in systems biology
where scholars search for structural and functional patterns in
biological networks without being driven by a specific biological
hypothesis (O’Malley & Soyer 2012; Steinle 1997). Research
on network motifs
 (Section 1.1.1)
 is one example where engineering approaches were applied in an
exploratory fashion to guide the generation of hypotheses on
biological functions (Alon 2007). Also in this context, the analysis
may lead to a reevaluation of design assumptions, e.g., whether the
functions of network motifs are independent of the network context
they are embedded in (Isalan et al. 2008).
It should also be noted that synthetic biologists often aim to produce
biological technology that is more machine-like than natural organisms
(Kastenhofer 2013a,b; O’Malley 2011b). An alternative response
to biological complexity may therefore be to make the designed system
simpler, for instance through genetic rewiring that ensures a higher
degree of modularity (Knuuttila & Loettgers 2013a). The explicit
aim to simplify synthetic models has been interpreted as a sign of the
acknowledgment of biological complexity, and it is therefore debated
whether thecriticism of the machine-view in synthetic biology is
misguided (cf., Holm 2015; Nicholson 2013). The heuristic value of
design approaches is, however, an ongoing topic of debate in both
systems and synthetic biology.
Unlike DNA-based device construction and genome-driven cell
engineering, synthetic biologists in the practice of protocell
creation engage in classical theoretical discussions on what life
is, and how it originated and evolved (O’Malley et al. 2008;
Luisi 2006). This research stream connects to discussions of the
fundamental properties of life in systems biology (Cornish-Bowden
2006; Letelier et al. 2011; Wolkenhauer and Hofmeyr 2007) and
philosophy (Bich 2010; Bich & Damiano 2007; Bedau & Cleland
2010; Moreno & Mossio 2015).
One strand of research attempts to design minimal cells resembling
early cellular life-forms. Inspired by Maturana and Varela’s
(1972/1980) formulation of autopoiesis, some synthetic biologists
experiment on conditions for minimal cells through chemical models
that combine the continuous formation and destruction of the
compartment (the cell membrane) with metabolic processes inside the
cell (e.g., Zepik et al. 2001). This research program specializes in
synthesis of lipid compartments, such as vesicles, to study
coordinated processes that possibly resemble self-maintenance in the
pre-biotic world (Luisi 2006). Moreover, vesicles have been used to
experiment on how catalytic molecules such as ribozymes and peptides
could become entrapped in lipid compartments and create precursors for
metabolic circuits (de Souza et al. 2014).
An important research goal is to provide a model for the fundamental
features that distinguish living systems from the non-living. So far,
however, there is no consensus on the defining features of life
(Tirard et al. 2010). Whether this should be seen as a disappointment,
indicating the uselessness of attempts to define life, is an ongoing
issue of philosophical debate (Cleland 2012; Ruiz-Mirazo et al. 2010).
Different views on this question may depend on different
interpretations of what the project of defining life entails in
philosophy and science, e.g., whether the aim is to establish
demarcate a natural kind (Cleland 2012) or to provide operational
definitions of practical use in model and theory construction (Bich
& Green 2017; Luisi 1998). More specific topics of debate are
whether definitions of life must include Darwinian evolution, how
evolution and units of selection should be defined, and whether it is
fruitful to attempt to categorize all the varieties of life forms
under one definition (Dupré & O’Malley 2009; Laland
et al. 2009; Szostak et al. 2001)
Systems biologists engaging in debates on the properties of life often
stress the relevance of insights from classical philosophers. Examples
are references to Aristotle or Kant in discussions on whether our
current notion of causation can adequately capture how parts and
wholes in living systems stand in reciprocal causes and effect
relationships (Drack & Wolkenhauer 2011; Hofmeyr 2017). Other
important sources of inspiration are Rosen’s formalization of
metabolism-repair systems, (mathematical) general systems theory, and
category theory (e.g., Drack 2015; Rosen 1991; Mesarović et al.
2004; Letelier et al. 2011). The systems-theoretical stream is also
influenced by mathematical biophysics (Rashevsky 1961),
Waddington’s theoretical biology (Fagan 2012), Biochemical
Systems Theory (Savageau 1976; Hofmeyr 2007), and classical
systems-oriented physiology (Noble 2008).
Systems-theoretical and organizational accounts often highlight the
functional roles of constraints, autonomy, and causal closure of the
processes of self-maintenance (Moreno & Mossio 2015; Wolkenhauer
& Hofmeyr 2007). While also stressing the utility of the search
for general principles, some prefer the term organizing
principles instead of design principles (Mesarović et al.
2004; Green & Wolkenhauer 2013). This choice of terminology
signals the view that understanding living systems requires a
systems-theoretical approach in a broader sense than cybernetics. An
intriguing question in this context is whether a different kind of
formal or mathematical framework is required—one that is adapted
to biology rather than to engineering or physics (Bich & Damiano
2008; Gramelsberger 2017; Rosen 1991).
Another debated issue in discussions about the fundamental properties
of life is the relative priority of autonomy, openness and
collaboration. Whereas much research in philosophy and origin of life
has focused on individual organisms, recent insights from microbiology
have extended the focus on individual cells to also include the
collaborative interactions of cell colonies (Dupré &
O’Malley 2009; Bich & Green 2017). A recent experiment in
synthetic biology investigated the dynamics of colonies of giant
oleate-based vesicles under hypothesized prebiotic conditions (Carrara
et al. 2012). The experiment showed that that the permeability of the
vesicles to catalysts and macromolecules were much higher for the
colonies, compared to individual vesicles. In some cases, the colonies
also attracted each other and exchanged material. The results raise
important questions about whether life has arisen from
‘cooperative mechanisms’ between prebiotic systems, and
whether we need to rethink ontological assumptions about what
constitutes a ‘unity of life’.
Systems biology is often defined as an approach primarily concerned
with functional questions (Boogerd et al. 2007). Evolutionary systems
biology (ESB) explicitly seeks to expand this focus through
investigations of the evolutionary dynamics of interacting networks
(Soyer 2012). ESB aims to put the results of systems biology in a
proper evolutionary context and also to enhance and extend current
evolutionary biology. Specifically, ESB aims to develop more detailed
models of genotype-phenotype maps to study causal changes over
evolutionary time-scales and to enhance the predictive potential of
evolutionary models. These aims are pursued by combining methods from
molecular and evolutionary biology with in silico evolution,
comparative genomic analysis, as well as with dynamical modeling of
network architectures that are reverse engineered from large
experimental datasets (Soyer & O’Malley 2013).
ESB can be considered a meeting ground not only for systems biology
and evolutionary biology but also for the integrated study of
developmental phenomena in an evolutionary perspective (O’Malley
et al. 2015). Systems biology complements statistical sequence
analysis in population genetics and studies of constraints on
evolutionary pathways in EvoDevo through in silico modelling
of large data-sets (Jaeger & Crombach 2012; Kim et al. 2011;
Knight & Pinney 2009). Recently, ESB also draws on synthetic
modelling of intracellular networks to investigate how the
evolutionary potential of a lineage is affected by specific
combinations of mutations (Palmer & Kishony 2013).
An important line of investigation in ESB examines the evolutionary
background for global network architectures, modular structures, and
recurring network motifs
 (Section 1.1.1;
 see also Krohs 2009). The structures may have arisen due to natural
selection, but ESB also takes seriously the possibilities that
patterns can arise as side-effects of genomic evolution and drift, or
from a combination of selective and non-selective factors (Knight
& Pinney 2009; Steinacher & Soyer 2012). An example of an
insight from simulations of evolving yeast networks is that
hierarchical structures with an overabundance of network motifs
(feedforward loops) can emerge by non-selective tinkering
with promoter regions (Cordero & Hogeweg 2006). In extended
models, the integrated effects of selective and non-selective factors
can be studied at multiple levels (Hogeweg 2012). With the emphasis on
pattern-generation and the potential for future evolutionary change,
ESB takes up Hugo de Vries’ challenge to explain not only the
survival of the fittest but also the arrival of the
fittest (Wagner 2012, 2014). The hope is that evolutionary simulations
can extend evolutionary biology by providing a forward-looking
account.
Evolutionary biology has traditionally been considered as a historical
discipline that provides explanations without giving predictions. ESB
offers an opportunity to develop more detailed models of evolving
genotype-phenotype relations and to explore whether some evolutionary
pathways are predictable given enough information about the network
structures, dynamic states, and environmental conditions. Unlike
forward engineering in synthetic biology, the aim is not to shape new
designs but to understand the possible trajectories of change under
different conditions. That is, ESB goes beyond historical accounts in
exploring the potential for evolvability or innovation—what some
have called the ‘tinkering potential’ of system evolution
(Koonin & Wolf 2010). Research on evolvability can, however, also
inform and inspire functional analysis and design in synthetic biology
(Calvert & Frow 2015; Lewens 2013). Thus, the relation between
biology and engineering must also be reexamined in this context.
The need to account for tinkering and contingency in evolution is
often taken to highlight the limitations of engineering approaches in
biology (Jacob 1977; Lynch 2007). Interestingly, however, some systems
biologists and philosophers emphasize that a non-adaptationist
framework can be reached through further cross-fertilization of
biology and engineering (Calcott et al. 2015). ESB opens for an
extended view on engineering by considering engineering fields with
focus on modification of existing systems. For instance, there are
interesting similarities between evolvability in biology and
a diachronic engineering goal in software engineering, where
the aim is to design systems that can be adapted to future functional
requests without having to rewrite the code from scratch (Calcott
2014).
The ambition to predict evolutionary trajectories, even for simple
organisms, may turn out to be extremely difficult. But ESB provides
new ways to investigate whether evolutionary pathways follow some
recognizable dynamical patterns. Simulations of how gene regulatory
networks change over evolutionary time-scales can be coupled to
experimental evolution in bacteria or insects. For instance, the
development of bacterial antibiotic resistance has been shown to be
constrained by interactions between different mutations (Weinreich et
al. 2006). Such insights are expected to make evolutionary biology
informative also for the development and combination of antibiotics
used in medical treatment (Toprak et al. 2012; Palmer & Krishony
2013).
Some proponents expect that ESB will uncover regularities or stable
evolutionary patterns across various types of networks and species.
Such regularities may not resemble universal laws, but the hope is
that some general principles underlying evolutionary dynamics can be
identified, referred to as “laws of evolution” (Koonin
2011), “evolutionary design principles” (Steinacher &
Soyer 2012) or “generic principles” of evolution (Jaeger
& Monk 2013). ESB thus offers excellent cases for debating the
possibility of turning evolutionary biology into a more predictive
field with generalizable principles (Lobkovsky & Koonin 2012; Papp
et al. 2011). Moreover, it is a rich field for discussing the
implications of an ‘extended modern synthesis’ that
combines molecular, mathematical, computational, synthetic, and
population genetic approaches to evolution (Pigliucci 2007;
O’Malley et al. 2015).
With the emphasis on systems and interacting networks, both systems
and synthetic biology explicitly engage in one of the oldest
philosophical discussions on the relationship between the whole and
its parts, or between holism and reductionism. This section examines
how classical questions are reframed in the new light of strategies
for large-scale data production and dynamic modeling.
As mentioned in the introduction, proponents of systems biology often
explicitly define their approach in contrast to reductionist
strategies in molecular biology. Molecular biology is depicted as a
field studying molecular components and pathways in isolation, whereas
systems biology integrates the pieces of the puzzle in the context of
the system as a whole (van Regenmortel 2004; Keller 2005; Kitano
2002a,b). The contrast between molecular biology and systems biology
is often overstated, and much of systems biology research is also
focused on specific molecular difference-makers (De Backer et al.
2010; Gross 2017; O’Malley & Dupré 2005). However,
systems biology may give a novel interpretation of Aristotle’s
dictum that the whole is more than the sum of the parts by
specifying what more means in the context of contemporary
biology.
When systems biologists criticize reduction in molecular biology, the
issue at stake is typically the limitations of studying biological
parts or modules in isolation. Because the target of the criticism
often differs from the more traditional philosophical focus on
reduction of higher-level to lower-level explanations (Brigandt &
Love 2017, the notion of modular reductionism has been
suggested (Gross & Green forthcoming). An anti-reductionist stance
towards modular reductionism needs not reject the idea that living
systems can be modelled and explained bottom up. For
instance, while global approaches within these fields reject the
modularity assumption, some keep the focus on genomes and molecular
networks as the primary determinants of biological functions
(O’Malley et al.
 2008).[7]
Many systems biologists have, however, also argued against reduction
of higher-level models and explanations, and there is an ongoing
debate about how far genomics, proteomics, etc. will take us in
solving complex problems like understanding cancer (cf.,
Barabási et al. 2011; Hood et al. 2015; Wolkenhauer & Green
2013). Similarly, researchers involved in projects aiming to simulate
multiscale structures like the human heart emphasize the need to
include macroscale parameters as they provide functionally important
constraints on the behavior of microscale processes (Bassingthwaighte
et al. 2009; Kohl & Noble 2009). An interesting reframing of
Aristotle’s dictum in this discussion is that living systems at
the same time are more and less than the sum of the
parts (see Hofmeyr 2017; Noble 2012). In other words, the system as a
whole constrains the degree of freedom of lower-level parts and
provides a functional organization of these that are required for some
system capacities (see below).
Given the increasing emphasis on comprehensive multiscale models,
systems biology research may have a unique potential for philosophical
insights considering the explanatory role of macroscale properties and
top-down effects. Systems biologists for instance point to how enzyme
activity is constrained by the chemical environment and the cellular
context (Hofmeyr 2017), or how the biophysical properties of muscle
fibers and cell membranes provide functional constraints on ionic
oscillations central to the generation of heart rhythms (Noble 2012).
Interpreting top-down effects as constraining relations may exemplify
what philosophers of science have called ‘medium downward
causation’ (Emmeche et al. 2000), which interprets downward
causation as boundary conditions. Noble (2012) explicitly endorses
such a view when arguing that downward causation is necessary by
pointing out how equations describing the kinetics of ion channels in
cardiac modeling cannot be solved without defining the boundary
conditions (e.g., the cell voltage). Multi-scale modeling may thus
help to give a more concrete mathematical reinterpretation of the
controversial notion of downwards causation (see also Ellis et al.
2011; Gross & Green forthcoming). Moreover, discussions of
downward causation in systems biology have practical as well as
theoretical implications for cancer research as some proponents
disagree on whether cancer is a genetic or tissue-based disease
(Bertolaso 2011; Soto et al. 2008; see also
 Section 5.3).
Discussions of downward causation are often connected to debates about
whether biological systems exhibit emergent properties.
Emergence in the context of systems biology typically means that
systems properties are explanatorily irreducible to the properties of
parts (also called synchronic emergence). However, it is debatable
which sense of emergence (weak or strong) systems biology supports
(cf., Alberghina & Westerhoff 2005; Boogerd et al. 2005, 2007;
Emmeche et al. 2000; Kolodkin et al. 2011). Moreover, systems
biologists have different views on whether biological systems also
exhibit diachronic emergence, i.e., system properties that
are inherently unpredictable (Ellis et al. 2011).
Some systems biologists stress that biological complexity forces life
scientists to draw on abstract and idealized models, and that there
are practical and in principle limitations to our ability to fully
predict and control living systems (Noble 2012; Bassingthwaighte et
al. 2009). Others are more optimistic that the limitations can be
overcome by upscaling computational models. Some even argue that
systems biology breaks with the methodological principle of
Ockham’s razor (Kolodkin & Westerhoff 2011; see also Hofmeyr
2017; Gross 2017). These debates center on fundamental questions about
how far biological research can be taken by integrating more
parameters and data points (Kolodkin et al. 2012), and how far we can
‘extend ourselves’ through computational approaches
(Humphreys 2004; Vermeulen 2011).
Large-scale modeling projects such as the Vitual Cell, the
Physiome Project, and the Virtual Physiological Human
offer exciting cases for philosophical analysis of the prospects and
challenges associated with parameterizing and validating complex
models (Carusi et al. 2012; Carusi 2014; Hunter et al. 2013).
Ultimately, such projects may push the boundaries for prediction and
control in the life science, or may reveal deeper challenges of
biological complexity.
Systems biology also brings new insights to discussions of scientific
explanation. The integration of different disciplinary inputs and
emphasis on mathematical modeling make systems biology a particularly
interesting case for discussions of whether the mechanistic account
can fully capture the diversity of explanatory practices in
contemporary biology.
Mechanistic accounts initially emphasized the differences between the
explanatory ideal of covering laws in physics and explanations in
molecular biology (Craver & Tabery 2015). Mechanistic explanations
cite how biological functions arise from the interactions and
organization of component parts or entities (Bechtel & Richardson
1993; Machamer et al. 2000; Glennan 2002). Since research in systems
biology is often integrated with research in molecular and cell
biology, some have argued that many cases in systems biology can
readily be seen as an extension of mechanistic research (Boogerd et
al. 2013; Richardson & Stephan 2007). However, the increasingly
important role of mathematical and computational modeling for
understanding non-linear dynamics, cyclic organization, and complex
feedback relations have led some proponents to argue for a modified
account of dynamic mechanistic explanations (Bechtel &
Abrahamsen 2011, 2012; Brigandt
 2013).[8]
Inspired by network analysis in systems biology, proponents of the
dynamical mechanistic account have further argued for increased
attention to strategies of abstraction used to identify organizational
features and generalizable aspects of mechanisms (Bechtel 2015b; Levy
& Bechtel 2013). The emphasis on spatial organization and mutual
relations between components may possibly be better described as
constitutive rather than causal aspects (Fagan
2015). Whereas causal relations are often prioritized in mechanistic
accounts (or the two aspects conflated), distinguishing between these
can help identify the distinct contributions of causal mechanistic
modeling and mathematical analysis of network dynamics. To account for
case examples from systems biology, Fagan (2015) suggests a joint
account of collaborative explanations in which diverse
perspectives are combined to account for the mutual relations of
spatial organization and binding among components as well as the
causal relations in the system.
Whereas the aforementioned accounts emphasize the importance of
mathematical modeling for an updated mechanistic account, others view
the emphasis on quantitative and dynamic aspects as a departure from
mechanistic explanations. The interpretation of network models is
often conducted in an abstract mathematical or engineering-inspired
framework, and it has been stressed that it is hard or perhaps
impossible to reconstruct a causal story from these models (Issad
& Malaterre 2015; Gross 2015). Insofar as mathematical models are
primarily used as inputs to or heuristics for mechanistic
explanations, e.g., as mechanistic schemas, the reliance on these
modeling strategies do not provide a challenge for mechanistic
accounts (Darden 2002; Matthiessen 2015). Yet, although abstract
modeling is compatible with mechanistic research, an important
contested issue is whether abstract models are developed towards
research aims that are distinct from mechanistic explanations.
Some have pointed to examples where the modeling process does not
proceed from abstract to more detailed models but in the opposite
direction, suggesting that mechanistic details may be vehicles for
more generic explanations rather than the other way around (Braillard
2010; Green & Jones 2016). It has been argued that systems
biologists sometimes aim for non-causal explanations. One candidate of
non-causal explanations, called topological explanations,
emphasizes how networks architectures generically determine dynamic
behaviors, independently of the causal details of the network (Huneman
2010). Mathematical analysis of network structures underlying
biological robustness has been argued to exemplify this explanatory
goal (Jones 2014).
Another candidate is what Wouters (2007) in the context of comparative
physiology calls design explanations. Design explanations do
not describe how a biological function is causally produced but
clarify why a given design (and not an alternative design) is present.
They do so by pointing to constraints on the possible designs that
make some designs good, some suboptimal, and others impossible (see
Shinar & Feinberg 2011 for a candidate example from systems
biology). The relevance of design explanations for systems biology
lies in the interest to specify relations between functional
capacities (e.g., robustness) and system organization (e.g., integral
feedback control) via design principles that are independent of
specific contexts of implementation (Braillard 2010; Boogerd
2017).
Others have discussed whether explanations in systems biology are
mergers of mathematical explanations and mechanistic
explanations (Baker 2005; Brigandt 2013; Mekios 2015) or introduce a
new explanatory category called Causally Interpreted Model
Explanations (Issad & Malaterre 2015). These proposals are
not considered as alternatives to mechanistic accounts but are
proposed as ingredients in a pluralistic approach to biological
explanation (Brigandt et al. forthcoming; Mekios 2015). There is,
however, currently no consensus on whether the differences are
sufficiently significant to support an explanatory pluralism involving
non-mechanistic explanations.
Although much, or perhaps most, of the philosophical work on systems
biology has focused on explanation, one cannot assume that explanation
is the sole aim of systems biology research (MacLeod & Nersessian
2015; Kastenhofer 2013a,b). Philosophers have debated whether research
on the relation between biological robustness and integral feedback
control should be considered as a stepping-stone for mechanistic
explanations, or whether the perspective from control engineering
constitute a non-mechanistic explanatory framework (Braillard 2010;
Brigandt et al. forthcoming; Matthiessen 2015; Green & Jones
2016). But another important reason why some systems biologists seek
generality and simplicity of their models may be that they—like
synthetic biologists—wish to explore whether the same function
could be realized in other or simpler ways (Briat et al. 2016). Thus,
mathematical and computational modeling in synthetic and systems
biology also call for philosophers to examine other epistemic aims
than explanation. Examples are prediction, control, and design, and
well as theoretical and practical interests in understanding the
minimal requirements for biological functions and life itself. 
Large-scale interdisciplinary collaboration is increasingly
highlighted as a necessary requirement for addressing the grand
challenges of modern science and society (Vermeulen 2010; Calvert
2010; Andersen 2016). Since interdisciplinarity is a hallmark of
systems and synthetic biology, both approaches offer rich sources for
philosophical analysis of the epistemic features of interdisciplinary
integration (O’Malley & Soyer 2012), interdisciplinary
identities (Calvert 2012), and of large-scale collaboration across
different universities (Calvert & Frow 2015; for examples of
large-scale projects see the list of internet resources below).
Studying the prospects and challenges of interdisciplinary integration
also offers a window to the cognitive processes involved in
interdisciplinary problem-solving, where research cannot rely on a
single theoretical framework (MacLeod & Nersessian 2013a,b).
Through this process, different epistemic ideals operating in
contemporary science often become apparent. While combining different
conceptual frameworks can lead to innovation and scientific progress,
the existence of different epistemic standards and values can also
pose challenges for interdisciplinary collaboration (Calvert &
Fujimura 2011; Carusi 2011; Kastenhofer 2007; Rowbottom 2011).
Philosophical analysis has been proposed to help facilitate
collaboration in situations where epistemic standards clash.
Philosophy of science can help explicate the differences and the
backgrounds for these, and uncover ‘blind spots’
considering the aims, values, constraints, and challenges of other
disciplines (Nersessian 2017).
One divide that is commonly highlighted is the gap between
experimental biologists and modelers with a background in engineering,
mathematics, or physics. Empirical analyses of collaborations between
modelers and experimentalists in systems biology show that these two
groups often have different views on what kinds of data and models are
most relevant (Nersessian 2017; Rowbottom 2011). For instance,
modelers may not be interested in studying biological systems at the
same level of detail as experimental biologists, and experimentalists
may find highly abstract and idealized models inspired by physics or
engineering misleading. From the perspective of engineers or
physicists, the preoccupation with molecular details involves a risk
of missing out on dynamic patterns that could be captured with more
generic models (Lazebnik 2002). Experimentalists, in contrast, may
find that such generic models often lack specificity or merely
reproduce current biological knowledge (Fagan 2016). These differences
may in part be grounded in different explanatory standards. It has
been suggested that experimentalists typically aim for mechanistic
explanations, whereas modelers often aim for more generic models or
formulation of law-like principles and explanations (Fagan 2016; Green
et al. 2015a).
Making explanatory standards and values more explicit, and clarifying
the relative prospects and limitations of different research
strategies, are ways in which philosophy of science could contribute
to science and science education. At the same time, collaborative
practices in synthetic and systems biology may call for an extension
of the scope of philosophical analysis. Whereas philosophers
traditionally have focused on logical and argumentative relations in
scientific texts, understanding collaborative practices in systems and
synthetic biology may further require the exploration of the
aesthetic, cognitive, and creative dimensions of scientific practice
(Carusi 2011; Ginsberg et al. 2015). Important questions are which
aspects underlie choices of visualization strategies, and how the
representation of biological data through diagrams, heat maps, network
models, or state spaces influence biological reasoning and
collaboration (Abrahamsen & Bechtel 2015; Carusi 2012; Jones &
Wolkenhauer 2012).
The emergence of systems biology and synthetic biology in the 21th
century is to a large extent driven by the development of techniques
and strategies for producing, digitalizing, collecting, disseminating,
and standardizing data. A first step in these research practices is
often to consult online databases or bio-ontologies that are used for
data sharing, data integration, annotation, and curation of
experimental datasets (Leonelli 2016). For instance, the search for
network motifs
 (Section 1.1.1)
 started with the development of network models based on data
downloaded from the database RegulonDB as well as other sources
(Shen-Orr et al. 2002). Numerous databases, bio-ontologies, and
software tools have been developed, emphasizing the ideals of Open
Data and large-scale collaborative efforts (Leonelli 2013). These
practices raise questions as to whether some projects within systems
and synthetic biology may be described as ‘big science’
(Vermeulen 2010), and about the epistemic and social implications of
data-intensive research practices and collaborations.
A highly debated issue is the extent to which big data will radically
change or even revolutionize scientific methods, shifting the focus
from hypothesis-driven inquiry to data-driven discoveries (e.g., Allen
2001; Kell & Olivier 2004; Mazzocchi 2015). The massive
data-production and investments in collection and curation of data
make possible the development of more comprehensive models which some
expect to be more predictive (Hood et al. 2015). Data-intensive
strategies are sometimes application-oriented, e.g., the use of
Genome-Wide Association Studies (GWAS) to identify biomarkers for
genomic risk profiling (Maher 2008; Hey 2015). Yet, data are often
produced and compiled without specific aims in mind and are used and
reused for multiple purposes (Leonelli 2016). Data-intensive systems
biology research thus highlights the need to reconsider the relation
between data and evidence, and between basic and applied science.
Whereas some have seen data-intensive strategies as a more bias-free
approach, others have criticized the idea that data can speak for
themselves and pointed to problematic aspects of top-down pattern
inference from large datasets (Kell & Olivier 2004; Krohs 2012).
Important philosophical questions are therefore whether new insights
can result from data-intensive strategies, and how choices concerning
collection, sampling, standardization, visualization, and
interpretation of data affect the result of the analysis.
Specifically, the results of correlation-based methods such as GWAS
are sensitive to sampling procedures and specific statistical
thresholds, and the clinical validity and utility of genetic
biomarkers is a debated issue (e.g., Hey 2015; Maher 2008; McPherson
and Tybjaerg-Hansen 2016).
Since the aim of bio-ontologies is to provide a standardized language
and repository for shared information, choices concerning vocabulary
and categorizations become important philosophical topics. Since the
call for standardization may be compromised by context-dependencies of
data production and use, data-curation and the creation of data
infrastructures are gaining currency as topics within philosophy of
science and social science (Leonelli 2016). Data-intensive practices
also have implications for the institutional organization of science,
as exemplified by the push for open access on one hand and commercial
interests in big data on the other (Calvert & Frow 2015;
Kastenhofer 2013a,b; Leonelli 2013, 2014; Royal Society 2012;
Vermeulen 2011). As contexts for ownership of data change, also
reward-systems in terms of authorship and credits may need to be
reconsidered (Ankeny & Leonelli 2015).
Systems biology and synthetic biology are expected to help address
societal challenges with payoffs for biomedical research, health care,
and environmental resource management. While offering new exciting
potentials, concerns have also been raised about the social and
ethical implications of the new techno-scientific strategies.
Systems medicine, the medical application of systems biology, aims for
major breakthroughs towards understanding of complex diseases such as
cancer and heart conditions (Voit & Brigham 2008; Wolkenhauer et
al. 2013). Ambitious projects within systems biology such as the
Virtual Physiological Human raise intriguing questions about
how computational modeling will influence future biomedical research
(Kohl & Noble 2009; Kolodkin et al. 2011; Hunter et al. 2013).
Multi-scale cardiac models are already being developed with important
implications for the potential to address physiological variability,
and for philosophical discussions of model validation and the relation
between experiment and simulation (Carusi et al. 2012; Carusi
2014).
One of the important problems in contemporary medicine is how to
account for patient-specific variation. Systems medicine is sometimes
highlighted as a route to so-called personalized medicine (Hood &
Flores
 2012)[9]
 or digitalized medicine (Topol 2012). Proponents are optimistic that
large-scale modeling of patient-specific data can result in a
paradigm-shift from a one-size-fits-all model in traditional medicine,
toward a more efficient systemic approach that can tailor disease
prevention, diagnosis, and treatment to individual patients. The aim
to personalize medicine is as old as the medical profession itself,
but it is now promoted through data-intensive computational strategies
with exciting new potentials (Tutton 2014). Moreover, the potential
combination of systems medicine and synthetic biology opens for a
constructive personalized medicine, where predictive modeling
and synthetic interventions could be combined (O’Malley
2011a).
Developments in systems and synthetic biology have encouraged
philosophers to revisit traditional conceptions of disease as
dysfunctional states (Holm 2013, 2014), or broken mechanisms (Gross
2011). Rather than focusing on the function or dysfunction of specific
mechanisms, network approaches to disease may suggest a more dynamic
approach to disease focusing on how network states can be reorganized
(Del Sol et al. 2010; Huang et al. 2009). Since cancer research is a
major priority of systems biology research, epistemic and social
implications of cancer research can be expected to gain more attention
in future philosophy of systems biology (Bertolaso 2016).
In 2005, the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) was launched to catalogue
cancer-related mutations through tumor sequencing. TCGA and similar
developments in cancer genomics have revealed an astonishing diversity
of tumor types, suggesting that finer-grained disease-categories may
be needed. This line of research has opened new research venues, such
as the development of multi-action remedies targeting numerous
disease-related pathways identified via genomic analysis. The
discovered diversity of mutations identified in sequenced tumors has,
however, also led to heated debates on whether the behavior and
identity of cancer cells can fully be understood through the current
focus on somatic mutations. Some have stressed the need to move beyond
gene-centric or cell-centric approaches and to consider cancer as a
problem of tissue-organization (Soto & Sonnenschein 2011). These
debates have philosophical implications for discussions about
(downward) causation and reductionism as well as practical
implications for how cancer should be approached experimentally
(Bertolaso 2011; Soto et al. 2008).
Data-intensive strategies aiming to identify biomarkers and genetic
risk factors are expected to improve prediction, early detection, and
prevention of common diseases (Hood & Flores 2012; Hood et al.
2015). Against this optimism, some have raised concerns about
uncertainties and potential harmful results associated with genetic
risk profiling, including the risk of overdiagnosis and unnecessary
medicalization of healthy individuals (Green & Vogt 2016; Vogt et
al. 2016a,b). Since predictive modeling as envisioned in systems
medicine is dependent on access to patient-specific data, concerns
regarding data security and social responsibilities are also brought
up (Juengst et al. 2012). Philosophers and social scientists have for
instance critically examined how risk information is communicated to
the public by companies capitalizing on personalized genomics, and
discussed how such information may affect health outcomes and
perceptions of health (Bartol 2013; Prainsack 2014; Reydon et al.
2012). More generally, systems medicine has spurred debates about
whether the vision to predict and control future health outcomes is
compatible with a humanistic approach to medicine and social
complexity (Tutton 2014; Vogt et al. 2014).
Ethical implications associated with the issue of control are also
debated in the context of synthetic biology, e.g., through reflections
on whether the attempt to create synthetic organisms may downgrade the
value of or respect for life (cf. Douglas et al. 2013; Christiansen
2016a). Other ethical debates in synthetic biology consider the risk
of negative consequences of specific synthetic applications.
Discussions often involve so-called dual-use problems where the
benefits of genetically modified organisms are weighted against
potential problems and risks. Examples are biohazards associated with
intentional or unintentional release of synthetic pathogens, or the
possibility that synthetic production of biomedical compounds opens
for efficient and inexpensive production of illegal drugs
(Christiansen 2016b).
Finally, concerns have been raised about the commercialization of
biotechnologies in both systems and synthetic biology. Examples are
applications of broad patents concerning minimal genomes or synthetic
genes (O’Malley et al. 2008), and vested interests in access to
health data and lowering of diagnostic thresholds (Vogt et al. 2016a).
Socioeconomic concerns have also been raised that industrial
production via synthetic organisms may outcompete conventional farming
in developing countries (Christiansen 2016b). Thus, the strong push to
address societal problems through systems and synthetic biology gives
rise to new exciting possibilities but also calls for critical
examination from philosophers and social scientists.
Systems and synthetic biology are often described as distinguishable
in their emphasis on analysis versus synthesis, but the ties to
engineering approaches are complex and multi-faceted in both fields.
Systems and synthetic biology have been addressed together in this
entry because many scientific and philosophical issues overlap. Both
approaches draw inspiration from engineering, mathematics, physics,
and computer science, but in various different ways and towards the
different aims of understanding, predicting, and modifying biological
systems. Accordingly, both approaches provide excellent sources for
philosophical discussions of interdisciplinary integration,
particularly the implications of the increasing embedding of
mathematical and computational approaches in biology. Some practices
encourage philosophers to revisit classical philosophical topics such
as reductionism and scientific explanation, but systems and synthetic
biology also broaden the scope of philosophical topics to include
data-intensive practices and modeling strategies towards the aims of
design and control.
Since this entry has examined the philosophical implications of both
systems biology and synthetic biology, much attention has been given
to the implications of engineering approaches, including the quest for
so-called design principles. It is, however, important to note that
systems biology and synthetic biology cover a broad spectrum of
research practices, some of which are more strongly inspired by
chemistry or physics than engineering. This entry should thus be taken
as an attempt to only cover some ground of the vast philosophical
landscape that these research fields reach into. With the rapid
development of both approaches and their explicit aim to address grand
scientific and societal challenges, exciting times lie ahead for
philosophy of biology.