Jean Piaget’s (1933 ) well-known theory of cognitive development
suggests that prior to age 11 or 12, most children are not capable of
philosophical thinking. This is because, he holds, prior to this time,
children are not capable of “thinking about thinking,” the
sort of meta-level thinking that characterizes philosophical
thinking. This “formal operational” level of cognitive
development includes analogical reasoning about relationships, such
as: “Bicycle is to handlebars as ship is to rudder, with
‘steering mechanism’ being the similar relationship”
(Goswami, p. xxi). However, there is a solid body of psychological
research that indicates Piaget’s account seriously underestimates
children’s cognitive abilities (Astington, 1993; Gopnik, et al., 1999;
Gopnik, 2009).
Philosopher Gareth Matthews goes further and argues at length that
Piaget failed to see the philosophical thinking manifest in the very
children he studied. Matthews (1980) provides a number of delightful
examples of very young children’s philosophical puzzlement. For
example:
Matthews acquired many of his anecdotes from friends who knew of his
interest in the philosophical thinking of children. It is not uncommon
for attentive adults to encounter such examples.
However, it might be objected that more than such anecdotes are needed
to show that children are capable of serious philosophical
thinking. What is needed is evidence that children are capable of
sustained philosophical discussion. Matthews (1984) provides
illustrations of this, too. Meeting with a group of 8–11 year olds, he
used the following example to develop a story for discussion:
This generated a lively discussion in which children commented on the
inconsiderateness of the three visiting children, the desirability of
working out a solution that would satisfy all four children, the
importance of respecting people’s rights, and how one might feel if he
or she were in Ian’s place. Matthews then posed a possible utilitarian
approach: “What about this argument, that if we let the three
visitors have their way, three people will be made happy instead of
just one?” One reply was that it would not be fair for three
people to get what they want at the expense of a fourth. This
triggered a discussion of fairness that addressed more specific
concerns about the relative ages of the children, whether they are
friends, siblings, or strangers—and what types of television
programs are involved.
No doubt, part of the explanation of the children’s ability and
willingness to carry on an extended discussion of Ian’s circumstance
is that they have faced similar challenges. Still, the children
exhibited a rather sophisticated conceptual grasp of the issues at
hand, which is what one might expect from children once they are
invited to reflect on their own experiences.
Stories about those roughly their own age can provide opportunities
for children to discuss ideas that are most important to
them. Consider this example from Matthew Lipman’s novel Lisa
(1983). Harry and his friend Timmy go to a stamp club to trade
stamps. Afterward they stop for ice cream cones, but Timmy discovers
he has no money. Harry offers to buy him one, and Timmy says he will
buy Harry a cone next time. As they are leaving the store, one of
their classmates trips Timmy. Timmy then knocks the tripper’s books
off the table. After running away from the scene, Timmy and Harry talk
about what has happened:
“I couldn’t let them get away with it,” Timmy
remarked when they saw that they weren’t being pursued and could slow
down to a walk. “He didn’t have to stick his foot out.”
Then he added, “Of course, I didn’t have to do what I did either.
But, like I said before, turnabout is fair play.” 
“Somehow,” Harry thought, “it isn’t quite the same
thing.” But he couldn’t figure out why. “I don’t
know,” he said finally to Timmy. “The purpose of your
stamp club is to exchange stamps. So when you give someone stamps,
you’re supposed to give something back. Just like if someone lends me
money, I’m supposed to give it back. But if someone pulls a dirty
trick on you, should you do the same thing to him? I’m not so
sure.”
“But I had to get even,” Timmy protested. “I
couldn’t let him get away with it, tripping me like that for no
reason.”
A bit later they met Lisa and Laura. Harry told the girls what had
happened and why he was puzzled. “It reminds me,” remarked
Lisa, “of last year when we were learning about how some
sentences could be turned around and would stay true, while others,
when you turned them around, would become false.”
“Yeah,” Harry agreed, “but there we found a rule.
What’s the rule here?” Lisa tossed her long hair so that it hung
over her right shoulder. “It looks like there are times when it
is right to give back what we got and other times when it is
wrong. But how do we tell which is which?” (Lisa,
pp. 23–4)
This passage is an invitation to explore the moral nuances of
reciprocity, or “returning in kind.” What might a group of
10–11 year-olds have to say about this? Here is a sampling from
a 30 minute discussion of the Lisa passage by a group of
fifth graders (Pritchard 1996). Although the group had been discussing
philosophical ideas once a week after school for the past several
months, they had not discussed this passage.  With little prompting
from the teacher, the students raised and vigorously pursued the
following questions:
Thoughtful and insightful discussions like this are not unusual for
children who are given the opportunity to have them. This discussion
was prompted by a children’s novel. However, students’ regular
classroom materials, works of art, thought experiments, or even the
daily news can be used to trigger philosophical discussions of
moral concerns.
Even if one concedes that children are quite capable of engaging in
extended discussions of moral concepts related to their own
experiences, what about philosophical ideas less immediately related to their
practical affairs? Here is an illustration that begins with logic and
ends up in metaphysics.
The true sentence, “All oaks are trees” becomes false when
reversed. So does, “All carrots are vegetables.” Can we
say that every true sentence beginning with ‘all’
becomes false when reversed?
At least as early as the 3rd grade, children easily find
exceptions. What about “All tigers are tigers”, many will
ask. Others may respond that this is a “boring” sentence,
offering something like “All rabbits are hares,” or
“All mothers have children” as alternatives. With
relatively little encouragement, they can come up with good
definitions of geometric figures and differentiate them from proposed
definitions that cannot be reversed. For example, “All squares
are rectangles” is true, but it becomes false when reversed.
“All squares are rectangles with equal sides,” however,
can be reversed.
Although the study of logic is traditionally regarded as a part of
philosophy, skeptics might not find the reflections of children on
rules of logic terribly interesting philosophically. (Of course, some
might say this about elementary logic in the college classroom, as
well.) It is not that different from basic math and grammar, they
might object. Whether or not this is a fair assessment, for many
children it is but a short step from logic to metaphysics. Here is an
example from a 4th grade class that had just been asked
whether true sentences beginning with ‘all’ always become
false when reversed (Pritchard 1996). After the usual “All
tigers are tigers” and “All rabbits are hares” were
suggested, a student asked, “How about ‘All answers have
questions’ and ‘All questions have answers’?”
Fortunately, the teacher paused to explore this with the class.
“Do all answers have questions?” he asked. Of course,
replied the students, otherwise we would not say that we have an
answer.
The teacher continued, “How about the other sentence? Do you
think that all questions have answers?” What followed was a
flood of responses:
During the course of discussing these questions, the students seemed
to be struggling to move from questions that are difficult, if not
impossible, to answer because of our practical limitations
(e.g., not being certain that a particular grain of sand has not
already been counted) to questions that in principle are
unanswerable. Finally, with a mischievous grin on his face, one of the
students asked, “Will time end?” The problem, he
explained, is that if time did end, no one would be able later to
confirm that this was so.
Here is another illustration of how quickly a discussion of logic can
move to a discussion of deep philosophical issues. (Pritchard, 1985)
This is a group of 5th graders considering the sentence,
“All people are animals.” One of the students offered this
as another example of a true sentence that becomes false when
reversed. Jeff objected that “All people are animals” is
not true. Chip proceeded to develop a taxonomy that relegated people,
along with elephants and tigers, under the heading of mammals, mammals
under animals, and animals under living things. Jeff continued to
object.
Chip: “Jeff, what are people? Just tell me, what are people?
You can’t answer that, can you?”
Jeff: “Yes, I can.”
Chip: “What are you?”
Jeff: “A person.”
Chip: “What’s a person?”
Jeff: “A living somebody.”
Chip: “A living somebody could be a whale.”
Jeff: “I said, somebody, not an
animal….”
Chip: “You can check every single book out there in the
library—well, every one that’s about us….”
Larry: “I want to know why everyone’s getting so huffy about a
little subject.”
Rich: “We’re thinking! That’s what we’re here
for.”
Amy: “Does anyone have an encyclopedia in here so we can look up
either animals, mammals, or persons?”
Jeff: “We’re all humans. So, if this Mars guy saw us, he would
say, ‘Hey, look, there’s some human beings.’ He wouldn’t
say, ‘Hey, look, there’s some animals down
there.’”
Mike: “Martians, if there are any, would say, ‘Hey, look
at those weird looking creatures,’ or something like that. They
wouldn’t know what we are. They don’t know anything about us.
[Returning now to Jeff’s original distinction, Mike continues.] If
it’s a person, you say, ‘somebody.’ If it’s an
animal you say, ‘something.’ Somebody is a human
body.”
Chip: “There’s living life, okay? Then you branch off from
there. You have animals, plants, and whatever the other stuff
is—you know, molecules and things like that. Now you go to the
animals and you branch off—mammals, amphibians, reptiles, and
whatever there is. Then you branch off and you have all these special
humans. Is that right so far, Jeff?”
Jeff: “Just go on.”
Chip: “Well, I just want to know if you agree so far.”
Jeff: “Just go on. Go on. I’m not going to change my mind.
That’s all…. I’m not an animal. I’m a person, and I’m going to
stay that way.”
Chip: “You’re a type of animal.”
Jeff: “I’m not going to walk up to Dr. Jekyll and say,
‘Hey, change me into an animal’….”
Amy: “People are a type of animal, like a bird is. That’s
different than like an elephant is. A bird’s different than an
elephant. And we’re different than a bird. Mike says we don’t call our
dog a person or somebody. But someone might be real close to their pet
and consider it part of the family.”
The discussion continued for several more minutes. As the group
dispersed, one student remarked to another, “If we want to, we
could argue for hours!” “For days,” replied the
second. Meeting weekly after school in the local public library, this
group of children returned the next week with an encyclopedia to
settle the matter. After several minutes of discussion, the teacher
asked the students if they thought everything in the encyclopedia is
true.
Emily: “Some things we’re not sure of; and the encyclopedia
could put down every word about how the solar system was formed, and
it would probably say there was big dust that spun around like a
top. But we’re not sure about that. And, so, that could be
wrong.”
The teacher asked whether, in such cases, the encyclopedia says,
“We’re not sure.”
Mike: “It’ll say ‘hypothesis’—which is a
guess.”
Kurt: “It’ll say we’re not sure yet.”
So, the discussion retained its philosophical vitality. This
particular group continued to meet for the entire school year,
discussing a wide range of philosophical topics, including: the
relationship between the mind and the brain, differences (and
similarities) between dreams and reality, knowledge of other minds,
self-knowledge, and relationships between evidence and knowledge.
Given an already crowded curriculum and growing pressure to provide
quantifiable evidence of student mastery of the standard subjects of
history, literature, math, and science, teachers may question the
suitability of adding philosophy to the curriculum. Where is time to
be found for the give-and-take of philosophical discussions? Adding
philosophy to the mix, they might object, only makes matters
worse. Not only is it yet another subject, it is one that is
unfamiliar to most teachers, and they may fear that bringing in
philosophy, with its continual questioning, will actually interfere
with students’ mastery of the subjects already in the
curriculum. Given the unsettling nature of much philosophical inquiry,
they may feel vulnerable as teachers because they are not confident of
their own answers to the questions posed.
Adding to this problem is increasing pressure on teachers to
demonstrate that their students are performing at satisfactory levels
in the standard subjects. Standardized tests are commonly used as the
measure of student achievement. Marked by definitive, unambiguous
questions and answers, these tests do not place a premium on
philosophical reflection. Since student performance is typically
linked to school funding, this is not something teachers can take
lightly, however skeptical they might be about the educational value
of preparing their students to perform well on standardized tests.
In response, those who advocate bringing
philosophy into the schools emphasize ways in which philosophy can
enhance the entire educational experience of students. The aim is more
than simply the introduction of one more subject in the schools. By
inviting students to reflect on relationships among different areas of
inquiry and to make sense of their educational experiences as a whole,
philosophy can add to the meaningfulness of students’ education as a
whole. In addition, philosophy can make important contributions to
another area of concern that cuts across the curriculum, critical
thinking.
In the mid-1960s, philosopher Matthew Lipman became dismayed at the
low quality of argumentation employed by presumably well-educated
citizens discussing the Vietnam war and society’s ills in general.
Convinced that the teaching of logic should begin long before college,
he tried to figure out a way to do this that would stimulate the
interest of 10–11 year olds. Leaving Columbia University for
Montclair State College, he launched his efforts with his first
children’s novel,
Harry Stottlemeier’s Discovery (1974). Lipman’s concerns about
the level of critical thinking in society in general, and the schools
in particular, were not his alone. By the 1970s the hue and cry for
teaching critical thinking in the schools was, if not clear, at least
loud; and it has continued largely unabated to the present.
What is meant by ‘critical thinking’? Characterizations
range in complexity from Robert Ennis’s admirably brief,
“reasonable reflective thinking that is focused on deciding what
to believe or do” (Ennis 1987) to a complex statement by a group
of 46 panelists convened by the American Philosophical Association’s
Committee on Pre-College Philosophy to employ the Delphi Method of
striving for consensus:
Lipman was a member of this panel, and it is clear that his novels and
teacher’s manuals all strive to meet these objectives. His briefer
depiction of critical thinking is that it involves judgments based on
criteria, or reasons. Criteria, he says, can be appraised in terms of
“megacriteria” such as reliability, relevance, strength,
coherence, and consistency (Lipman 1991, p. 119). Critical thinking,
he adds, is characterized as “thinking that (1) facilitates
judgment because it (2) relies on criteria, (3) is self-correcting,
and (4) is sensitive to context.” (Lipman 1991, p. 116)
Picking up on the idea that critical thinking is sensitive to context, some
critics challenge the notion that critical thinking can be usefully
taught independently of specific disciplinary areas (McPeck,
1985). While conceding that there are some generic features of
critical thinking that cut across disciplines, they maintain that even
these features acquire their meanings only in specific contexts that
vary across disciplines (such as history, sociology, biology,
chemistry).  However, unless the different disciplines ask questions
about their own basic assumptions and their relationships to one
another, critical thinking within those disciplines will overlook
important questions that need attention. Philosophy does ask such
questions about other disciplines, as well as about itself.
Lipman’s hope was that philosophy would acquire a central place in the
K-12 curriculum, thus enabling students to develop their critical
thinking skills through philosophical questioning. At the same time,
he claimed, philosophy can help students make better sense of their
educational experiences. By seeking to develop comprehensive
perspectives, philosophy attempts to understand connections. A
curriculum that divides students’ education into discrete,
self-contained disciplines without encouraging philosophical questions
about the nature of those disciplines and their relationships to one
another invites a fragmented view of education.  Lipman’s proposed
alternative is described in the next section, which describes the K-12
program developed by the Institute for the Advancement of Philosophy
for Children (IAPC) he founded.
Short of the ambitious program Lipman and his IAPC colleagues had in
mind for the schools, there are more modest, but worthwhile, ways of
bringing philosophical inquiry into the already existing disciplinary
structure in the schools. Teachers can invite their students to
reflect on philosophical aspects of their subjects of study. At the
same time they study history, students can take some time to ask
questions about the extent to which historical accounts can be
objective—and questions about what ‘objectivity’
might mean, and why it is or is not important to seek it. Similar
questions can be asked about the natural and social sciences,
including questions about the extent to which science is, or ought to
be, “value-free”. In fact, if room for such questions is
not encouraged, one might well ask to what extent critical thinking
itself is encouraged.
The educational movement known as Philosophy for Children got its
start in the early 1970s with the publication of Matthew Lipman’s
philosophical novel for children, Harry Stottlemeier’s
Discovery. In 1970 Harry made its entry into the
Montclair Public Schools in New Jersey. By the mid-70s the Institute
for the Advancement of Philosophy for Children (IAPC) was formally in
place at Montclair State College (now Montclair State University). The
media quickly picked up on reports of significant improvements in the
reading and critical thinking skills of middle school children who
were involved in IAPC programs. Subsequently, IAPC has produced
materials consisting of Lipman’s children’s novels and, under the
leadership of IAPC colleague Ann Margaret Sharp, accompanying teacher
workbooks for the entire K-12 curriculum. Thousands of children in New
Jersey, across the United States, and even around the world have been
introduced to IAPC educational programs.
An unassuming 96 page novel for middle-school children, Harry
Stottlemeier’s Discovery features Harry and his 5th
grade classmates. Adults occasionally enter in, but the primary
philosophical work is the children’s. Harry and his friends discover
several basic concepts and rules of Aristotelean logic; and they
puzzle over questions about the nature of thought, mind, causality,
reality, knowledge and belief, right and wrong, and fairness and
unfairness. The story does not introduce any of the special vocabulary
of philosophy (not even the word ‘philosophy’ itself makes
an appearance). Philosophical inquiry is initiated by the children in
the story rather than adults.
“What is Harry Stottlemeier’s discovery?”
Harry’s readers might ask. This question is not directly
answered. However, one candidate stands out among the many things that
Harry discovers in the course of exploring questions about logic,
knowledge, reality, and the mind. Harry and his classmates are asked
to write a paper on the topic, “The Most Interesting Thing in
the World.” Entitled Thinking, Harry’s essay
begins:
After writing several more paragraphs, Harry puts his paper aside.
Later he thinks, “In school, we think about math, and we think
about spelling, and we think about grammar. But who every heard of
thinking about thinking?” So, he adds one more sentence to his
paper: “If we think about electricity, we can understand it
better, but when we think about thinking, we seem to understand
ourselves better.”
Without using the word ‘philosophy,’ either here or
anywhere else in Harry, Lipman shows Harry engaged in serious
philosophical thought, “thinking about thinking.” This, we
might say, reveals Harry’s discovery of the joys of philosophical
thinking. But there is more. Harry also notices that, as interesting
and important as thinking about thinking is, it seems to have no
special place in school. Finally, although his paper begins in the
first person, it quickly moves to ‘we’ and focuses on what
might be accomplished with others in the classroom.
One of the more attractive features of the IAPC approach to Philosophy
for Children for many teachers has been that it promotes the idea of the
classroom as a “community of inquiry” in which students
openly and respectfully exchange ideas. Each student is regarded as
having the potential to make valuable contributions to the topics
under consideration. Students are encouraged to develop good listening
skills, responsiveness to what others say, willingness to try to
support one’s own ideas with good reasons, and openness to the
possibility that one should modify one’s beliefs in light of new
considerations. In short, the classroom is designed to reinforce the
student’s potential for reasonableness. This involves more
than being able to engage in skillful reasoning. As Laurance J.
Splitter and Ann Margaret Sharp put it (Splitter and Sharp, p. 6):
Teachers who look favorably on the idea that the classroom should be a
“community of inquiry” nevertheless may resist the idea
that philosophy should be the centerpiece for discussion.
Other subjects, they might contend, lend themselves well to forming
the sort of collaborative learning environment that can fairly be
called a “community of inquiry.” Philosophy for Children
advocates, however, need only insist that the sort of inquiry they are
supporting be philosophical.  Unfortunately, Ann Margaret Sharp passed
away in 2011. The distinctiveness of the sort of inquiry she and
Lipman advocated is explored in some detail in a recent collection of
essays by and about her that is dedicated to her memory (Gregory and
Laverty, 2017).
It may be thought that philosophy is, at best, a suitable subject for
relatively few students at the pre-college level. Since philosophy
traditionally has been taught only at the college level in the United
States, it might be thought that it can be suitable for only a small
segment of students at pre-college levels—the two percent of
students who are classified as “gifted and talented.”
However, Philosophy for Children programs have shown themselves to be
remarkably successful in drawing virtually all students in the
classroom together in inquiry. Teachers are often surprised, and
pleased, to see many of their most reticent,
“underachieving” students actively join in the discussion
of philosophical ideas.
Nevertheless, because they lack background in the formal study of
philosophy, many teachers are reluctant to encourage the philosophical
thinking of their students. Their fears, however, are exaggerated.
Familiarity with some of the standard philosophical literature might
be desirable, but it is not necessary for bringing Philosophy for
Children into the classroom. What is required is the ability to
facilitate philosophical discussion. For this, it is much more
important that teachers have some philosophical curiosity themselves
than a familiarity with academic philosophical literature. Like their
students, teachers unfamiliar with the discipline of philosophy may
nevertheless have an aptitude for philosophical thinking—or at
least a knack for recognizing when others are engaged in philosophical
thought.
Facilitating a Philosophy for Children discussion does not mean
dominating it; it is important for teachers to allow their students to
develop their own ideas. Teachers are not expected to provide, or even
have, answers to all the questions. They can share puzzlement with
their students, be open to unexpected but suggestive responses to the
questions they and their students pose, and take pleasure in observing
the exchanges students have with each other. This means shedding the
traditional role of teacher as lecturer and answer-giver. Especially
for teachers who are uncertain about what this entails, workshops like
those offered by IAPC provide a good introduction to the pedagogy of
Philosophy for Children.
Philosophy for Children encourages children to think for
themselves at the same time that it encourages them to think
with others. However, philosophy is often viewed as more a
matter of solitary reflection, perhaps involving exchanges between a
few other solitary thinkers—something to which the
“masses” are neither privy nor attracted. Perhaps many
would claim that this is philosophy at its best; like physics or
mathematics, “philosophy for everyone” is watered down.
There is no need for Philosophy for Children to challenge this
analogy.  In fact, it can turn it in its favor. However esoteric
physics and mathematics at their best may be, the schools nevertheless
recognize the importance of making these subjects available to all
students.  Similarly, Philosophy for Children advocates can counter
that there should be a place for the entire classroom—including
“gifted and talented,” “underachieving,” and
“ordinary” students—pursuing philosophical
questions together.
For this to work, it must be possible for children in the classroom to
engage in sustained philosophical discussion with others. As already
noted, Gareth Matthew’s writings provide ample evidence that many
children are capable of having interesting, if not profound,
philosophical thoughts. Less obvious, however, is children’s ability
to sustain and develop this with others. Anecdotes of young children
spontaneously sharing a philosophical thought with an observant adult
are not sufficient. Matthews’ Dialogues With Children
provides good evidence that children can go well beyond this. Examples
of substantial philosophical conversations of children found in Lone
(2012), McCall (2009), Pritchard (1996), Shapiro (2012), and
Wartenberg (2009), among many others, should leave little doubt that
children have this ability.
In light of the rapidly expanding international interest in philosophy
for children, the International Council for Philosophical Inquiry with
Children (ICPIC) was established in 1985. ICPIC continues to sponsor
an international conference every other year, with hosts including
Australia, Austria, Brazil, England, Mexico, Spain (twice), and
Taiwan. The most recent conference (June 2017) was held in Madrid,
Spain.  Organized by Felix Garcia-Moriyon (Universidad Autonoma de
Madrid), the conference was attended by more than 400 participants
from around the world.
Even after the passing of IAPC pioneers Matthew Lipman (2010) and Ann
Margaret Sharp (2011), under the leadership of Maughn Gregory IAPC
retains a strong presence in ICPIC. However, many ICPIC members now
have established their own institutional structures and have developed
centers, associations, and programs. In North America, there is the
North American Association of Community of Inquiry (NAACI), which
gathers every other year (years when ICPIC is not meeting). Recently, with initial
support from the American Philosophical Association’s Pre-College
Philosophy Committee, PLATO (Philosophy Learning and Teaching
Organization) was formed.  Now a non-profit organization supported by
the Squire Family Foundation, it sponsors annual meetings and works
closely with the University of Washington Center for Philosophy for Children. PLATO also sponsors two periodicals: Questions and the online Precollege Philosophy and Public Practice.  Australia and New Zealand are organized under
the Federation of Australasian Philosophy in Schools Associations
(FAPSA), which meets annually and publishes Journal for Philosophy
in Schools as its official journal. (Burgh and Thornton, 2016). In
1992 the Society for the Advancement of Philosophical Enquiry and
Reflection in Education (SAPERE) was established in Oxford,
England. In 2007 England’s Philosophy Foundation was
established. (Worley, 2011).  Since 2005, the journal Philosophy
and Childhood has been sponsored by ICPIC and the graduate
program in education at the State University of Rio De Janeiro (UERJ),
with Walter Kohan and David Kennedy serving as editors. These
organizations, along with many other centers and experienced
practitioners around the world, continue to support training programs
for teachers that enable them to introduce thousands of children to
philosophy, both inside and outside regular classrooms.
Although there is continued use of IAPC materials, recent years have
been marked by a proliferation of alternative teaching resources and
ways of engaging children in philosophical discussions.  For years
Gareth Matthews contributed reviews of children’s stories
to Thinking, then IAPC’s official journal (even though IAPC’s
own teaching materials made no use of other children’s
literature). This inspired Tom Wartenberg (2009, 2013) to develop his
highly successful pre-college philosophy program at Mt. Holyoke
College (MA), a prize winning program that is built around classic
children’s stories.  Karen Murris was an early objector to Lipman’s
resistance to using illustrated materials. (Morris, 1992) She and
Johana Haynes offer a detailed account of the philosophical importance
of picture books. (Murris and Haynes, 2012 and Murris, 2016).
England’s Peter Worley has written several stimulating books for
teachers and students that make no use of IAPC materials.  Australia’s
Phil Cam has assembled a variety of stories suitable for philosophical
use with children.  In short, there is a rapidly growing list of
resources that show great promise for engaging children in
philosophical discussions.  (See, for example, DeHaan et al. 1995;
Fisher 1998; Keen 1997; Lewis and Chandley 2012; Lone 2012; McCall
2009; Murris 1992, 2016; Sprod 2001, and White 2000). Questions:
Philosophy for Young People, a periodical sponsored by the
American Philosophical Association’s Pre-College Philosophy Committee,
features young people’s writings on special philosophical topics. The
first issue (Spring 2001) focused on children’s rights.
Fortunately, the internet makes it possible to keep up reasonably well
with the latest developments around the world and communicate quickly
with other educators interested in Philosophy for
Children. Unfortunately, many of these websites seem to be
short-lived.  However, see the Internet Resources section below for a
list of websites that are reliable and which provide links to other
useful sites.