More than for most philosophers, the circumstances of Bayle’s
life determined the shape, content and thrust of his work. Curiously,
accounts nowadays of the lives of historical philosophers, usually
written by philosophers for philosophers, often begin with this sort
of statement, even though most philosophers otherwise write as if
circumstances were irrelevant. In the case of Bayle, however, the
importance of circumstances is undeniable, to the point that ignoring
them inevitably leads to distortion and misinterpretation.
An emblematic event in the life of Bayle was the Revocation of the
Edict of Nantes in 1685, which from his point of view was an instance
of grotesque intolerance based on moral and logical absurdity. The
greater part of his life’s work can be understood as
Bayle’s attempt to lay bare the absurdity represented by this
event. Nor was the significance of the event merely symbolic for
Bayle, since he himself was a victim of the intolerance to an extreme
degree.
The Revocation (as it came simply to be called, so momentous was it)
must be understood in the context of the general reformation of
Christianity in the sixteenth century. Perceived ecclesiastical
abuses, both moral and doctrinal, had led many to believe that such
radical overhaul of Roman Catholicism was required that, in the end,
separation from Rome was often the result. The separation of the
Protestants, as they were called, was generally based on political
power, either of a majority or simply of those in a position to
exercise it. In France, however, the situation was more complicated,
because the Protestants, or Huguenots, were never more than about a
twentieth of the population. Even so, they had influence beyond their
numbers, and they took sides in a protracted political struggle that
emerged as the civil Wars of Religion, one of the grisliest chapters
in French history. After most of a century of death and upheaval, the
French were ready for a settlement, which came about when the
succession of the crown passed to the Protestant Henry of Navarre, but
on condition of his abjuration of Protestantism, i.e., conversion to
Catholicism. “Paris is worth a Mass,” quipped the new
Henry IV, who was then uniquely in a position to terminate the Wars of
Religion, which he did with the Edict of Nantes (1598). This royal
decree recognized the rights of Protestants in at least certain
domains, but in terms that were far from fully favorable to Protestant
interests (for example, only Catholics were to be admitted to the
universities). Moreover, Henry’s successors gradually chipped
away at Protestant guarantees in a policy of persecution aimed, as
they saw it, at uniting the French state (un roi, une loi, une
foi—one king, one law, one faith). Finally, Louis XIV, the
“Sun King,” abolished the Edict altogether, even though it
had been issued in perpetuity, on the ground that it was no longer
needed since there were no longer any Protestants.
Amidst this mess, Pierre Bayle was born in 1647, the son of a
Protestant minister in Le Carla (now Le Carla-Bayle), a small town in
the foothills of the Pyrenees. Typically, the family was financially
impoverished, and Pierre, after primary school, could be only
home-schooled until he was 21. Then, when his older brother had at
last graduated from the only place the family could afford at the
Protestant school at Puylaurens, he left home for what soon became the
crossroads of his life. For within three months he had moved on to the
Jesuit school in Toulouse, where he abjured his Protestantism. His
conversion was short-lived however, for he after graduating with a
master’s degree he returned to the Protestant fold. Commentators
differ on the significance of this episode. The interpretation in
terms of venal self-interest seems mistaken, however. While
Bayle’s abjuration made him eligible for a Jesuit scholarship,
his re-conversion returned him to a state that was far worse, for in
the eyes of the authorities he was now not just a heretic, but a
relapsed heretic, liable to the severest of penalties. He therefore
fled France for the Calvinist stronghold of Geneva. He went with the
renewed blessing of his family and the knowledge, given that both his
changes of religion were sincere, that errors of conscience could
occur in good faith.
A menial job of tutoring kept body and soul together in Geneva, but
also kept him from the scholarly life Bayle craved. He eventually
slipped back into France for a position at the Protestant Academy at
Sedan, where he remained until its suppression by the government in
1681. Eventually, he was given a position at the Ecole Illustre in
Rotterdam, a school for the community of Huguenot refugees there,
whose numbers increased dramatically after the Revocation. Despite
still-onerous teaching commitments, Bayle began his serious publishing
career with works defending the French Reform from Catholic
persecution and criticisms on many topics, but particularly on the
doctrine of the Real Presence of Christ in the sacrament of the
Eucharist, which the Huguenots denied. Works from this period include:
Pensées diverses (1682), the Critique
générale (1682), Nouvelles lettres (1685)
and La France toute catholique (1686). The philosophical
basis for his argument against Catholic persecution appeared the
following year in the Commentaire philosophique, a classic in
the literature on toleration.
Bayle’s position on toleration was found inimical to the
Protestant cause by his erstwhile friend and colleague from Sedan,
Pierre Jurieu, whom he had helped bring to the safety of Holland.
Jurieu, “the Theologian of Rotterdam,” soon became the
bitterest enemy of Bayle, “the Philosopher of Rotterdam,”
and the two engaged in long and caustic polemic that was neither
positive nor productive in any sense. These were difficult times for
Bayle. His father and both brothers died within two years, one of the
latter while languishing in a French jail because of Bayle’s
publications. He had also assumed editorship of one of the first of
the learned journals, Nouvelles de la République des
Lettres, the rigors of which contributed to his plight and the
resulting breakdown he suffered in 1687.
Bayle’s life, and the subsequent course of intellectual history,
were dramatically altered by the publication of his Dictionnaire
historique et critique, which began appearing in 1696. Certainly,
Bayle’s material situation was improved, not to mention that of
his publisher, since the work was soon on its way to becoming the
philosophical best-seller of the eighteenth century. Bayle was at last
able to give up teaching. But what accounts for the success of this
strange work? It is not a dictionary in the usual sense; rather it is
a hodge-podge encyclopedia of intellectual curiosities, serious
argument on a variety of topics, salacious stories, exacting textual
scholarship, and much more that drew a readership hardly less diverse
than its contents. To be sure, its entries are alphabetically
arranged, but perhaps ninety-five percent of the work is to be found
in the footnotes, called Ôremarks,’ that often bear little
relation to the main text. Readers obviously dipped here and there
into this massive work of over six million words, and had a wonderful
time.
Not everyone was happy with the work, however. Unhappy were
authorities in France, of course, where the proscribed work
nonetheless showed up, and the reactionary Jurieu, who mobilized the
Consistory of the Walloon Church in Rotterdam against Bayle, who was
then constrained to publish Eclaircissements or
“Clarifications” of his treatment of atheism, Manicheism,
skepticism and obscenity. In addition to work for further editions of
the Dictionnaire, Bayle’s last years were spent in
continued theological debate, now primarily with the Rationalist
theologians Le Clerc, Jaquelot, and Bernard. Bayle, whose health had
never been robust, died on 28 December 1706, probably of a heart
attack precipitated by tuberculosis. He was putting the final touches
to his Entretiens de Maxime et de Thémiste, the work
which motivated Leibniz to write the only book he would ever publish,
the Theodicy.
There is a general problem in the interpretation of Bayle that has
been acknowledged (and even insisted upon both by critics and
admirers) in the literature from his own time to the present. It is a
problem not just of deciding whether Bayle succeeded in what he was
trying to do, which would be difficult enough given the charged topics
that he often dealt with, but even and especially in deciding the
nature of what he was trying to do. One might not go so far as to
claim that meaning is author’s intention (the so-called
intentional fallacy), but it is hard to deny that author’s
intention is at least relevant to meaning. And what Bayle’s
intentions were has been a matter of debate from the beginning.
According to just the twentieth-century interpretations, Bayle might
have been a positivist, an atheist, a deist, a skeptic, a fideist, a
Socinian, a liberal Calvinist, a conservative Calvinist, a libertine,
a Judaizing Christian, a Judeo-Christian, or even a secret Jew, a
Manichean, an existentialist. To be sure, not all of these exclude the
rest; for example, skepticism has often been associated with fideism.
But atheism, for example, is certainly incompatible with deism and the
other forms of theism. Moreover, there is at least some plausibility
to all of these interpretations.
Perhaps one way of sorting out his cacophony is in terms of the
distinction that Bayle himself drew between two kinds of philosophers:
the lawyers, who represent their case in the best light possible and
their opponents’ in the worst, and the reporters, who tell it as
it is, with respect to all views. Bayle might be a reporter, equitably
relating all views, even those that are mutually inconsistent,
especially in the Dictionnaire, which is the work on which
the panoply of interpretations is largely based. When justifying
himself to the Walloon Church over the obscenities alleged to be found
there, he claimed not to be producing obscenities but only to be
relating, as a good historian must, what others had produced. Even so,
some of the views that he clearly purports to relate as a reporter are
his own, both in the Dictionnaire and especially in the whole
rest of his work, which deals almost exclusively with religious
topics. And here there is a special problem of interpretation.
A case can be made that the logic of Bayle’s various positions
on toleration, evil, truth, substance and accident, lead ineluctably
to atheism; yet Bayle constantly asserts his belief in the tenets of
the Calvinist faith in which he was raised, and for which, not
incidentally, he made such sacrifice. We are thus faced with an
inconsistent triad: Bayle’s clearly articulated and acknowledged
principles entail atheism; Bayle does not accept atheism; Bayle is
neither stupid nor dishonest. He sees the incompatibility of the first
two claims, but nonetheless makes them (that is, Bayle neither nods
nor winks).
From his own time to the present, it has been the third claim that has
drawn closest scrutiny. Given the stressful period of the Revocation
and its aftermath, the possibility of a nodding (or even crazed) Bayle
has some plausibility. But it is a winking Bayle who came to be the
“Arsenal of the Enlightenment.” Those looking to discredit
religion and theism generally had only to focus on what is most
obvious, consistent and rationally cogent in his work. If there are
also claims there of Christian orthodoxy, they were taken as so much
hand-waving dissimulation in an effort to slip the real message past
censorious authorities. Whatever his intentions, this impulse toward
modern atheism was Bayle’s greatest single influence.
This interpretation was another of the topics on which Bayle had to
defend himself before the Walloon Consistory. His defense in the
Eclaircissement, and in fact throughout his work, was an
appeal to a fideism that seems to have made incompatibility with
reason a condition for an article of faith. Certainly, Bayle asserts
that the value of faith is directly proportional with its repugnancy
to reason. In this, Bayle was only pursuing a line to be found in
Scripture, especially St. Paul, whom Bayle cites repeatedly and at
length on the rational foolishness of faith in still another
Eclaircissement, on Manicheanism and the problem of evil.
Arguably, his is the only conception of faith that avoids the heresy
of Pelagianism, according to which people are able to save themselves,
independently of divine grace. For if we can reason ourselves to the
truth (or even the probability, or plausibility) of what is believed
on faith, and such belief is a sufficient condition for salvation,
then, contrary to Calvinist doctrine, faith is not necessary. Of
course, even this defense is open to the winking Bayle
interpretation.
One way to express the issue, at least, is with respect to
Bayle’s reaction to the horrors of the Revocation. The fact is
that after the death of his imprisoned brother, Bayle hardly ever
again referred to divine providence. This silence is remarkable for
one whose Calvinism dictated belief in strict predestination based on
the sufficiency and necessity of grace. What ought to have been a
consolation was ignored. Why? It might be that for him the Revocation
came to represent the hypocrisy, not just of Roman Catholicism, but of
Christianity and all religion—hypocrisy being the very failing
condemned by the Gospel more than sins of the flesh or any other sin.
The issue is epistemologically underdetermined by its very nature, for
Bayle’s behavior was compatible with both atheistic
dissimulation and sincere fideism. This issue is also morally idle
given Bayle’s own view on toleration of dissenting belief,
expressed by the scriptural injunction, judge not. Only God
has the privileged access necessary to judge conscience.
Bayle has generally been regarded as a skeptic of some sort, but the
sort has seldom been specified with any precision. Three kinds seem
relevant. The most influential kind has already been alluded to,
namely religious skepticism, which may be taken to mean that Bayle did
not in fact believe all, or perhaps any, of the religious views that
he asserted. The evidence for attributing such skepticism to Bayle
could hardly be stronger. Such beliefs are, according to Bayle,
contrary to reason. But the evidence against doing so is at least
equipollent: Bayle claims, repeatedly and unequivocally, to be a
believer. Those who take Bayle to be a religious skeptic discount this
testimony as dissimulation. What the motive for it would be is
unclear. Fear of censorship is implausible; Bayle hardly lacked for
courage, and in any case did not have a great deal to fear in
relatively liberal Holland. Moreover, that Bayle should have foreseen
the skeptical influence he was to have on the Enlightenment credits
him with an unlikely prescience and deviousness, making him, to use
one of his own favorite expressions, a snake in the
breast—indeed, the wiliest of them.
A more tractable and philosophically more interesting form of
skepticism attributed to Bayle is Pyrrhonism. This interpretation has
the advantage of reconciling his denigration of reason and profession
of faith: the one is a preparation for the other. The principal text
for Bayle’s Pyrrhonism is the Dictionnaire article on
Pyrrho, especially remarks B and C. There he argues that the same
reasons that led the Cartesians to assert that sensory qualities such
as colors, heat, cold and smells are not in the objects of the senses,
but instead are modifications of the mind, in fact show that all
qualities have this status. In fact, says Bayle, even granting that
God is veridical, Descartes’s proof of the external world itself
is flawed. For, as Malebranche argued, in no way can belief in that
world be based on the veracity of God, who in any case allows us to be
deceived about sensory qualities, and who might therefore allow us to
be deceived about all else in the world.
In this text Bayle also gives arguments that purport to show that
reason itself is unreliable. Principles of reason that are as evident
as could be are revealed as incompatible with what is known to be
true. However, the examples that Bayle gives indicate the tenuousness
of his Pyrrhonism. The principle that no human body can be in two
places at once, or be interpenetrated by its own parts, is at odds
with the doctrine of the real presence of Christ in the sacrament of
the Eucharist. Now, this is the Catholic conception of the Eucharist,
which Bayle himself rejects. In fact, all of the arguments emerge from
a conversation that Bayle places between two Catholic priests, thus,
for whatever reason, distancing himself from them. It has recently
been argued in fact, that the reason Bayle distances himself in this
way is that he is offering a reductio ad absurdum of Catholic
fideism based on philosophical skepticism. That is, Bayle rejects even
this ground-clearing role for skepticism as preparation for faith,
since it would be an instance of Pelagianism.
Generally, Bayle’s arguments concerning skepticism are highly
contextualized. He offers no in vacuo critique of pure
reason. The arguments usually occur in the Dictionnaire,
whose entries offer some minimal constraint on what Bayle says, and
they usually occur in religious debate of some sort, where the role of
faith needs to be ascertained. Nor is there ever a wholesale rejection
of reason, which would be paradoxical, given Bayle’s use of
argument. In the ancient world, Sextus Empiricus thought of argument
as like a purgative that once having done its work is itself flushed
away. Although he employs his own version of the medical model (reason
is like a corrosive that first cleans a wound but then eats through
flesh and bone to the very marrow), Bayle seems to have a very
different view. Shifting analogies in response to the liberal
Protestant Jacquelot, who had criticized his fideism as renouncing
reason altogether, Bayle explained that individual defeats of reason
entailed only a retreat to a more defensible position, something that
happens all the time in philosophy. His assessment of reason, even in
his most outré statements (reason is like a runner who
does not know when the race is over, or like another Penelope undoing
at night what was done during the day), is on a case-by-case basis,
and whatever generalizations he offers are open to revision.
Bayle seems to espouse something of a holistic web of belief, of the
Quine-Ullian sort, at least in the sense that cognitive antinomies are
resolved by rejecting the principles causing them, beginning with
those farthest from the center. Bayle, however, includes religious
truths as at the very center, trumping all others. Another
complication is that sometimes there seems no way to resolve the
antinomies, as in the case of the divisibility of matter. The relevant
maxims of reason seem equally central, yet yield an exhaustive and
inconsistent triad of views, none of which is true. Unlike the
Pyrrhonists, however, whose aim is to sustain antinomies, Bayle tries
to resolve them. If there is the occasional standoff, Bayle’s
attitude is one of regret and patience, for he is interested in
overcoming doubt, not generating it. The motivation he gave for the
Dictionnaire, after all, was the correction of errors,
confusion and doubt in previous such works.
The form of skepticism that seems best to capture this attitude is
Academic skepticism, which is in fact the position he explicitly
espouses when accused of Pyrrhonism by Jurieu. This skepticism is not
the negative dogmatism, as defined by Sextus, that nothing can be
known. Rather, it is the methodological position expressed by
Cicero’s injunction always to preserve the integrity of
one’s power of judgment; that is, not to dissipate it in
accepting as true what one does not perceive to be true. In this
sense, the first of Descartes’s rules of method in the
Discourse is an Academic principle, perhaps the only one: to
avoid precipitateness and prejudice and to rely only on one’s
own ability to discern the truth. Integrity is a matter of honestly
preserving the wholeness of one’s own judgment.
Part of this outlook would be the reportorial role that Bayle assumes,
of giving unimpeded voice to all views, even those that compete with
his own. Only a lawyer would argue a single position to the exclusion
of all others. Moreover, if this Academic skepticism were
Bayle’s outlook, he could not have espoused it as such, for to
do so would be still another form of dogmatism. Thus, instead of
defining, arguing and recommending Academic skepticism in any direct
fashion, he would give instances if it, practice it himself and
generally seek its promulgation through edification. This might be
exactly what he does.
If Bayle doubts, he does so on a highly contingent and non-theoretical
basis. He is prepared to accept what he finds to be evident, but the
fact of the matter is that he does not find it very often, at least
not in philosophy. In history, on the other hand, there is a kind of
certainty appropriate to the domain that is often enough to be found.
The Dictionnaire itself cannot be interpreted except as
stupendous testimony to the ability of an individual to overcome
passion and prejudice and arrive at historical truth—so much so
that Bayle’s historical method has been viewed by the literature
as a form of Cartesianism, despite the Cartesians’ own dismissal
of history. Only in one domain, however, is anything like strictly
Cartesian infallibility to be found, and that is morality. There, the
individual conscience is inviolate. Even if it errs with respect to
the objective moral character of an act, conscience, so long as it
acts with integrity, cannot morally err and is to be respected. Such
is the basis for Bayle’s view on toleration.
No philosophical topic occupied Bayle more than toleration. Many of
the articles of his Dictionnaire deal with it, and most of
the rest of his other works are directed either largely or entirely to
the topic, most notably, his Commentaire philosophique. It is
an area in which he clearly had a profound impact on the
Enlightenment. Locke also might have found in Bayle, if not a source
for his own views, then at least moral support for them, which he
himself might have provided for Bayle. In any case, their views are
very similar, even to the point of excluding Catholics from the
provisions of toleration (although their theories provide little on
behalf of this exclusion and much against it).
The toleration in question means religious toleration, although what
is said about it can be extended to political and other forms of
toleration. The question is whether someone whose sincere belief is
perceived to be in error should be forced to change it. Bayle’s
view is that in this case of the erring conscience, as it was called,
constraint, even in the perceived interest of the errant individual,
is never justified. The relevance of this issue in the context of
Huguenot persecution is obvious.
Bayle’s direct arguments on behalf of toleration are not very
convincing, however, at least not when taken in isolation. Consider,
for example, his argument that if even the true church had the right
to persecute the heretic, then every church would have that right,
with the result that a heretical church would be in a position to
persecute the true church. Quite apart from whether this conclusion is
so obviously false as to serve as the reductio as absurdum
that Bayle intends, his argument turns on an equivocation. A premise
of the argument is that only if the true church believed that it was
the true church would it be in a position to persecute, otherwise it
would give up its position and join, or at least seek, what it would
take to be the true church. But if this belief justified the true
church, then it would justify every church that had it. The
equivocation concerns the sense in which the true church might base
its right to persecute. Certainly, only if a church believed itself to
be the true church would it be in a position to exercise its putative
right to persecute. But this is not to say that this belief by itself
justifies the persecution. Such a view would beg the question against
those who, like Jurieu, think that only the objective fact, in this
case of actually being the true church, can ever justify.
Bayle is far more convincing when he generalizes from carefully
articulated examples, the best of which is that of the wife of Martin
Guerre. Bayle, whose native Le Carla was the next village over from
the site of the actual events, would have known about the case from
the local retelling of it, which has been continuous from the
fifteenth century to the present. The short of the story is that
Martin Guerre goes off to war, leaving behind his wife, child and
problematic existence, and is replaced eight years later by an
impostor who claims all his rights, including those of the marriage
bed. According to Bayle, because she thinks the man is her husband,
the wife, in ceding him those rights, not only is inculpable of an act
that otherwise would be adulterous, but actually performs her duty. He
concludes, more generally, “the erroneous conscience procures
for error the same rights and privileges that the orthodox conscience
procures for truth.”
An instructive curiosity is Bayle’s handling of this case from
the point of view of the impostor. Because the wife has an obligation
to submit to him, the impostor has a right to treat her as his wife.
But it does not follow, according to Bayle, that the impostor would be
justified in exercising that right. The sort of case that he has in
mind is the magistrate, and likely the church. With respect to their
behavior there are two notions of right: immunity from punishment and
justice. Whatever their pronouncements, they are to be obeyed; but
they might yet be culpable before God. This distinction does not
elucidate the case of Martin’s Guerre’s impostor, who is
an authority of neither church nor state. But it does emphasize
Bayle’s contention that if the heretic has the duty to act
according to conscience, then he has a right to do so; but if he has a
right to do so, then everyone has a duty not to interfere. The
individual conscience is autonomous and ought to be tolerated.
Even this position is less than straightforward, however, for it may
happen that the individual conscience calls for persecution. Bayle
seems not to have fully considered this case, but his best answer
would seem to be that the conscientious persecutor should be
restrained, but in a way that least poses a direct threat of
temptation to conscience. That is, the conscience of even a persecutor
must be respected, such that although it is regarded as mistaken, the
individual should not be forced or even bribed to act against it.
Rational persuasion to the contrary would seem to be the sole remedy
recommendable by the alleged skeptic Bayle. What this case shows, in
addition, is that while conscience is necessary for right action, it
is not sufficient. It supplies a formal requirement, as it were, with
the content of the act being determined on other grounds. To be told
to act according to conscience is in effect to be told to do what one
thinks is right. But arriving at what one thinks is right is another
matter, involving reason, but also other factors such as grace or
education, which for Bayle are not much different from a matter of
luck.
If a perfectly good and all-powerful God alone created everything in
the universe, then why do pain, moral wickedness, and so many
varieties of imperfection exist? Philosophers today refer to the
family of issues raised by this question as “the problem of
evil.” There is perhaps no thesis for which Bayle is more
well-known than the skeptical claim that there is no rational solution
to the problem of evil. Such skepticism can already be found in
Bayle’s earliest work, the 1675–77 Philosophy Course, in
which Bayle argues that no available account of God’s causal
relation to sin and suffering answers the problem. Bayle again attacks
theodicy (i.e. the attempt to answer the problem of evil), especially
the Cartesian strand, in his 1679 Objectiones to Pierre
Poiret’s Cogitationes Rationales de Deo, Animo, et
Malo. And both the 1682 Pensées diverses and
1686–88 Commentaire philosophique, though they
primarily deal with superstition and toleration respectively, also
positively engage God’s causal role in evil and demonstrate the
insoluble puzzles it raises.
But the centerpiece of any discussion of Bayle and the problem of evil
must be the Dictionnaire, particularly the articles
“Manichéens” and “Pauliciens” of the
first edition, and the “Eclaircissement sur les
Manichéens” of the second. It is in these texts that
Bayle attempts to refute every theodicy he had yet encountered,
thereby demonstrating the incapacity of reason, especially within the
confines of Christian dogma, to explain the origin of evil in a way
that does not make God its sole author. The suggestion that reason
leads us ineluctably to the conclusion that God is morally responsible
for all evil was found so scandalous that Bayle was forced to spend
the last decade of his life defending himself against charges of
atheism and even sedition on account of it. The Rationalist
theologians Jean Le Clerc and Isaac Jaquelot were Bayle’s
principal adversaries, and their objections to Bayle, as well as their
attempts at theodicy, prompted him to expand his skeptical reflections
on evil in subsequent books, including the Réponses aux
questions d’un provincial and the posthumous Entretiens
de Maxime et de Thémiste. These final works were the
occasional cause of Leibniz’s Theodicy, as well as the
inspiration for (and source for many of the arguments of)
Voltaire’s satirical novella, Candide, several chapters
of Hume’s Dialogues concerning Natural Religion, and
possibly Kant’s late essay, On the Miscarriage of All
Philosophical Trials in Theodicy.
Bayle’s controversial “doctrine” on the problem of
evil that caused so much commotion was carefully summarized by Bayle
himself in three points:
The first principle was a common supposition in Bayle’s day, and
so obviously caused no controversy. Nevertheless, Bayle argued on
behalf of the principle in “Manichéens,” remark D,
in passages that render more precise the nature of Bayle’s
skepticism about theodicy. Bayle imagines a monotheist philosopher,
Melissus, arguing with a dualist philosopher, Zoroaster, over the
origin of evil. The dispute begins with a contest over a
priori arguments. In other words, the first question raised is
whether one principle of creation or two is most in accord with ideas
of pure reason. Melissus wins this particular debate, in Bayle’s
view, because it is more agreeable to a priori reason to
suppose that there is just one necessary and infinitely perfect being
responsible for the creation of the universe than to suppose that
there are two warring gods, one good and the other evil (which is the
view of Bayle’s fictionalized Zoroaster). Melissus’
monotheism is, in short, simpler and more elegant than
Zoroaster’s dualism.
The contentious elements of Bayle’s doctrine begin to surface
when the debate then turns to a posteriori reasons; that is,
once the question shifts away from the beauty of the theory to its
ability to account for the observable phenomena. In this debate
Melissus fares worse than his interlocutor, since human reason finds
“the manner in which evil was introduced under the empire of a
sovereign being, infinitely good, infinitely holy, and infinitely
powerful … not only inexplicable, but even incomprehensible;
and everything that is opposed to the reasons why this being permitted
evil is more agreeable to the natural light and to the ideas of order
than these reasons are” (Dictionnaire,
“Pauliciens,” rem. E). Simplicity and elegance are now on
the side of Zoroaster (and the Manichean tradition that followed him,
if Bayle’s history is correct), for whom all the good in the
world is traceable to a perfectly benevolent deity, while all the evil
is the effect of his malevolent enemy. Therefore, whereas a
priori reason and Christian Scripture point toward monotheism
(Bayle’s first principle), a posteriori reason raises
perpetual difficulties for this picture in light of the way the world
actually is (Bayle’s second principle). 
Some of the most notorious remarks in the Dictionnaire are
those in which Bayle details how a dualist could refute the
traditional Christian accounts of the origin of evil, most of which
begin from the story of the Fall of Adam and Eve in the Garden of
Eden. Bayle begins his critique by asking how such a Fall was even
metaphysically possible. If Adam and Eve were created wholly good,
then they should not have had the capacity to sin, since such a
capacity is hardly a good quality. But supposing an answer to this
worry could be given, Bayle moves on to demand why God would permit
the possibility of sin to reduce to an actual sin, considering the
terrible consequences that befell humanity as a result of it. The most
common response to this question was that God had given human beings
free will, the most generous divine gift of all, and the autonomy of
which God willed to respect in order to make true worship and love of
him possible. Bayle’s response again focuses on the metaphysical
possibility of the explanation: can a creature that derives all its
being from God ever act in a manner that is truly free? Even supposing
an account of freedom could be offered to answer this question, Bayle
still finds the free-will defence unsatisfying on account of
God’s alleged omniscience. Surely God foresaw the first sin of
humankind from all eternity, yet he created humans with freedom
anyway. Is this not comparable, Bayle asks, to supplying a criminal
with a knife knowing full-well that he will commit murder with it? If
so, the responsibility for the murder falls at least partially on the
supplier of the weapon. But perhaps God allowed humans to fall so that
he could send his Son to redeem them. To this last resort of the
Christians-the felix culpa theodicy-Bayle observes that God
in this case would resemble a father who allowed his son to break his
arm (though he could have prevented it) just so that he could display
his skill at cast-making to the neighbors. Or God would be like a king
who permitted a deadly uprising just so he could demonstrate his
ability to quell it. God would not appear infinitely perfect
on any of these hypotheses. 
Such reflections demonstrate the need for Bayle’s third
principle (assuming that one is interested in upholding Christian
monotheism). The origin of evil, like the Trinity, is a mystery
fraught with endless difficulties. On Bayle’s view of religious
mysteries, which he lays out at the beginning of his
Eclaircissement sur les Manichéens, philosophical
objections to mysteries are nothing troubling, but merely serve to
confirm that God’s mind infinitely surpasses human minds. If
there were no insoluble philosophical objections to mysteries, then
there would be nothing mysterious about the doctrines in
question-reason could answer every difficulty, and could claim
equality with God’s own mind. For these reasons Bayle conflated
the traditional categories of “above reason” and
“against reason,” claiming that mysteries were necessarily
both. Reason is consequently useless, even pernicious, as a basis for
belief in the mysteries, and so must be replaced by simple faith
(Bayle’s third principle).
Bayle’s most able philosophical critic on these issues during
his lifetime was Jean Le Clerc, who argued that Bayle’s doctrine
on the problem of evil was intentionally subversive of religion. The
basis of Le Clerc’s accusation of atheism against Bayle was his
claim that it is not pyschologically possible to continue to believe
some doctrine after one has conceded that it is met with insoluble
difficulties. If this psychology of belief were true, then the second
principle of Bayle’s doctrine would destroy belief in monotheism
because, by supposition, it would be impossible to believe in the
unity of God after acknowledging the irresistible force of the
Manicheans’ objections. In response to Le Clerc Bayle argued in
his posthumous Entretiens de Maxime et de Thémiste
that it is not only psychologically possible to believe in a
proposition that has been defeated in argument, but also very common.
Bayle points to the debate over the continuum to illustrate his
thesis. Those engaged in the debate over whether lines are infinitely
divisible or ultimately reducible to points of finite size recognize
that there are insoluble paradoxes opposed to each point of view. Yet
there are adherents of both views all the same, which demonstrates, by
historical fact, that it is possible to believe in a proposition (e.g.
“lines are infinitely divisible”) despite recognizing
unanswerable difficulties (e.g. Zeno’s paradoxes). Far from a
recommendation of adopting irrational fideism in response to the
problem of evil, Bayle therefore believed he was urging the same
rational retreat from certain debates that philosophers are commonly
forced into when they argue about labyrinthine philosophical topics
like the continuum.
Bayle undeniably had an enormous influence given the wide readership
of his work; but the precise nature of that influence, even in
individual cases, remains a desideratum of research. Bayle’s
connections with Locke, Leibniz, Kant and the Enlightenment have
already been at least suggested. Here the debt to him of Berkeley and
Hume will be looked at.
The literature regards Bayle, not only as an original source for the
Enlightenment, but as a conduit of the views and arguments of his
immediate predecessors in the seventeenth century. A good example of
where Bayle’s role has not been made precise is his discussion
of the primary-secondary quality distinction. Bayle is supposed to
have conveyed Foucher’s arguments against the distinction to
Berkeley and Hume. The contention is that just as Malebranche produced
arguments to show that secondary qualities exist only in the mind, so
his critic Foucher extended those same arguments to show that primary
qualities also exist only in the mind. In fact, however, the arguments
that Foucher actually deployed were directed less against Malebranche,
whom he took simply to assume the distinction, than against Descartes
and especially Rohault. His point was not to undo the distinction, but
to show that however it was understood, it was incompatible with
Cartesian dualism.
It was Bayle himself in the famous note B of the Pyrrho article who
took Foucher to be extending Malebranche’s arguments: “if
the objects of our senses appear to us coloured, hot, cold, smelling,
tho’ they are not so, why should they not appear extended and
figured, at rest, and in motion, though they had no such thing.”
Although a parallel is established, the argument is obviously not very
strong. Now, the most notable mutatis mutandis argument employed by
Berkeley against the distinction is based on the relativity of sense
perception: the perception of both varies under varying conditions, so
if the variation of secondary qualities is a reason to place them in
the mind, it is also a reason to place the primary in the mind. This
argument is not to be found in Foucher or in this article, but it does
appear in note G of the Zeno article, unconnected with Foucher:
“the modern Philosophers, though they are no Sceptics,”
have made secondary qualities no more than perceptions in the mind;
“why should we not say the same thing of extension?” Bayle
again deploys the weak parallel argument above, and then continues:
“Observe also, that the same body appears to us little or great,
round or square, according to the place from whence we view it: and
certainly, a body which seems to us very little, appears very great to
fly.” A problem for this text as a source for Berkeley is that
this very argument is to be found better presented in Malebranche, who
is cited here along with other moderns such as Lamy and Nicole, who
are supposed to be undone by it. Given that Malebranche is cited by
Berkeley more often by Berkeley’s notebooks than anyone but
Locke, it would seem more likely that Berkeley went straight to
Malebranche for his arguments on the primary-secondary
distinction.
A stronger connection between Berkeley and Bayle would be the text
itself, and especially note H, of the same Zeno article. By appeal to
theoretical parsimony, according to Bayle, “the Cartesians may
maintain that no such thing as matter exists; for whether it doth or
doth not exist, God could equally communicate to us all the thought we
have.” Such divine communication is, of course, precisely what
Berkeley was to advocate. Moreover, Bayle in note G extends
Zeno’s argument against motion by denying that extension exists.
His argument is that extension cannot be composed of mathematical
points or of atoms, nor can it be infinitely divisible. It remains an
open question how this squares with Berkeley’s comment in his
notebooks, which he repeats there, that “Malebranche’s
& Bayle’s arguments do not seem to prove against Space, but
onely Bodies.” The only other time Bayle is mentioned in
Berkeley’s entire work is in the Theory of Vision
Vindicated, where he is mentioned, with Hobbes, Spinoza and
Leibniz, as an author whose popularity shows how atheistic principles
have taken root.
That Bayle exercised an enormous influence on Hume is beyond doubt.
Not long before publishing his Treatise, Hume drew the
attention of his friend Michael Ramsey to four texts that would
facilitate his reading of it. One of them was “the more
metaphysical Articles of Bailes [sic] Dictionary; such as those [on]
Zeno, & Spinoza.” Now, it is conceivable that Hume
encountered these texts, and recognized their propaedeutic value, only
after completing his Treatise; but this bare possibility (the
letter was written two years before its publication) is absolutely
ruled out in the case of Bayle, if not of the other texts Hume names,
by Hume’s so-called early memoranda and especially by the use
(unacknowledged, as was typical for the period) that he actually makes
of Bayle’s work in the text itself.
Of the philosophical entries in the early memoranda, about half deal
with Bayle. Even more important are the textual uses of Bayle. Kemp
Smith long ago drew attention to five issues on which, in his view,
Bayle had an unquestionable influence on Hume. First, from the article
“Zeno” Hume takes Bayle’s tripartite division of the
possible ways that space and time might be constituted: from
mathematical points, or from physical points, or as infinitely
divisible. But whereas Bayle argued in no uncertain terms that none of
these possibilities was rationally defensible, Hume in effect opts for
physical points with his conception of indivisible minima
sensibilia (colored points, in the case of space). Although the
result is a non-standard account of geometry as an inexact science,
Hume thinks that he thereby preserves reason from otherwise
irresolvable antinomies.
Second, Hume is supposed to have been influenced by Bayle’s
historical account of the types of skepticism and his own use of
skeptical argument in attacking orthodox positions. Bayle’s
position on skepticism has been discussed above. It may not be too
misleading to describe Hume’s resolution of skeptical
difficulties in terms of “taste and sentiment” as a
naturalistic version of Bayle’s supernaturalistic resolution in
terms of grace that was described by the same phrase.
A third connection concerns the metaphysics of substance, mode and
identity. Hume takes from the article “Spinoza” the
objections Bayle lodged against Spinoza’s “hideous
hypothesis” that there is but a single substance which is God,
and applies these objections to the view that humans possess a soul
that is a simple, indivisible and immaterial substance. The whole of
Hume’s argument in three stages and two rebuttals of a reply is
lifted from Bayle. Both the unique substance and the substantial soul
are supposed to be indivisible, yet are really identical to the
extension that is their mode, hence are divisible; both have contrary
properties; etc. The upshot is that just as Spinoza’s hypothesis
is “unintelligible,” so is the theologians’
supposition concerning the soul.
Fourth, Kemp Smith draws attention to the discussion of animal
intelligence in the article “Rorarius.” In this instance,
the influence of Bayle is less clear. Presumably, he had in mind
chapter nine of the Enquiry; but here one finds as the main
exercise an application of the argument by analogy with an emphasis on
the importance of experience. There is, however, an ultimate appeal to
instinct to explain the cognitive behavior of both men and animals.
And here Bayle might have played a role, alluded to immediately
above.
Finally, Hume might have been influenced by Bayle’s treatment of
religious questions, especially the argument from design. This is an
exceedingly vexed area because of the questionable orthodoxy of
Bayle’s views and the expression of them. Many of the same
ambiguities, of course, infect Hume’s views on these questions,
although his heterodoxy seems far less debatable.