Many people associate Plato with a few central doctrines that are
advocated in his writings: The world that appears to our senses is in
some way defective and filled with error, but there is a more real and
perfect realm, populated by entities (called “forms” or
“ideas”) that are eternal, changeless, and in some sense
paradigmatic for the structure and character of the world presented to our senses. Among the
most important of these abstract objects (as they are now called,
because they are not located in space or time) are goodness, beauty,
equality, bigness, likeness, unity, being, sameness, difference,
change, and changelessness. (These terms—“goodness”, 
“beauty”, and so on—are
often capitalized by those who write about Plato, in order to call
attention to their exalted status; similarly for “Forms”
and “Ideas.”) The most fundamental distinction in Plato's
philosophy is between the many observable objects that appear beautiful
(good, just, unified, equal, big) and the one object that is what
beauty (goodness, justice, unity) really is, from which those many
beautiful (good, just, unified, equal, big) things receive their names
and their corresponding characteristics. Nearly every major work of
Plato is, in some way, devoted to or dependent on this distinction.
Many of them explore the ethical and practical consequences of
conceiving of reality in this bifurcated way. We are urged to transform
our values by taking to heart the greater reality of the forms and the
defectiveness of the corporeal world. We must recognize that the soul
is a different sort of object from the body—so much so that it
does not depend on the existence of the body for its functioning, and
can in fact grasp the nature of the forms far more easily when it is
not encumbered by its attachment to anything corporeal. In a few of
Plato's works, we are told that the soul always retains the ability to
recollect what it once grasped of the forms, when it was disembodied prior to its possessor's birth
(see especially Meno), and that the lives we lead are to some
extent a punishment or reward for choices we made in a previous
existence (see especially the final pages of Republic). But in
many of Plato's writings, it is asserted or assumed that true
philosophers—those who recognize how important it is to
distinguish the one (the one thing that goodness is, or virtue is, or
courage is) from the many (the many things that are called good or
virtuous or courageous )—are in a position to become ethically
superior to unenlightened human beings, because of the greater degree
of insight they can acquire. To understand which things are good and
why they are good (and if we are not interested in such questions, how
can we become good?), we must investigate the form of good.
Although these propositions are often identified by Plato's readers
as forming a large part of the core of his philosophy, many of his
greatest admirers and most careful students point out that few, if any,
of his writings can accurately be described as mere advocacy of a
cut-and-dried group of propositions. Often Plato's works exhibit a
certain degree of dissatisfaction and puzzlement with even those
doctrines that are being recommended for our consideration. For
example, the forms are sometimes described as hypotheses (see for
example Phaedo). The form of good in particular is described
as something of a mystery whose real nature is elusive and as yet
unknown to anyone at all (Republic). Puzzles are raised—and not overtly
answered—about how any of the forms can be known and
how we are to talk about them without falling into contradiction
(Parmenides), or about what it is to know anything
(Theaetetus) or to name anything (Cratylus). When one
compares Plato with some of the other philosophers who are often ranked
with him—Aristotle, Aquinas, and Kant, for example—he
can be recognized to be far more exploratory, incompletely systematic,
elusive, and playful than they. That, along with his gifts as a writer
and as a creator of vivid character and dramatic setting, is one of the
reasons why he is often thought to be the ideal author from whom one
should receive one's introduction to philosophy. His readers are not
presented with an elaborate system of doctrines held to be so fully
worked out that they are in no need of further exploration or
development; instead, what we often receive from Plato is a few key
ideas together with a series of suggestions and problems about how
those ideas are to be interrogated and deployed. Readers of a Platonic
dialogue are drawn into thinking for themselves about the issues
raised, if they are to learn what the dialogue itself might be thought
to say about them. Many of his works therefore give their readers a
strong sense of philosophy as a living and unfinished subject (perhaps
one that can never be completed) to which they themselves will have to
contribute. All of Plato's works are in some way meant to leave further
work for their readers, but among the ones that most conspicuously fall
into this category are: Euthyphro, Laches,
Charmides, Euthydemus, Theaetetus, and
Parmenides.
There is another feature of Plato's writings that makes him
distinctive among the great philosophers and colors our experience of
him as an author. Nearly everything he wrote takes the form of a
dialogue. (There is one striking exception: his Apology, which
purports to be the speech that Socrates gave in his defense—the
Greek word apologia means “defense”—when,
in 399, he was legally charged and convicted of the crime of impiety.
However, even there, Socrates is presented at one point addressing
questions of a philosophical character to his accuser, Meletus, and
responding to them. In addition, since antiquity, a collection of 13
letters has been included among his collected works, but their
authenticity as compositions of Plato is not universally accepted among
scholars, and many or most of them are almost certainly not his. Most
of them purport to be the outcome of his involvement in the politics of
Syracuse, a heavily populated Greek city located in Sicily and ruled by
tyrants.)
We are of course familiar with the dialogue form through our
acquaintance with the literary genre of drama. But Plato's dialogues do
not try to create a fictional world for the purposes of telling a
story, as many literary dramas do; nor do they invoke an earlier
mythical realm, like the creations of the great Greek tragedians
Aeschylus, Sophocles, and Euripides. Nor are they all presented in the
form of a drama: in many of them, a single speaker narrates events in
which he participated. They are philosophical discussions—“debates” 
would, in some cases, also be an appropriate 
word—among a small number of interlocutors, many of whom can be
identified as real historical figures; and often they begin with a
depiction of the setting of the discussion—a visit to a prison,
a wealthy man's house, a celebration over drinks, a religious festival,
a visit to the gymnasium, a stroll outside the city's wall, a long walk
on a hot day. As a group, they form vivid portraits of a social world,
and are not purely intellectual exchanges between characterless and
socially unmarked speakers. (At any rate, that is true of a large
number of Plato's interlocutors. However, it must be added that in some
of his works the speakers display little or no character. See, for
example, Sophist and Statesman—dialogues in
which a visitor from the town of Elea in Southern Italy leads the
discussion; and Laws, a discussion between an unnamed Athenian
and two named fictional characters, one from Crete and the other from
Sparta.) In many of his dialogues (though not all), Plato is
not only attempting to draw his readers into a discussion, but is also
commenting on the social milieu that he is depicting, and criticizing
the character and ways of life of his interlocutors. Some of the
dialogues that most evidently fall into this category are
Protagoras, Gorgias, Hippias Major,
Euthydemus, and Symposium.
There is one interlocutor who speaks in nearly all of Plato's
dialogues, being completely absent only in Laws, which ancient
testimony tells us was one of his latest works: that figure is
Socrates. Like nearly everyone else who appears in Plato's works, he is
not an invention of Plato: there really was a Socrates just as there really was a Crito, a Gorgias, a Thrasymachus, and a Laches. Plato was not
the only author whose personal experience of Socrates led to the
depiction of him as a character in one or more dramatic works. Socrates
is one of the principal characters of Aristophanes' comedy,
Clouds; and Xenophon, a historian and military leader, wrote,
like Plato, both an Apology of Socrates (an account of
Socrates' trial) and other works in which Socrates appears as a
principal speaker. Furthermore, we have some fragmentary remains of
dialogues written by other contemporaries of Socrates besides Plato and Xenophon (Aeschines,
Antisthenes, Eucleides, Phaedo), and these purport to describe
conversations he conducted with others. So, when Plato wrote dialogues
that feature Socrates as a principal speaker, he was both contributing
to a genre that was inspired by the life of Socrates and participating
in a lively literary debate about the kind of person Socrates was and
the value of the intellectual conversations in which he was involved.
Aristophanes' comic portrayal of Socrates is at the same time a bitter
critique of him and other leading intellectual figures of the day (the
420s B.C.), but from Plato, Xenophon, and the other composers (in the
390's and later) of “Socratic discourses” (as Aristotle
calls this body of writings) we receive a far more favorable
impression.
Evidently, the historical Socrates was the sort of person who
provoked in those who knew him, or knew of him, a profound response,
and he inspired many of those who came under his influence to write
about him. But the portraits composed by Aristophanes, Xenophon, and
Plato are the ones that have survived intact, and they are therefore
the ones that must play the greatest role in shaping our conception of
what Socrates was like. Of these, Clouds has the least value
as an indication of what was distinctive of Socrates' mode of
philosophizing: after all, it is not intended as a philosophical work,
and although it may contain a few lines that are characterizations of
features unique to Socrates, for the most part it is an attack on a
philosophical type—the long-haired, unwashed, amoral
investigator into abstruse phenomena—rather than a
depiction of Socrates himself. Xenophon's depiction of Socrates,
whatever its value as historical testimony (which may be considerable),
is generally thought to lack the philosophical subtlety and depth of
Plato's. At any rate, no one (certainly not Xenophon himself) takes
Xenophon to be a major philosopher in his own right; when we read his
Socratic works, we are not encountering a great philosophical mind. But
that is what we experience when we read Plato. We may read Plato's
Socratic dialogues because we are (as Plato evidently wanted us to be)
interested in who Socrates was and what he stood for, but even if we
have little or no desire to learn about the historical Socrates, we
will want to read Plato because in doing so we are encountering an
author of the greatest philosophical significance. No doubt he in some
way borrowed in important ways from Socrates, though it is not easy to
say where to draw the line between him and his teacher (more about this
below in section 12). But it is widely agreed among scholars that Plato
is not a mere transcriber of the words of Socrates (any more than
Xenophon or the other authors of Socratic discourses). His use of a
figure called “Socrates” in so many of his dialogues should
not be taken to mean that Plato is merely preserving for a reading
public the lessons he learned from his teacher.
Socrates, it should be kept in mind, does not appear in all of
Plato's works. He makes no appearance in Laws, and there are
several dialogues (Sophist, Statesman,
Timaeus) in which his role is small and peripheral, while some
other figure dominates the conversation or even, as in the
Timaeus and Critias, presents a long and elaborate,
continuous discourse of their own. Plato's dialogues are not a static
literary form; not only do his topics vary, not only do his speakers
vary, but the role played by questions and answers is never the same
from one dialogue to another. (Symposium, for example, is a
series of speeches, and there are also lengthy speeches in
Apology, Menexenus, Protagoras,
Crito, Phaedrus, Timaeus, and
Critias; in fact, one might reasonably question whether these
works are properly called dialogues). But even though Plato constantly
adapted “the dialogue form” (a commonly used term, and
convenient enough, so long as we do not think of it as an unvarying
unity) to suit his purposes, it is striking that throughout his career
as a writer he never engaged in a form of composition that was widely
used in his time and was soon to become the standard mode of
philosophical address: Plato never became a writer of philosophical
treatises, even though the writing of treatises (for example, on
rhetoric, medicine, and geometry) was a common practice among his
predecessors and contemporaries. (The closest we come to an exception
to this generalization is the seventh letter, which contains a brief
section in which the author, Plato or someone pretending to be him, commits himself to several philosophical 
points—while insisting, at the same time, that no philosopher will
write about the deepest matters, but will communicate his thoughts only in private discussion with selected individuals. As noted above, the authenticity
of Plato's letters is a matter of great controversy; and in any case,
the author of the seventh letter declares his opposition to the writing
of philosophical books. Whether Plato wrote it or not, it cannot be
regarded as a philosophical treatise, and its author did not wish it to
be so regarded.) In all of his writings—except in the letters,
if any of them are genuine—Plato never speaks to his audience
directly and in his own voice. Strictly speaking, he does not himself
affirm anything in his dialogues; rather, it is the interlocutors in
his dialogues who are made by Plato to do all of the affirming,
doubting, questioning, arguing, and so on. Whatever he wishes to
communicate to us is conveyed indirectly.
This feature of Plato's works raises important questions about how
they are to be read, and has led to considerable controversy among
those who study his writings. Since he does not himself affirm anything
in any of his dialogues, can we ever be on secure ground in attributing
a philosophical doctrine to him (as opposed to one of his characters)?
Did he himself have philosophical convictions, and can we discover what
they were? Are we justified in speaking of “the philosophy of
Plato”? Or, if we attribute some view to Plato himself, are we
being unfaithful to the spirit in which he intended the dialogues to be read? Is
his whole point, in refraining from writing treatises, to discourage the readers of his works from asking what their author believes
and to encourage them instead simply to consider the plausibility or
implausibility of what his characters are saying? Is that why Plato
wrote dialogues? If not for this reason, then what was his
purpose in refraining from addressing his audience in a more direct
way? There are other important questions about the particular shape his
dialogues take: for example, why does Socrates play such a prominent
role in so many of them, and why, in some of these works, does Socrates
play a smaller role, or none at all?
Once these questions are raised and their difficulty acknowledged,
it is tempting, in reading Plato's works and reflecting upon them, to
adopt a strategy of extreme caution. Rather than commit oneself to any
hypothesis about what he is trying to communicate to his readers, one
might adopt a stance of neutrality about his intentions, and confine
oneself to talking only about what is said by his dramatis
personae. One cannot be faulted, for example, if one notes
that, in Plato's Republic, Socrates argues that justice in the
soul consists in each part of the soul doing its own. It is equally
correct to point out that other principal speakers in that work,
Glaucon and Adeimantus, accept the arguments that Socrates gives for
that definition of justice. Perhaps there is no need for us to say 
more—to say, for example, that Plato himself agrees that this is how
justice should be defined, or that Plato himself accepts the arguments
that Socrates gives in support of this definition. And we might adopt
this same “minimalist” approach to all of Plato's
works. After all, is it of any importance to discover what went on
inside his head as he wrote—to find out whether he himself
endorsed the ideas he put in the mouths of his characters, whether they
constitute “the philosophy of Plato”? Should we not read
his works for their intrinsic philosophical value, and not as tools to
be used for entering into the mind of their author? We know what
Plato's characters say—and isn't that all that we need, for the
purpose of engaging with his works philosophically?
But the fact that we know what Plato's characters say does
not show that by refusing to entertain any hypotheses about what the
author of these works is trying to communicate to his readers we can
understand what those characters mean by what they say. We should
not lose sight of this obvious fact: it is Plato, not any of his
dramatis personae, who is reaching out to a readership and
trying to influence their beliefs and actions by means of his literary
actions. When we ask whether an argument put forward by a character in
Plato's works should be read as an effort to persuade us of its
conclusion, or is better read as a revelation of how foolish that
speaker is, we are asking about what Plato as author (not that
character) is trying to lead us to believe, through the writing that he
is presenting to our attention. We need to interpret the work itself to
find out what it, or Plato the author, is saying. Similarly, when we
ask how a word that has several different senses is best understood, we
are asking what Plato means to communicate to us through the speaker
who uses that word. We should not suppose that we can derive much
philosophical value from Plato's writings if we refuse to entertain any
thoughts about what use he intends us to make of the things his
speakers say. Penetrating the mind of Plato and comprehending what his
interlocutors mean by what they say are not two separate tasks but one,
and if we do not ask what his interlocutors mean by what they say, and
what the dialogue itself indicates we should think about what they
mean, we will not profit from reading his dialogues.
Furthermore, the dialogues have certain characteristics that are
most easily explained by supposing that Plato is using them as vehicles
for inducing his readers to become convinced (or more convinced than
they already are) of certain propositions—for example, that
there are forms, that the soul is not corporeal, that knowledge can be
acquired only by means of a study of the forms, and so on. Why, after
all, did Plato write so many works (for example: Phaedo,
Symposium, Republic, Phaedrus,
Theaetetus, Sophist, Statesman,
Timaeus, Philebus, Laws) in which one
character dominates the conversation (often, but not always, Socrates)
and convinces the other speakers (at times, after encountering initial
resistance) that they should accept or reject certain conclusions, on
the basis of the arguments presented? The only plausible way of
answering that question is to say that these dialogues were intended by
Plato to be devices by which he might induce the audience for which
they are intended to reflect on and accept the arguments and
conclusions offered by his principal interlocutor. (It is noteworthy
that in Laws, the principal speaker—an unnamed visitor
from Athens—proposes that laws should be accompanied by
“preludes” in which their philosophical basis is given as
full an explanation as possible. The educative value of written texts
is thus explicitly acknowledged by Plato's dominant speaker. If
preludes can educate a whole citizenry that is prepared to learn from
them, then surely Plato thinks that other sorts of written 
texts—for example, his own dialogues—can also serve an
educative function.)
This does not mean that Plato thinks that his readers can become
wise simply by reading and studying his works. On the contrary, it is
highly likely that he wanted all of his writings to be supplementary
aids to philosophical conversation: in one of his works, he has
Socrates warn his readers against relying solely on books, or taking
them to be authoritative. They are, Socrates says, best used as devices
that stimulate the readers' memory of discussions they have had
(Phaedrus 274e-276d). In those face-to-face conversations with
a knowledgeable leader, positions are taken, arguments are given, and
conclusions are drawn. Plato's writings, he implies in this passage
from Phaedrus, will work best when conversational seeds have
already been sown for the arguments they contain.
If we take Plato to be trying to persuade us, in many of his works,
to accept the conclusions arrived at by his principal interlocutors (or
to persuade us of the refutations of their opponents), we can easily
explain why he so often chooses Socrates as the dominant speaker in his
dialogues. Presumably the contemporary audience for whom Plato was
writing included many of Socrates' admirers. They would be predisposed
to think that a character called “Socrates” would have all
of the intellectual brilliance and moral passion of the historical
person after whom he is named (especially since Plato often makes
special efforts to give his “Socrates” a life-like reality,
and has him refer to his trial or to the characteristics by which he
was best known); and the aura surrounding the character called
“Socrates” would give the words he speaks in the dialogue
considerable persuasive power. Furthermore, if Plato felt strongly
indebted to Socrates for many of his philosophical techniques and
ideas, that would give him further reason for assigning a dominant role
to him in many of his works. (More about this in section 12.)
Of course, there are other more speculative possible ways of
explaining why Plato so often makes Socrates his principal speaker. For
example, we could say that Plato was trying to undermine the reputation
of the historical Socrates by writing a series of works in which a
figure called “Socrates” manages to persuade a group of
naïve and sycophantic interlocutors to accept absurd conclusions
on the basis of sophistries. But anyone who has read some of Plato's
works will quickly recognize the utter implausibility of that
alternative way of reading them. Plato could have written into his
works clear signals to the reader that the arguments of Socrates do not
work, and that his interlocutors are foolish to accept them. But there
are many signs in such works as Meno, Phaedo,
Republic, and Phaedrus that point in the opposite
direction. (And the great admiration Plato feels for Socrates is also
evident from his Apology.) The reader is given every
encouragement to believe that the reason why Socrates is successful in
persuading his interlocutors (on those occasions when he does succeed)
is that his arguments are powerful ones. The reader, in other words, is
being encouraged by the author to accept those arguments, if not as
definitive then at least as highly arresting and deserving of careful
and full positive consideration. When we interpret the dialogues in
this way, we cannot escape the fact that we are entering into the mind
of Plato, and attributing to him, their author, a positive evaluation
of the arguments that his speakers present to each other.
There is a further reason for entertaining hypotheses about what
Plato intended and believed, and not merely confining ourselves to
observations about what sorts of people his characters are and what
they say to each other. When we undertake a serious study of Plato, and
go beyond reading just one of his works, we are inevitably confronted
with the question of how we are to link the work we are currently
reading with the many others that Plato composed. Admittedly, many of
his dialogues make a fresh start in their setting and their
interlocutors: typically, Socrates encounters a group of people many of
whom do not appear in any other work of Plato, and so, as an author, he
needs to give his readers some indication of their character and social
circumstances. But often Plato's characters make statements that would
be difficult for readers to understand unless they had already read one
or more of his other works. For example, in Phaedo (73a-b),
Socrates says that one argument for the immortality of the soul derives
from the fact that when people are asked certain kinds of questions,
and are aided with diagrams, they answer in a way that shows that they
are not learning afresh from the diagrams or from information provided
in the questions, but are drawing their knowledge of the answers from
within themselves. That remark would be of little worth for an audience
that had not already read Meno. Several pages later, Socrates
tells his interlocutors that his argument about our prior knowledge of
equality itself (the form of equality) applies no less to other 
forms—to the beautiful, good, just, pious and to all the other things
that are involved in their asking and answering of questions (75d).
This reference to asking and answering questions would not be well
understood by a reader who had not yet encountered a series of
dialogues in which Socrates asks his interlocutors questions of the
form, “What is X?” (Euthyphro: what is piety?
Laches: what is courage? Charmides: What is
moderation? Hippias Major: what is beauty?). Evidently, Plato
is assuming that readers of Phaedo have already read several
of his other works, and will bring to bear on the current argument all
of the lessons that they have learned from them. In some of his
writings, Plato's characters refer ahead to the continuation of their
conversations on another day, or refer back to conversations they had
recently: thus Plato signals to us that we should read
Theaetetus, Sophist, and Statesman
sequentially; and similarly, since the opening of Timaeus
refers us back to Republic, Plato is indicating to his readers
that they must seek some connection between these two works.
These features of the dialogues show Plato's awareness that he
cannot entirely start from scratch in every work that he writes. He
will introduce new ideas and raise fresh difficulties, but he will also
expect his readers to have already familiarized themselves with the
conversations held by the interlocutors of other dialogues—even
when there is some alteration among those interlocutors. (Meno does not
re-appear in Phaedo; Timaeus was not among the interlocutors
of Republic.) Why does Plato have his dominant characters
(Socrates, the Eleatic visitor) reaffirm some of the same points from
one dialogue to another, and build on ideas that were made in earlier
works? If the dialogues were merely meant as provocations to 
thought—mere exercises for the mind—there would be no need for
Plato to identify his leading characters with a consistent and
ever-developing doctrine. For example, Socrates continues to maintain,
over a large number of dialogues, that there are such things as
forms—and there is no better explanation for this continuity
than to suppose that Plato is recommending that doctrine to his
readers. Furthermore, when Socrates is replaced as the principal
investigator by the visitor from Elea (in Sophist and
Statesman), the existence of forms continues to be taken for
granted, and the visitor criticizes any conception of reality that
excludes such incorporeal objects as souls and forms. The Eleatic
visitor, in other words, upholds a metaphysics that is, in many
respects, like the one that Socrates is made to defend. Again, the best
explanation for this continuity is that Plato is using both characters—Socrates and the Eleatic visitor—as devices for the
presentation and defense of a doctrine that he embraces and wants his
readers to embrace as well.
This way of reading Plato's dialogues does not presuppose that he
never changes his mind about anything—that whatever any of his
main interlocutors uphold in one dialogue will continue to be
presupposed or affirmed elsewhere without alteration. It is, in fact, a
difficult and delicate matter to determine, on the basis of our reading
of the dialogues, whether Plato means to modify or reject in one
dialogue what he has his main interlocutor affirm in some other. One of
the most intriguing and controversial questions about his treatment of
the forms, for example, is whether he concedes that his conception of
those abstract entities is vulnerable to criticism; and, if so, whether
he revises some of the assumptions he had been making about them, or
develops a more elaborate picture of them that allows him to respond to
that criticism. In Parmenides, the principal interlocutor (not
Socrates—he is here portrayed as a promising, young philosopher
in need of further training—but rather the pre-Socratic from
Elea who gives the dialogue its name: Parmenides) subjects the forms to
withering criticism, and then consents to conduct an inquiry into the
nature of oneness that has no overt connection to his critique of the
forms. Does the discussion of oneness (a baffling series of
contradictions—or at any rate, propositions that seem, on the
surface, to be contradictions) in some way help address the problems
raised about forms? That is one way of reading the dialogue. And if we
do read it in this way, does that show that Plato has changed his mind
about some of the ideas about forms he inserted into earlier dialogues?
Can we find dialogues in which we encounter a “new theory of
forms”—that is, a way of thinking of forms that carefully
steers clear of the assumptions about forms that led to Parmenides'
critique? It is not easy to say. But we cannot even raise this as an
issue worth pondering unless we presuppose that behind the dialogues
there stands a single mind that is using these writings as a way of
hitting upon the truth, and of bringing that truth to the attention of
others. If we find Timaeus (the principal interlocutor of the dialogue
named after him) and the Eleatic visitor of the Sophist and
Statesman talking about forms in a way that is entirely
consistent with the way Socrates talks about forms in Phaedo
and Republic, then there is only one reasonable explanation
for that consistency: Plato believes that their way of talking about
forms is correct, or is at least strongly supported by powerful
considerations. If, on the other hand, we find that Timaeus or the
Eleatic visitor talks about forms in a way that does not harmonize with
the way Socrates conceives of those abstract objects, in the dialogues
that assign him a central role as director of the conversation, then
the most plausible explanation for these discrepancies is that Plato
has changed his mind about the nature of these entities. It would be
implausible to suppose that Plato himself had no convictions about
forms, and merely wants to give his readers mental exercise by
composing dialogues in which different leading characters talk about
these objects in discordant ways.
The same point—that we must view the dialogues as the
product of a single mind, a single philosopher, though perhaps one who
changes his mind—can be made in connection with the politics of
Plato's works.
It is noteworthy, to begin with, that Plato is, among other things,
a political philosopher. For he gives expression, in several
of his writings (particular Phaedo), to a yearning to escape
from the tawdriness of ordinary human relations. (Similarly, he evinces
a sense of the ugliness of the sensible world, whose beauty pales in
comparison with that of the forms.) Because of this, it would have been
all too easy for Plato to turn his back entirely on practical reality,
and to confine his speculations to theoretical questions. Some of his
works—Parmenides is a stellar example—do
confine themselves to exploring questions that seem to have no bearing
whatsoever on practical life. But it is remarkable how few of his works
fall into this category. Even the highly abstract questions raised in
Sophist about the nature of being and not-being are, after
all, embedded in a search for the definition of sophistry; and thus
they call to mind the question whether Socrates should be classified as
a sophist—whether, in other words, sophists are to be despised
and avoided. In any case, despite the great sympathy Plato expresses
for the desire to shed one's body and live in an incorporeal world, he
devotes an enormous amount of energy to the task of understanding the
world we live in, appreciating its limited beauty, and improving
it.
His tribute to the mixed beauty of the sensible world, in
Timaeus, consists in his depiction of it as the outcome of
divine efforts to mold reality in the image of the forms, using simple
geometrical patterns and harmonious arithmetic relations as building
blocks. The desire to transform human relations is given expression in
a far larger number of works. Socrates presents himself, in Plato's
Apology, as a man who does not have his head in the clouds
(that is part of Aristophanes' charge against him in Clouds).
He does not want to escape from the everyday world but to make it
better. He presents himself, in Gorgias, as the only Athenian
who has tried his hand at the true art of politics.
Similarly, the Socrates of Republic devotes a considerable
part of his discussion to the critique of ordinary social 
institutions—the family, private property, and rule by the many. The
motivation that lies behind the writing of this dialogue is the desire
to transform (or, at any rate, to improve) political life, not to
escape from it (although it is acknowledged that the desire to escape
is an honorable one: the best sort of rulers greatly prefer the
contemplation of divine reality to the governance of the city). And if
we have any further doubts that Plato does take an interest in the
practical realm, we need only turn to Laws. A work of such
great detail and length about voting procedures, punishments,
education, legislation, and the oversight of public officials can only
have been produced by someone who wants to contribute something to the
improvement of the lives we lead in this sensible and imperfect realm.
Further evidence of Plato's interest in practical matters can be drawn
from his letters, if they are genuine. In most of them, he presents
himself as having a deep interest in educating (with the help of his
friend, Dion) the ruler of Syracuse, Dionysius II, and thus reforming
that city's politics.
Just as any attempt to understand Plato's views about forms must
confront the question whether his thoughts about them developed or
altered over time, so too our reading of him as a political philosopher
must be shaped by a willingness to consider the possibility that he
changed his mind. For example, on any plausible reading of
Republic, Plato evinces a deep antipathy to rule by the many.
Socrates tells his interlocutors that the only politics that should
engage them are those of the anti-democratic regime he depicts as the
paradigm of a good constitution. And yet in Laws, the Athenian
visitor proposes a detailed legislative framework for a city in which
non-philosophers (people who have never heard of the forms, and have
not been trained to understand them) are given considerable powers as
rulers. Plato would not have invested so much time in the creation of
this comprehensive and lengthy work, had he not believed that the
creation of a political community ruled by those who are
philosophically unenlightened is a project that deserves the support of
his readers. Has Plato changed his mind, then? Has he re-evaluated the
highly negative opinion he once held of those who are innocent of
philosophy? Did he at first think that the reform of existing Greek
cities, with all of their imperfections, is a waste of time—but
then decide that it is an endeavor of great value? (And if so, what led
him to change his mind?) Answers to these questions can be justified
only by careful attention to what he has his interlocutors say. But it
would be utterly implausible to suppose that these developmental
questions need not be raised, on the grounds that Republic and
Laws each has its own cast of characters, and that the two
works therefore cannot come into contradiction with each other.
According to this hypothesis (one that must be rejected), because it is
Socrates (not Plato) who is critical of democracy in Republic,
and because it is the Athenian visitor (not Plato) who recognizes the
merits of rule by the many in Laws, there is no possibility
that the two dialogues are in tension with each other. Against this
hypothesis, we should say: Since both Republic and
Laws are works in which Plato is trying to move his readers
towards certain conclusions, by having them reflect on certain
arguments—these dialogues are not barred from having this
feature by their use of interlocutors—it would be an evasion of
our responsibility as readers and students of Plato not to ask whether
what one of them advocates is compatible with what the other advocates.
If we answer that question negatively, we have some explaining to do:
what led to this change? Alternatively, if we conclude that the two
works are compatible, we must say why the appearance of conflict is
illusory.
Many contemporary scholars find it plausible that when Plato
embarked on his career as a philosophical writer, he composed, in
addition to his Apology of Socrates, a number of short ethical
dialogues that contain little or nothing in the way of positive
philosophical doctrine, but are mainly devoted to portraying the way in
which Socrates punctured the pretensions of his interlocutors and
forced them to realize that they are unable to offer satisfactory
definitions of the ethical terms they used, or satisfactory arguments
for their moral beliefs. According to this way of placing the dialogues
into a rough chronological order—associated especially with
Gregory Vlastos's name (see especially his Socrates Ironist and
Moral Philosopher, chapters 2 and 3)—Plato, at this point
of his career, was content to use his writings primarily for the
purpose of preserving the memory of Socrates and making plain the
superiority of his hero, in intellectual skill and moral seriousness,
to all of his contemporaries—particularly those among them who
claimed to be experts on religious, political, or moral matters. Into
this category of early dialogues (they are also sometimes called
“Socratic” dialogues, possibly without any intended chronological connotation) are placed: Charmides,
Crito, Euthydemus, Euthyphro,
Gorgias, Hippias Major, Hippias
Minor, Ion, Laches, Lysis, and
Protagoras, (Some scholars hold that we can tell which of
these come later during Plato's early period. For example, it is
sometimes said that Protagoras and Gorgias are later,
because of their greater length and philosophical complexity. Other
dialogues—for example, Charmides and Lysis—are 
thought not to be among Plato's earliest within this early group,
because in them Socrates appears to be playing a more active role in
shaping the progress of the dialogue: that is, he has more ideas of his
own.) In comparison with many of Plato's other dialogues, these
“Socratic” works contain little in the way of metaphysical,
epistemological, or methodological speculation, and they therefore fit
well with the way Socrates characterizes himself in Plato's
Apology: as a man who leaves investigations of high
falutin’ matters (which are “in the sky and below the
earth”) to wiser heads, and confines all of his investigations to
the question how one should live one's life. Aristotle describes
Socrates as someone whose interests were restricted to only one branch
of philosophy—the realm of the ethical; and he also says that
he was in the habit of asking definitional questions to which he
himself lacked answers (Metaphysics 987b1, Sophistical
Refutations 183b7). That testimony gives added weight to the
widely accepted hypothesis that there is a group of dialogues—the
ones mentioned above as his early works, whether or not they were all written early in Plato's writing career—in which Plato used
the dialogue form as a way of portraying the philosophical activities
of the historical Socrates (although, of course, he might also have
used them in other ways as well—for example to suggest and
begin to explore philosophical difficulties raised by them).
But at a certain point—so says this hypothesis about the
chronology of the dialogues—Plato began to use his works to
advance ideas that were his own creations rather than those of
Socrates, although he continued to use the name “Socrates”
for the interlocutor who presented and argued for these new ideas. The
speaker called “Socrates” now begins to move beyond and
depart from the historical Socrates: he has views about the methodology
that should be used by philosophers (a methodology borrowed from
mathematics), and he argues for the immortality of the soul and the
existence and importance of the forms of beauty, justice, goodness, and
the like. (By contrast, in Apology Socrates says that no one
knows what becomes of us after we die.) Phaedo is often said
to be the dialogue in which Plato first comes into his own as a
philosopher who is moving far beyond the ideas of his teacher (though
it is also commonly said that we see a new methodological
sophistication and a greater interest in mathematical knowledge in
Meno). Having completed all of the dialogues that, according
to this hypothesis, we characterize as early, Plato widened the range
of topics to be explored in his writings (no longer confining himself
to ethics), and placed the theory of forms (and related ideas about
language, knowledge, and love) at the center of his thinking. In these
works of his “middle” period—for example, in
Phaedo, Cratylus, Symposium,
Republic, and Phaedrus—there is both a change
of emphasis and of doctrine. The focus is no longer on ridding
ourselves of false ideas and self-deceit; rather, we are asked to
accept (however tentatively) a radical new conception of ourselves (now
divided into three parts), our world—or rather, our two 
worlds—and our need to negotiate between them. Definitions of the most
important virtue terms are finally proposed in Republic (the
search for them in some of the early dialogues having been
unsuccessful): Book I of this dialogue is a portrait of how the
historical Socrates might have handled the search for a definition of
justice, and the rest of the dialogue shows how the new ideas and tools
discovered by Plato can complete the project that his teacher was
unable to finish. Plato continues to use a figure called
“Socrates” as his principal interlocutor, and in this way
he creates a sense of continuity between the methods, insights, and
ideals of the historical Socrates and the new Socrates who has now
become a vehicle for the articulation of his own new philosophical outlook.
In doing so, he acknowledges his intellectual debt to his teacher and
appropriates for his own purposes the extraordinary prestige of the man
who was the wisest of his time.
This hypothesis about the chronology of Plato's writings has a third
component: it does not place his works into either of only two
categories—the early or “Socratic” dialogues, and
all the rest—but works instead with a threefold division of
early, middle, and late. That is because, following ancient testimony,
it has become a widely accepted assumption that Laws is one of
Plato's last works, and further that this dialogue shares a great many
stylistic affinities with a small group of others: Sophist,
Statesman, Timaeus, Critias, and
Philebus. These five dialogues together with Laws are
generally agreed to be his late works, because they have much more in
common with each other, when one counts certain stylistic features
apparent only to readers of Plato's Greek, than with any of Plato's
other works. (Computer counts have aided these stylometric studies, but
the isolation of a group of six dialogues by means of their stylistic
commonalities was recognized in the nineteenth century.)
It is not at all clear whether there are one or more
philosophical affinities among this group of six 
dialogues—that is, whether the philosophy they contain is sharply
different from that of all of the other dialogues. Plato does nothing
to encourage the reader to view these works as a distinctive and
separate component of his thinking. On the contrary, he links
Sophist with Theaetetus (the conversations they
present have a largely overlapping cast of characters, and take place
on successive days) no less than Sophist and
Statesman. Sophist contains, in its opening pages, a
reference to the conversation of Parmenides—and
perhaps Plato is thus signaling to his readers that they should bring
to bear on Sophist the lessons that are to be drawn from
Parmenides. Similarly, Timaeus opens with a reminder
of some of the principal ethical and political doctrines of Republic. It could be
argued, of course, that when one looks beyond these stage-setting
devices, one finds significant philosophical changes in the six late
dialogues, setting this group off from all that preceded them. But
there is no consensus that they should be read in this way. Resolving
this issue requires intensive study of the content of Plato's works.
So, although it is widely accepted that the six dialogues mentioned
above belong to Plato's latest period, there is, as yet, no agreement
among students of Plato that these six form a distinctive stage in his
philosophical development.
In fact, it remains a matter of dispute whether the division of
Plato's works into three periods—early, middle, late—does
correctly indicate the order of composition, and whether it is a
useful tool for the understanding of his thought (See Cooper 1997,
vii–xxvii). Of course, it would be wildly implausible to suppose
that Plato's writing career began with such complex works
as Laws, Parmenides,
Phaedrus, or Republic. In light of widely accepted
assumptions about how most philosophical minds develop, it is likely
that when Plato started writing philosophical works some of the shorter
and simpler dialogues were the ones he composed: Laches, or
Crito, or Ion (for example). (Similarly,
Apology does not advance a complex philosophical agenda or
presuppose an earlier body of work; so that too is likely to have been
composed near the beginning of Plato's writing career.) Even so, there
is no good reason to eliminate the hypothesis that throughout much of
his life Plato devoted himself to writing two sorts of dialogues at the
same time, moving back and forth between them as he aged: on the one
hand, introductory works whose primary purpose is to show readers the
difficulty of apparently simple philosophical problems, and thereby to
rid them of their pretensions and false beliefs; and on the other hand,
works filled with more substantive philosophical theories supported by
elaborate argumentation. Moreover, one could point to features of many
of the “Socratic” dialogues that would justify putting
them in the latter category, even though the argumentation does not
concern metaphysics or methodology or invoke mathematics—Gorgias, 
Protagoras, Lysis,
Euthydemus, Hippias Major among them.
Plato makes it clear that both of these processes, one preceding the
other, must be part of one's philosophical education. One of his
deepest methodological convictions (affirmed in Meno,
Theaetetus, and Sophist) is that in order to make
intellectual progress we must recognize that knowledge cannot be
acquired by passively receiving it from others: rather, we must work
our way through problems and assess the merits of competing theories
with an independent mind. Accordingly, some of his dialogues are
primarily devices for breaking down the reader's complacency, and that
is why it is essential that they come to no positive conclusions;
others are contributions to theory-construction, and are therefore best
absorbed by those who have already passed through the first stage of
philosophical development. We should not assume that Plato could have
written the preparatory dialogues only at the earliest stage of his
career. Although he may well have begun his writing career by taking up
that sort of project, he may have continued writing these
“negative” works at later stages, at the same time that he
was composing his theory-constructing dialogues. For example although
both Euthydemus and Charmides are widely assumed to
be early dialogues, they might have been written around the same time
as Symposium and Republic, which are generally
assumed to be compositions of his middle period—or even
later.
No doubt, some of the works widely considered to be early really are
such. But it is an open question which and how many of them are. At any
rate, it is clear that Plato continued to write in a
“Socratic” and “negative” vein even after he
was well beyond the earliest stages of his career: Theaetetus
features a Socrates who is even more insistent upon his ignorance than
are the dramatic representations of Socrates in briefer and
philosophically less complex works that are reasonably assumed to be
early; and like many of those early works, Theaetetus seeks
but does not find the answer to the “what is it?” question
that it relentlessly pursues—“What is knowledge?”
Similarly, Parmenides, though certainly not an early dialogue,
is a work whose principal aim is to puzzle the reader by the
presentation of arguments for apparently contradictory conclusions;
since it does not tell us how it is possible to accept all of those
conclusions, its principal effect on the reader is similar to that of
dialogues (many of them no doubt early) that reach only negative
conclusions. Plato uses this educational device—provoking the
reader through the presentation of opposed arguments, and leaving the
contradiction unresolved—in Protagoras (often
considered an early dialogue) as well. So it is clear that even after
he was well beyond the earliest stages of his thinking, he continued to
assign himself the project of writing works whose principal aim is the
presentation of unresolved difficulties. (And, just as we should
recognize that puzzling the reader continues to be his aim even in
later works, so too we should not overlook the fact that there is some
substantive theory-construction in the ethical works that are simple
enough to have been early compositions: Ion, for example,
affirms a theory of poetic inspiration; and Crito sets out the
conditions under which a citizen acquires an obligation to obey civic
commands. Neither ends in failure.)
If we are justified in taking Socrates' speech in Plato's
Apology to constitute reliable evidence about what the
historical Socrates was like, then whatever we find in Plato's other
works that is of a piece with that speech can also be safely attributed
to Socrates. So understood, Socrates was a moralist but (unlike Plato)
not a metaphysician or epistemologist or cosmologist. That fits with
Aristotle's testimony, and Plato's way of choosing the dominant speaker
of his dialogues gives further support to this way of distinguishing
between him and Socrates. The number of dialogues that are dominated by
a Socrates who is spinning out elaborate philosophical doctrines is
remarkably small: Phaedo, Republic,
Phaedrus, and Philebus. All of them are dominated by
ethical issues: whether to fear death, whether to be just, whom to
love, the place of pleasure. Evidently, Plato thinks that it is
appropriate to make Socrates the major speaker in a dialogue that is
filled with positive content only when the topics explored in that work
primarily have to do with the ethical life of the individual. (The
political aspects of Republic are explicitly said to serve the
larger question whether any individual, no matter what his
circumstances, should be just.) When the doctrines he wishes to present
systematically become primarily metaphysical, he turns to a visitor
from Elea (Sophist, Statesman); when they become
cosmological, he turns to Timaeus; when they become constitutional, he
turns, in Laws, to a visitor from Athens (and he then
eliminates Socrates entirely). In effect, Plato is showing us: although
he owes a great deal to the ethical insights of Socrates, as well as to
his method of puncturing the intellectual pretensions of his
interlocutors by leading them into contradiction, he thinks he should
not put into the mouth of his teacher too elaborate an exploration of
ontological, or cosmological, or political themes, because Socrates
refrained from entering these domains. This may be part of the
explanation why he has Socrates put into the mouth of the personified
Laws of Athens the theory advanced in Crito, which reaches the
conclusion that it would be unjust for him to escape from prison.
Perhaps Plato is indicating, at the point where these speakers enter
the dialogue, that none of what is said here is in any way derived from
or inspired by the conversation of Socrates.
Just as we should reject the idea that Plato must have made a
decision, at a fairly early point in his career, no longer to write one
kind of dialogue (negative, destructive, preparatory) and to write only
works of elaborate theory-construction; so we should also question
whether he went through an early stage during which he refrained from
introducing into his works any of his own ideas (if he had any), but
was content to play the role of a faithful portraitist, representing to
his readers the life and thought of Socrates. It is unrealistic to
suppose that someone as original and creative as Plato, who probably
began to write dialogues somewhere in his thirties (he was around 28
when Socrates was killed), would have started his compositions with no
ideas of his own, or, having such ideas, would have decided to suppress
them, for some period of time, allowing himself to think for himself
only later. (What would have led to such a decision?) We should instead
treat the moves made in the dialogues, even those that are likely to be
early, as Platonic inventions—derived, no doubt, by Plato's
reflections on and transformations of the key themes of Socrates that
he attributes to Socrates in Apology. That speech indicates,
for example, that the kind of religiosity exhibited by Socrates was
unorthodox and likely to give offense or lead to misunderstanding. It
would be implausible to suppose that Plato simply concocted the idea
that Socrates followed a divine sign, especially because Xenophon too attributes this to his Socrates. But what of the various
philosophical moves rehearsed in Euthyphro—the
dialogue in which Socrates searches, unsuccessfully, for an
understanding of what piety is? We have no good reason to think that in
writing this work Plato adopted the role of a mere recording device, or
something close to it (changing a word here and there, but for the most
part simply recalling what he heard Socrates say, as he made his way to
court). It is more likely that Plato, having been inspired by the
unorthodoxy of Socrates' conception of piety, developed, on his own, a
series of questions and answers designed to show his readers how
difficult it is to reach an understanding of the central concept that
Socrates' fellow citizens relied upon when they condemned him to death.
The idea that it is important to search for definitions may have been
Socratic in origin. (After all, Aristotle attributes this much to
Socrates.) But the twists and turns of the arguments in
Euthyphro and other dialogues that search for definitions are
more likely to be the products of Plato's mind than the content of
any conversations that really took place.
It is equally unrealistic to suppose that when Plato embarked on his
career as a writer, he made a conscious decision to put all of the
compositions that he would henceforth compose for a general reading
public (with the exception of Apology) in the form of a
dialogue. If the question, “why did Plato write
dialogues?”, which many of his readers are tempted to ask,
pre-supposes that there must have been some such once-and-for-all
decision, then it is poorly posed. It makes better sense to break that
question apart into many little ones: better to ask, “Why did
Plato write this particular work (for example:
Protagoras, or Republic, or Symposium, or
Laws) in the form of a dialogue—and that one
(Timaeus, say) mostly in the form of a long and
rhetorically elaborate single speech?” than to ask why he decided
to adopt the dialogue form.
The best way to form a reasonable conjecture about why Plato wrote
any given work in the form of a dialogue is to ask: what would be lost,
were one to attempt to re-write this work in a way that eliminated the
give-and-take of interchange, stripped the characters of their
personality and social markers, and transformed the result into
something that comes straight from the mouth of its author? This is
often a question that will be easy to answer, but the answer might vary
greatly from one dialogue to another. In pursuing this strategy, we
must not rule out the possibility that some of Plato's reasons for
writing this or that work in the form of a dialogue will also be his
reason for doing so in other cases—perhaps some of his reasons,
so far as we can guess at them, will be present in all other cases. For
example, the use of character and conversation allows an author to
enliven his work, to awaken the interest of his readership, and
therefore to reach a wider audience. The enormous appeal of Plato's
writings is in part a result of their dramatic composition. Even
treatise-like compositions—Timaeus and Laws,
for example—improve in readability because of their
conversational frame. Furthermore, the dialogue form allows Plato's
evident interest in pedagogical questions (how is it possible to learn?
what is the best way to learn? from what sort of person can we learn?
what sort of person is in a position to learn?) to be pursued not only
in the content of his compositions but also in their form. Even in
Laws such questions are not far from Plato's mind, as he
demonstrates, through the dialogue form, how it is possible for the
citizens of Athens, Sparta, and Crete to learn from each other by
adapting and improving upon each other's social and political
institutions.
In some of his works, it is evident that one of Plato's goals is to
create a sense of puzzlement among his readers, and that the dialogue
form is being used for this purpose. The Parmenides is perhaps
the clearest example of such a work, because here Plato relentlessly
rubs his readers' faces in a baffling series of unresolved puzzles and
apparent contradictions. But several of his other works also have this
character, though to a smaller degree: for example, Protagoras
(can virtue be taught?), Hippias Minor (is voluntary
wrongdoing better than involuntary wrongdoing?), and portions of
Meno (are some people virtuous because of divine
inspiration?). Just as someone who encounters Socrates in conversation
should sometimes be puzzled about whether he means what he says (or
whether he is instead speaking ironically), so Plato sometimes uses the
dialogue form to create in his readers a similar sense of discomfort
about what he means and what we ought to infer from the arguments that
have been presented to us. But Socrates does not always speak
ironically, and similarly Plato's dialogues do not always aim
at creating a sense of bafflement about what we are to think about the
subject under discussion. There is no mechanical rule for discovering
how best to read a dialogue, no interpretive strategy that applies
equally well to all of his works. We will best understand Plato's works
and profit most from our reading of them if we recognize their great
diversity of styles and adapt our way of reading accordingly. Rather
than impose on our reading of Plato a uniform expectation of what he
must be doing (because he has done such a thing elsewhere), we should
bring to each dialogue a receptivity to what is unique to it.
That would be the most fitting reaction to the artistry in his
philosophy.