For whom did Plato write? Who was his readership? A very good survey
of this topic is Yunis 2007 from which I would like to quote the
following illuminating passage: “before Plato, philosophers
treated arcane subjects in technical treatises that had no appeal
outside small circles of experts. These writings, ‘on
nature’, ‘on truth’, ‘on being’ and so
on, mostly in prose, some in verse, were demonstrative, not protreptic.
Plato, on the other hand, broke away from the experts and sought to
treat ethical problems of universal relevance and to make philosophy
accessible to the public” (13). Other scholars, such as Morgan
(2003), have also argued that Plato addressed in his writings both
philosophical and non-philosophical audiences.
It is true that in the Republic Plato has the following
advice for philosophers: “like someone who takes refuge under a
little wall from a storm of dust or hail driven by the wind, the
philosopher—seeing others filled with lawlessness—is
satisfied if he can somehow lead his present life free from injustice
and impious acts and depart from it with good hope, blameless and
content” (496d–e). He was certainly very bitter about
Socrates’ fate. In his controversial interpretation Strauss (1964)
argues that in Plato’s view the philosopher should stay
disconnected from society. This interpretation is too extreme. Plato
did not abandon Socrates’ credo, that the philosopher has a duty towards
his fellow-citizens who do not devote their lives to philosophy. For
him philosophy has a civic dimension. The one who makes it outside the
cave should not forget about those who are still down there and believe
that the shadows they see there are real beings. The philosopher should
try to transmit his knowledge and his wisdom to the others, and he
knows that he has a difficult mission. But Plato was not willing to go
as far as Socrates did. He preferred to address the public at large
through his written dialogues rather than conducting dialogues in the
agora. He did not write abstruse philosophical treatises but engaging
philosophical dialogues meant to appeal to a less philosophically
inclined audience. The dialogues are, most of the time, prefaced by a
sort of mise en scène in which the reader learns who
the participants to the dialogue are, when, where and how they
presently met, and what made them start their dialogue. The
participants are historical and fictional characters. Whether
historical or fictional, they meet in historical or plausible settings,
and the prefatory mises en scène contain only some
incidental anachronisms. Plato wanted his dialogues to look like
genuine, spontaneous dialogues accurately preserved. How much of these
stories and dialogues is fictional? It is hard to tell, but he surely
invented a great deal of them. References to traditional myths and
mythical characters occur throughout the dialogues. However, starting
with the Protagoras and Gorgias, which are usually
regarded as the last of his early writings, Plato begins to season his
dialogues with self-contained, fantastical narratives that we usually
label his ‘myths’. His myths are meant, among other things,
to make philosophy more accessible.
There are in Plato identifiable traditional myths, such as the story
of Gyges (Republic 359d–360b), the myth of Phaethon
(Timaeus 22c7) or that of the Amazons (Laws 804e4).
Sometimes he modifies them, to a greater or lesser extent, while other
times he combines them—this is the case, for instance, of the
Noble Lie (Republic 414b–415d), which is a combination
of the Cadmeian myth of autochthony and the Hesiodic myth of
ages. There are also in Plato myths that are his own, such as the myth
of Er (Republic 621b8) or the myth of Atlantis
(Timaeus 26e4). Many of the myths Plato invented feature
characters and motifs taken from traditional mythology (such as the
Isles of the Blessed or the judgment after death), and sometimes it is
difficult to distinguish his own mythological motifs from the
traditional ones. The majority of the myths he invents preface or
follow a philosophical argument: the
Gorgias myth (523a–527a), the myth of the androgyne
(Symposium 189d–193d), the Phaedo myth
(107c–115a), the myth of Er (Republic 614a–621d),
the myth of the winged soul (Phaedrus 246a–249d), the
myth of Theuth (Phaedrus 274c–275e), the cosmological
myth of the Statesman (268–274e), the Atlantis myth
(Timaeus 21e–26d, Critias), the Laws
myth (903b–905b).
Plato refers sometimes to the myths he uses, whether traditional or
his own, as muthoi (for an overview of all the loci
where the word muthos occurs in Plato see Brisson 1998
(141ff.)). However, muthos is not an exclusive label. For
instance: the myth of Theuth in the Phaedrus (274c1) is called
an akoē (a “thing heard”,
“report”, “story”); the myth of Cronus is
called a phēmē (“oracle”,
“tradition”, “rumour”) in the Laws
(713c2) and a muthos in the Statesman (272d5, 274e1,
275b1); and the myth of Boreas at the beginning of the
Phaedrus is called both muthologēma (229c5) and
logos (d2).
The myths Plato invents, as well as the traditional myths he uses, are
narratives that are non-falsifiable, for they depict particular
beings, deeds, places or events that are beyond our experience: the
gods, the daemons, the heroes, the life of soul after death, the
distant past, etc. Myths are also fantastical, but they are not
inherently irrational and they are not targeted at the irrational
parts of the soul. Kahn (1996, 66–7) argues that between
Plato’s “otherworldly vision” and “the values
of Greek society in the fifth and fourth centuries BC” was a
“radical discrepancy”. In that society, Plato’s
metaphysical vision seemed “almost grotesquely out of
place”. This discrepancy, claims Kahn, “is one explanation
for Plato’s use of myth: myth provides the necessary literary
distancing that permits Plato to articulate his
out–of–place vision of meaning and truth.”
The Cave, the narrative that occurs in the Republic
(514a–517a), is a fantastical story, but it does not deal
explicitly with the beyond (the distant past, life after death etc.),
and is thus different from the traditional myths Plato uses and the
myths he invents. Strictly speaking, the Cave is an analogy, not a
myth. Also in the Republic, Socrates says that until
philosophers take control of a city “the politeia whose story we
are telling in words (muthologein) will not achieve its
fulfillment in practice” (501e2–5; translated by Rowe (1999,
268)). The construction of the ideal city may be called a
“myth” in the sense that it depicts an imaginary polis (cf.
420c2: “We imagine the happy state”). In the
Phaedrus (237a9, 241e8) the word muthos is used to
name “the rhetorical exercise which Socrates carries out”
(Brisson 1998, 144), but this seems to be a loose usage of the
word.
Most (2012) argues that there are eight main features of the Platonic
myth. (a) Myths are a monologue, which those listening do not
interrupt; (b) they are told by an older speaker to younger listeners;
(c) they “go back to older, explicitly indicated or implied,
real or fictional oral sources” (17); (d) they cannot be
empirically verified; (e) their authority derive from tradition, and
“for this reason they are not subject to rational examination by
the audience” (18); (f) they have a psychologic effect:
pleasure, or a motivating impulse to perform an action “capable
of surpassing any form of rational persuasion” (18); (g) they
are descriptive or narrative; (h) they precede or follow a dialectical
exposition. Most acknowledges that these eight features are not
completely uncontroversial, and that there are occasional exceptions;
but applied flexibly, they allow us to establish a corpus of at least
fourteen Platonic myths in the Phaedo, Gorgias,
Protagoras, Meno, Phaedrus,
Symposium, Republic X, Statesman,
Timaeus, Critias and Laws IV. The first
seven features “are thoroughly typical of the traditional myths
which were found in the oral culture of ancient Greece and which Plato
himself often describes and indeed vigorously criticizes”
(19).
Dorion (2012) argues that the Oracle story in Plato’s Apology
has all these eight features of the Platonic myth discussed by Most
(2012). Dorion concludes that the Oracle story is not only a Platonic
fiction, but also a Platonic myth, more specifically: a myth of
origin. Who invented the examination of the opinions of others by the
means of elenchus? Aristotle (see Sophistical
Refutations 172a30–35 and Rhetoric 1354a3–7) thought
that the practice of refutation is, as Dorion puts it, “lost in
the mists of time and that it is hence vain to seek an exact origin of
it” (433). Plato, however, attempts to convince us that the
dialectical elenchus “were a form of argumentation that
Socrates began to practice spontaneously as soon as he learned of the
Oracle” (433); thus, Plato confers to it a divine origin; in the
Charmides he does the same when he makes Socrates say that he
learned an incantation (a metaphor for the elenchus) from
Zalmoxis; see also the Philebus 16c (on
Socrates mythologikos see also Miller (2011)).
We have a comprehensive book about the people of Plato: Nails (2002);
now we also have one about the animals of Plato: Bell and Naas
(2015). Anyone interested in myth, metaphor, and on how people and
animals are intertwined in Plato would be rewarded by consulting
it. Here is a quotation from the editors’ introduction,
“Plato’s Menagerie”: “Animal images, examples,
analogies, myths, or fables are used in almost every one of
Plato’s dialogues to help characterize, delimit, and define many
of the dialogues’ most important figures and themes. They are used to
portray not just Socrates [compared to a gadfly, horse, swan, snake,
stork, fawn, and torpedo ray] but many other characters in the
dialogues, from the wolfish Thrasymachus of the Republic to
the venerable racehorse Parmenides of the Parmenides. Even
more, animals are used throughout the dialogues to develop some of
Plato’s most important political or philosophical ideas. […] By
our reckoning, there is but a single dialogue (the Crito)
that does not contain any obvious reference to animals, while most
dialogues have many. What is more, throughout Plato’s dialogues
the activity or enterprise of philosophy itself is often compared to a
hunt, where the interlocutors are the hunters and the object of the
dialogue’s search—ideas of justice, beauty, courage, piety, or
friendship—their elusive animal prey” (Bell and Naas
(2015, 1–2)).
For Plato we should live according to what reason is able to deduce
from what we regard as reliable evidence. This is what real
philosophers, like Socrates, do. But the non-philosophers are reluctant
to ground their lives on logic and arguments. They have to be
persuaded. One means of persuasion is myth. Myth inculcates beliefs. It
is efficient in making the less philosophically inclined, as well as
children (cf. Republic 377a ff.), believe noble things.
In the Republic the Noble Lie is supposed to make the
citizens of Callipolis care more for their city. Schofield (2009)
argues that the guards, having to do philosophy from their youth, may
eventually find philosophizing “more attractive than doing their
patriotic duty” (115). Philosophy, claims Schofield, provides the
guards with knowledge, not with love and devotion for their city. The
Noble Lie is supposed to engender in them devotion for their city and
instill in them the belief that they should “invest their best
energies into promoting what they judge to be the city’s best
interests” (113). The preambles to a number of laws in the
Laws that are meant to be taken as exhortations to the laws in
question and that contain elements of traditional mythology (see 790c3,
812a2, 841c6) may also be taken as “noble lies”.
Plato’s eschatological myths are not complete lies. There is
some truth in them. In the Phaedo the statement “The
soul is immortal” is presented as following logically from
various premises Socrates and his interlocutors consider acceptable
(cf. 106b–107a). After the final argument for immortality
(102a–107b), Cebes admits that he has no further objections to,
nor doubts about, Socrates’ arguments. But Simmias confesses
that he still retains some doubt (107a–b), and then Socrates
tells them an eschatological myth. The myth does not provide evidence
that the soul is immortal. It assumes that the soul is immortal and so
it may be said that it is not entirely false. The myth also claims
that there is justice in the afterlife and Socrates hopes that the
myth will convince one to believe that the soul is immortal and that
there is justice in the afterlife. “I think”, says
Socrates, that “it is fitting for a man to risk the
belief—for the risk is a noble one—that this, or something
like this, is true about our souls and their dwelling places”
(114d–e). (Edmonds (2004) offers a interesting analysis of the
final myth of Phaedo, Aristophanes’ Frogs and the
funerary gold leaves, or “tablets”, that have been found
in Greek tombs). At the end of the myth of Er (the eschatological myth
of the Republic) Socrates says that the myth “would
save us, if we were persuaded by it” (621b). Myth represents a
sort of back-up: if one fails to be persuaded by arguments to change
one’s life, one may still be persuaded by a good myth. Myth, as
it is claimed in the Laws, may be needed to
“charm” one “into agreement” (903b) when
philosophy fails to do so.
Sedley (2009) argues that the eschatological myth of the
Gorgias is best taken as an allegory of “moral malaise
and reform in our present life” (68) and Halliwell (2007) that
the myth of Er may be read as an allegory of life in this
world. Gonzales (2012) claims that the myth of Er offers a
“spectacle [that] is, in the words of the myth itself, pitiful,
comic and bewildering” (259). Thus, he argues, “what
generally characterizes human life according to the myth is a
fundamental opacity” (272); which means that the myth
is not actually a dramatization of the philosophical reasoning that
unfolds in the Republic, as one might have expected, but of
everything that “such reasoning cannot penetrate and master,
everything that stubbornly remains dark and irrational: embodiment,
chance, character, carelessness, and forgetfulness, as well as the
inherent complexity and diversity of the factors that define a life
and that must be balanced in order to achieve a good life”
(272). The myth blurs the boundary between this world and the other.
To believe that soul is immortal and that we should practice justice
in all circumstances, Gonzales argues, we have to be persuaded by what
Socrates says, not by the myth of Er. Unlike the eschatological myths
of the Gorgias and Phaedo, the final myth of the
Republic illustrates rather “everything in this world
that opposes the realization of the philosophical ideal. If the other
myths offer the philosopher a form of escapism, the myth of Er is his
nightmare” (277, n. 36).
The philosopher should share his philosophy with others. But since
others may sometimes not follow his arguments, Plato is ready to
provide whatever it takes—an image, a simile, or a
myth—that will help them grasp what the argument failed to tell
them. The myth—just like an image, or analogy—may be a good
teaching tool. Myth can embody in its narrative an abstract
philosophical doctrine. In the Phaedo, Plato develops the
so-called theory of recollection (72e–78b). The theory is there
expounded in rather abstract terms. The eschatological myth of the
Phaedo depicts the fate of souls in the other world, but it
does not “dramatize” the theory of recollection. The
Phaedrus myth of the winged soul, however, does. In it we are
told how the soul travels in the heavens before reincarnation, attempts
to gaze on true reality, forgets what it saw in the heavens once
reincarnated, and then recalls the eternal forms it saw in the heavens
when looking at their perceptible embodiments. The Phaedrus
myth does not provide any proofs or evidence to support the theory of
recollection. It simply assumes this theory to be true and provides
(among other things) an “adaptation” of it. Since this
theory the myth embodies is, for Plato, true, the myth has (pace Plato)
a measure of truth in it, although its many fantastical details may
lead one astray if taken literally. Among other things, the fantastical
narrative of the myth helps the less philosophically inclined grasp the
main point of Plato’s theory of recollection, namely that
“knowledge is recollection”.
The cosmology of the Timaeus is a complex and ample
construction, involving a divine maker (assisted by a group of less
powerful gods), who creates the cosmos out of a given material
(dominated by an inner impulse towards disorder) and according to an
intelligible model. The cosmology as a whole is called both an
eikōs muthos (29d, 59c, 68d) and an eikōs
logos (30b, 48d, 53d, 55d, 56a, 57d, 90e). The expression
eikōs muthos has been translated as ‘probable
tale’ (Jowett), ‘likely story’ (Cornford),
‘likely tale’ (Zeyl). The standard interpretation is
promoted by, among others, Cornford (1937, 31ff.). The Timaeus
cosmology, Cornford argues, is a muthos because it is cast in
the form of a narration, not as a piece-by-piece analysis. But also,
and mainly, because its object, namely the universe, is always in a
process of becoming and cannot be really known. Brisson (1998, ch. 13)
offers a different solution, but along the same lines. The cosmology,
Brisson argues, is a non-verifiable discourse about the perceptible
universe before and during its creation. In other words: the cosmology
is an eikōs muthos because it is about what happens to an
eikōn before, and during, its creation, when everything
is so fluid that it cannot be really known. The standard alternative is
to say that the problem lies in the cosmologist, not in the object of
his cosmology. It is not that the universe is so unstable so that it
cannot be really known. It is that we fail to provide an exact and
consistent description of it. A proponent of this view is Taylor (1928,
59). Rowe (2003) has argued that the emphasis at 29d2 is on the word
eikōs, not muthos, and that here muthos
is used primarily as a substitute for logos without its
typical opposition to that term (a view also held by Vlastos (1939,
380–3)). Burnyeat (2009) argues that this cosmology is an attempt to
disclose the rationality of the cosmos, namely the Demiurge’s
reasons for making it thus and so. The word eikōs (a
participial form of the verb eoika, “to be like”)
is, argues Burnyeat, usually translated as “probable”;
but—as textual evidence from Homer to Plato proves—it also
means “appropriate”, “fitting”,
“fair”, “natural”, “reasonable”.
Since the cosmology reveals what is reasonable in the
eikōn made by the Demiurge, it may rightly be called
eikōs, “reasonable”. The Demiurge’s
reasoning, however, is practical, not theoretical. The Demiurge,
Burnyeat claims, works with given materials, and when he creates the
cosmos, he does not have a free choice, but has to adjust his plans to
them. Although we know that the Demiurge is supremely benevolent
towards his creation, none of us could be certain of his practical
reasons for framing the cosmos the way he did. That is why anyone
aiming at disclosing them cannot but come up with
“probable” answers. Plato’s cosmology is then
eikōs in the two senses of the word, for it is both
“reasonable” and “probable”. But why does Plato
call it a muthos? Because, Burnyeat argues, the
Timaeus cosmology is also a theogony (for the created cosmos
is for Plato a god), and this shows Plato’s intention to overcome
the traditional opposition between muthos and
logos.
Timaeus speaks about the Demiurge’s practical reasoning for
creating the cosmos as he did. No cosmologist can deduce these reasons
from various premises commonly accepted. He has to imagine them, but
they are neither fantastical, nor sophistic. The cosmologist exercises
his imagination under some constraints. He has to come up with
reasonable and coherent conjectures. And in good Socratic and Platonic
tradition, he has to test them with others. This is what Timaeus does.
He expounds his cosmology in front of other philosophers, whom he calls
kritai, “judges” (29d1). They are highly skilled
and experienced philosophers: Socrates, Critias and Hermocrates and at
the beginning of the Critias, the sequel to the
Timaeus, they express their admiration for Timaeus’
cosmological account (107a). One may say that Timaeus’ account
has been peer-reviewed. The judges, however, says Plato, have to be
tolerant, for in this field one cannot provide more than conjectures.
Timaeus’ cosmological discourse is not aimed at persuading a less
philosophically inclined audience to change their lives. It may be
argued that its creationist scenario was meant to make the difficult
topic of the genesis of the realm of becoming more accessible. In the
Philebus, in a tight dialectical conversation, the genesis of
the realm of becoming is explained in abstract terms (the unlimited,
limit, being that is mixed and generated out of those two; and the
cause of this mixture and generation, 27b–c). But the
Timaeus aims at encompassing more than the Philebus.
It aims not only at revealing the ultimate ontological principles
(accessible to human reason, cf. 53d), and at explaining how their
interaction brings forth the world of becoming, but also at disclosing,
within a teleological framework, the reasons for which the cosmos was
created the way it is. These reasons are to be imagined because
imagination has to fill in the gaps that reason leaves in this attempt
to disclose the reasons for which the cosmos was created the way it
is.
In the Protagoras (324d) a distinction is made between
muthos and logos, where muthos appears to
refer to a story and logos to an argument. This distinction
seems to be echoed in the Theaetetus and the
Sophist. In the Theaetetus Socrates discusses
Protagoras’ main doctrine and refers to it as “the
muthos of Protagoras” (164d9) (in the same line
Socrates also calls Theaetetus’ defence of the identity of knowledge
and perception a muthos). And later on, at 156c4, Socrates
calls a muthos the teaching according to which active and
passive motions generate perception and perceived objects. In the
Sophist, the Visitor from Elea tells his interlocutors that
Xenophanes, Parmenides and other Eleatic, Ionian (Heraclitus included)
and Sicilian philosophers “appear to me to tell us a myth, as if
we were children” (242c8; see also c–e). By calling all
those philosophical doctrines muthoi Plato does not claim
that they are myths proper, but that they are, or appear to be,
non-argumentative. In the Republic Plato is fairly hostile to
particular traditional myths (but he claims that there are two kinds
of logoi, one true and the other false, and that
the muthoi we tell children “are false, on the whole,
though they have some truth in them”, 377a; for a discussion of
allegory and myth in Plato’s Republic see Lear
(2006)). Halliwell (2011) claims that Book X of the Republic
“offers not a simple repudiation of the best poets but a
complicated counterpoint in which resistance and attraction to their
work are intertwined, a counterpoint which (among other things)
explores the problem of whether, and in what sense, it might be
possible to be a ‘philosophical lover’ of poetry”
(244).
In many dialogues he condemns the use of images in knowing things and
claims that true philosophical knowledge should avoid images. He would
have had strong reasons for avoiding the use of myths: they are not
argumentative and they are extremely visual (especially those he
invented, which contain so many visual details as if he would have
given instructions to an illustrator). But he didn’t. He wanted
to persuade and/or teach a wider audience, so he had to make a
compromise. Sometimes, however, he seems to interweave philosophy with
myth to a degree that was not required by persuading and/or teaching a
non-philosophical audience. The eschatological myths of
the Gorgias, Phaedo and Republic, for
instance, are tightly bound with the philosophical arguments of those
dialogues (cf. Annas 1982); and the eschatological myth of the
Phaedo “picks one by one the programmatic remarks about
teleological science from earlier on in the dialogue, and sketches ways
in which their proposals can be fulfilled” (Sedley 1990, 381).
Some other times he uses myth as a supplement to philosophical
discourse (cf. Kahn (2009) who argues that in the myth of the
Statesman Plato makes a doctrinal contribution to his
political philosophy; Naas (2018, Chapter 2) offers an interesting
interpretation of this myth, and (Chapter 3) discusses Michel
Foucault’s reading of it)). One time, in the Timaeus, Plato
appears to overcome the opposition between muthos and
logos: human reason has limits, and when it reaches them it
has to rely on myth (arguably, that also happen in
the Symposium; for a very close reading of how
Diotima’s speech interacts with Aristophanes’ myth of the
androgyne see Hyland (2015)).
“On the less radical version, the idea will be that
the telling of stories is a necessary adjunct to, or extension of,
philosophical argument, one which recognizes our human limitations,
and—perhaps—the fact that our natures combine irrational
elements with the rational” (Rowe 1999, 265). On a more radical
interpretation, “the distinction between ‘the
philosophical’ and ‘the mythical’ will—at one
level—virtually disappear” (265). If we take into
account that Plato chose to express his thoughts through a narrative
form, namely that of the dialogue (further enveloped in fictional
mises en scène), we may say that the “use of a
fictional narrative form (the dialogue) will mean that any conclusions
reached, by whatever method (including ‘rational
argument’), may themselves be treated as having the status of a
kind of ‘myth’” (265). If so, “a sense of the
‘fictionality’ of human utterance, as provisional,
inadequate, and at best approximating to the truth, will infect
Platonic writing at its deepest level, below other and more ordinary
applications of the distinction between mythical and nonmythical forms
of discourse” (265); if so, it is not only “that
‘myth’ will fill in the gaps that reason leaves (though it
might do that too, as well as serving special purposes for particular
audiences), but that human reason itself ineradicably displays some of
the features we characteristically associate with story-telling”
(265–6) (cf. also Fowler (2011, 64): “Just as the
immortal, purely rational soul is tainted by the irrational body,
so logos is tainted by mythos”). It is
difficult to say which one of these two readings is a better
approximation of what Plato thought about the interplay between myth
and philosophy. The interpreter seems bound to furnish only probable
accounts about this matter.
Fowler (2011) surveys the muthos–logos dichotomy from
Herodotus and the pre–Socratic philosophers to Plato, the
Sophists, and the Hellenistic and Imperial writers, and provides many
valuable references to works dealing with the notion
of muthos, the Archaic uses of myth– words,
and ancient Greek mythology; for the muthos–logos
dichotomy in Plato see also Miller (2011, 76–77).
Aristotle admits that the lover of myths is in a sense a lover of
wisdom (Metaphysics 982b18; cf. also 995a4 and
1074b1–10). He might have used a myth or two in his early
dialogues, now lost. But in general he seems to have distanced himself
from myth (cf. Metaphysics 1000a18–9).
On the philosophical use of myth before Plato there are a number of
good studies, notably Morgan 2000. There is, however, little on the
philosophical use of myth in the Platonist tradition. Of Plato’s
immediate successors in the Academy, Speusippus, Xenocrates and
Heraclides of Pontus composed both dialogues and philosophical
treatises. But, with one exception, none of these seems to have used
myths as Plato did. The exception is Heraclides, who wrote various
dialogues—such as On the Things in Hades,
Zoroastres and Abaris—involving mythical
stories and mythical, or semi-mythical, figures. In the later Platonist
tradition—with the exception of Cicero and Plutarch—there
is not much evidence that Plato’s philosophical use of myths was
an accepted practice. In the Neoplatonic tradition various Platonic
myths became the subject of elaborate allegorization. Porphyry,
Proclus, Damascius and Olympiodorus gave allegorical interpretations of
a number of Platonic myths, such as the Phaedo and
Gorgias eschatological myths, or the myth of Atlantis.
Plato was a celebrated figure in the Renaissance but only a few
illustrations of Platonic mythical motifs can be found. Perhaps
Plato’s attitude to visual representation—claiming so often
that the highest philosophical knowledge is devoid of it, and attacking
poets and artists in general more than once—inhibited and
discouraged attempts to capture in painting, sculpture or prints, the
mythical scenes Plato himself depicted so vividly in words. Perhaps
artists simply felt themselves unequal to the task. McGrath (2009)
reviews and analyzes the rare illustrations of Platonic mythical
figures and landscapes in Renaissance iconography: the androgyne of the
Symposium, the charioteer of the Phaedrus, the
Cave, and the spindle of the universe handled by Necessity and
the Fates of the Republic.