If legitimacy is interpreted descriptively, it refers to
people’s beliefs about political authority and, sometimes,
political obligations. In his sociology, Max Weber put forward a very
influential account of legitimacy that excludes any recourse to
normative criteria (Mommsen 1989: 20). According to Weber, that a
political regime is legitimate means that its participants have
certain beliefs or faith (“Legitimitätsglaube”) in
regard to it: “the basis of every system of authority, and
correspondingly of every kind of willingness to obey, is a belief, a
belief by virtue of which persons exercising authority are lent
prestige” (Weber 1964: 382). As is well known, Weber
distinguishes among three main sources of legitimacy—understood
as the acceptance both of authority and of the need to obey its
commands. People may have faith in a particular political or social
order because it has been there for a long time (tradition), because
they have faith in the rulers (charisma), or because they trust its
legality—specifically the rationality of the rule of law (Weber
1990 [1918]; 1964). Weber identifies legitimacy as an important
explanatory category for social science, because faith in a particular
social order produces social regularities that are more stable than
those that result from the pursuit of self-interest or from habitual
rule-following (Weber 1964: 124).
In contrast to Weber’s descriptive concept, the normative
concept of political legitimacy refers to some benchmark of
acceptability or justification of political power or authority
and—possibly—obligation. On one view, held by John Rawls
(1993) and Ripstein (2004), for example, legitimacy refers, in the
first instance, to the justification of coercive political power.
Whether a political body such as a state is legitimate and whether
citizens have political obligations towards it depends, on this view
on whether the coercive political power that the state exercises is
justified. On a widely held alternative view, legitimacy is linked to
the justification of political authority. On this view, political
bodies such as states may be effective, or de facto,
authorities, without being legitimate. They claim the right to rule
and to create obligations to be obeyed, and as long as these claims
are met with sufficient acquiescence, they are authoritative.
Legitimate authority, on this view, differs from merely effective or
de facto authority in that it actually holds the right to
rule and creates political obligations (e.g. Raz 1986). On some views,
even legitimate authority is not sufficient to create political
obligations. The thought is that a political authority (such as a
state) may be permitted to issue commands that citizens are not
obligated to obey (Dworkin 1986: 191). Based on a view of this sort,
some have argued that legitimate political authority only gives rise
to political obligations if additional normative conditions are
satisfied (e.g. Wellman 1996; Edmundson 1998; Buchanan 2002).
There is sometimes a tendency in the literature to equate the
normative concept of legitimacy with justice. Some explicitly define
legitimacy as a criterion of minimal justice (e.g. Hampton 1998;
Buchanan 2002). Unfortunately, there is sometimes also a tendency to
blur the distinction between the two concepts, and a lot of confusion
arises from that. Someone might claim, for example, that while
political authorities such as states are often unjust, only a just
state is morally acceptable and legitimate in this sense. The emerging
literature on realist political theory criticizes this tendency to
blur the distinction between legitimacy and justice (e.g. Rossi and
Sleat 2015), diagnosing it as a sign of misplaced “political
moralism” (Williams 2005). Rawls (1993, 1995) clearly distinguishes
between the two concepts, of course. In his view, while justice and
legitimacy are related—they draw on the same set of political
values—they have different domains and legitimacy makes weaker
demands than justice (1993: 225; 1995: 175ff.). A state may be
legitimate but unjust, but the converse is not possible. Pettit (2012:
130ff) distinguishes more sharply between the two concepts. According
to Pettit, a state is just if it imposes a social order that promotes
freedom as non-domination for all its citizens. It is legitimate if it
imposes a social order in an appropriate way. A state that fails to
impose a social order in an appropriate way, however just the social
order may be, is illegitimate. Vice versa, a legitimate state may fail
to impose a just social order.
Political realists also lend support to those who have questioned any
sharp distinction between descriptive and normative concepts of
legitimacy (e.g. Habermas 1979; Beetham 1991; Horton 2012). The
objection to a strictly normative concept of legitimacy is that it is
of only limited use in understanding actual processes of legitimation.
The charge is that philosophers tend to focus too much on the general
conditions necessary for the justification of political institutions,
but neglect the historical actualization of the justificatory process.
In Jürgen Habermas’ words (Habermas 1979: 205):
“Every general theory of justification remains peculiarly
abstract in relation to the historical forms of legitimate domination.
… Is there an alternative to this historical injustice of
general theories, on the one hand, and the standardlessness of mere
historical understanding, on the other?” The objection to a
purely descriptive concept such as Weber’s is that it neglects
people’s second order beliefs about legitimacy—their
beliefs, not just about the actual legitimacy of a particular
political institution, but about the justifiability of this
institution, i.e. about what is necessary for legitimacy. According to
Beetham, a “power relationship is not legitimate because people
believe in its legitimacy, but because it can be justified in
terms of their beliefs” (Beetham 1991: 11).
This section lays out the different ways in which legitimacy,
understood normatively, can be seen as relating to political
authority, coercion, and political obligations.
The normative concept of political legitimacy is often seen as related
to the justification of authority. The main function of political
legitimacy, on this interpretation, is to explain the difference
between merely effective or de facto authority and legitimate
authority.
John Locke put forward such an interpretation of legitimacy.
Locke’s starting-point is a state of nature in which all
individuals are equally free to act within the constraints of natural
law and no individual is subject to the will of another. As Rawls
(2007: 129) characterizes Locke’s understanding of the state of
nature, it is “a state of equal right, all being kings.”
Natural law, while manifest in the state of nature, is not
sufficiently specific to rule a society and cannot enforce itself when
violated, however. The solution to this problem is a social contract
that transfers political authority to a civil state that can realize
and secure the natural law. According to Locke, and contrary to his
predecessor Thomas Hobbes, the social contract thus does not create
authority. Political authority is embodied in individuals and
pre-exists in the state of nature. The social contract transfers the
authority they each enjoy in the state of nature to a particular
political body.
While political authority thus pre-exists in the state of nature,
legitimacy is a concept that is specific to the civil state. Because
the criterion of legitimacy that Locke proposes is historical,
however, what counts as legitimate authority remains connected to the
state of nature. The legitimacy of political authority in the civil
state depends, according to Locke, on whether the transfer of
authority has happened in the right way. Whether the transfer has
happened in the right way depends on individuals’ consent:
“no one can be put out of this estate and subjected to the
political power of another without his own consent” (Locke 1980:
52). Anyone who has given their express or tacit consent to the social
contract is bound to obey a state’s laws (Locke 1980: 63). Locke
understands the consent criterion to apply not just to the original
institutionalization of a political authority—what Rawls (2007:
124) calls “originating consent”. It also applies to the
ongoing evaluation of the performance of a political
regime—Rawls (2007: 124) calls this “joining
consent”.
Although Locke emphasises consent, consent is not, however, sufficient
for legitimate authority because an authority that suspends the
natural law is necessarily illegitimate (e.g. Simmons 1976). On some
interpretations of Locke (e.g. Pitkin 1965), consent is not even
necessary for legitimate political authority; it is only a marker of
illegitimacy. Whether an actual political regime respects the
constraints of the natural law is thus at least one factor that
determines its legitimacy.
This criterion of legitimacy is negative: it offers an account of when
effective authority ceases to be legitimate. When a political
authority fails to secure consent or oversteps the boundaries of the
natural law, it ceases to be legitimate and, therefore, there is no
longer an obligation to obey its commands. For Locke—unlike for
Hobbes—political authority can thus not be absolute.
The contemporary literature has developed Locke’s ideas in
several ways. John Simmons (2001) uses them to argue that we should
distinguish between the moral justification of states in general and
the political legitimacy of actual states. I will come back to this
point in section 3.3. Joseph Raz links legitimacy to the justification
of political authority. According to Raz, political authority is just
a special case of the more general concept of authority (1986, 1995,
2006). He defines authority in relation to a claim—of a person
or an agency—to generate what he calls pre-emptive reasons. Such
reasons replace other reasons for action that people might have. For
example, if a teacher asks her students to do some homework, she
expects her say-so to give the students reason to do the homework.
Authority is effective, on this view, if it gets people to act on the
reasons it generates. The difference between effective and legitimate
authority, on Raz’ view, is that the former merely purports to
change the reasons that apply to others, while legitimate authority
actually has the capacity to change these reasons. Legitimate
authority satisfies what Raz calls the pre-emption thesis: “The
fact that an authority requires performance of an action is a reason
for its performance which is not to be added to all other relevant
reasons when assessing what to do, but should exclude and take the
place of some of them” (Raz 1988: 46). (There are limits to what
even a legitimate authority can rightfully order others to do, which
is why it does not necessarily replace all relevant reasons.) 
When is effective or de facto authority legitimate? In other
words, what determines whether the pre-emption thesis is satisfied?
Raz’ answer is captured in two further theses. The
“dependence thesis” states that the justification of
political authority dpends on the normative reasons that apply to
those under its rule directly, independently of the authority’s
directives. Building on the dependence thesis, the “normal
justification thesis” then states that political authority is
justified if it enables those subject to it to better comply with the
reasons that apply to them anyway. In full, the normal justification
thesis says: “The normal way to establish that a person has
authority over another involves showing that the alleged subject is
likely to better comply with the reasons which apply to him (other
than the alleged authoritative directive) if he accepts the directives
of the alleged authority as authoritatively binding and tries to
follow them, rather than by trying to follow the reasons which apply
to him directly” (Raz 1988: 53). The normal justification thesis
explains why those governed by a legitimate authority ought to treat
its directives as binding. It thus follows as a corollary of the
normal justification thesis that such an authority generates a duty to
be obeyed. Raz calls his conception the “service
conception” of authority (1988: 56). Note that even though
legitimate authority is defined as a special case of effective
authority, only the former is appropriately described as a serving its
subjects. Illegitimate—but effective—authority does not
serve those it aims to govern, although it may purport to do so.
William Edmundson formulates this way of linking authority and
legitimacy via a condition he calls the warranty thesis: “If
being an X entails claiming to F, then being a
legitimate X entails truly claiming to
F.” (Edmundson 1998: 39). Being an X here
stands for “a state”, or “an authority”. And
“to F” stands for “to create a duty to be
obeyed”, for example. The idea expressed by the warranty thesis
is that legitimacy morally justifies an independently existing
authority such that the claims of the authority become moral
obligations.
Those who link political legitimacy to the problem of justifying
authority tend to think of political coercion as only a means that
legitimate states may use to secure their authority. As Leslie Green
puts it: “Coercion threats provide secondary, reinforcing
motivation when the political order fails in its primary normative
technique of authoritative guidance” (Green 1988: 75). According
to a second important interpretation, by contrast, the main function
of legitimacy is precisely to justify coercive power. (For an
excellent discussion of the two interpretations of legitimacy and a
defense of the coercion-based interpretation, see Ripstein 2004; see
also Hampton 1998.) On coercion-based interpretations, the main
problem that a conception of legitimacy aims to solve is how to
distinguish the rightful use of political power from mere coercion.
One way to capture the thought is that, on these views, legitimacy
relates to the way in which the rightful use of political power
creates or constitutes political authority. Again, there are different
ways in which this idea might be understood.
In Hobbes’ influential account, political authority is created
by the social contract. In the state of nature, everyone’s
self-preservation is under threat and this makes it rational for all,
Hobbes argues, to consent to a covenant that authorizes a sovereign
who can guarantee their protection and to transfer their rights to
this sovereign—an individual or a group of individuals. When
there is no such sovereign, one may be created by a
covenant—Hobbes calls this “sovereignty by
institution”. But political authority may also be established by
the promise of all to obey a threatening power (“sovereignty by
acquisition”; see Leviathan, chapter 17). Both manners
of creating a sovereign are equally legitimate. And political
authority will be legitimate as long as the sovereign ensures the
protection of the citizens, as Hobbes believes that the natural right
to self-preservation cannot be relinquished (Leviathan,
chapter 21). Beyond that, however, there can be no further questions
about the legitimacy of the sovereign. In particular, there is no
distinction between effective authority and legitimate authority in
Hobbes’ thought. It might even be argued that Hobbes fails to
distinguish between legitimate authority and the mere exercise of
power (Korsgaard 1997: 29; see chapter 30 of Leviathan,
however, for an account of the quality of the sovereign’s
rule).
Another way in which the relation between legitimacy and the creation
of authority may be understood is that the attempt to rule without
legitimacy is an attempt to exercise coercive power—not
authority. Such a view can be found in Jean-Jacques Rousseau’s
work. Legitimacy, for Rousseau, justifies the state’s exercise
of coercive power and creates an obligation to obey. Rousseau
contrasts a legitimate social order with a system of rules that is
merely the expression of power. Coercive power is primarily a feature
of the civil state. While there are some forms of coercive power even
in the state of nature—for example the power of parents over
their children—Rousseau assumes that harmful coercive power
arises primarily in the civil state and that this creates the problem
of legitimacy. In the first chapter of the first book of On
the Social Contract he remarks that while “[m]an
is born free”, the civil state he observes makes everyone a
slave. Rousseau’s main question is under what conditions a civil
state, which uses coercive power to back up its laws, can be thought
of as freeing citizens from this serfdom. Such a state would be
legitimate. As he puts it in the opening sentence of the Social
Contract, “I want to inquire whether there can be some
legitimate and sure rule of administration in the civil order, taking
men as they are and laws as they might be.”
Rousseau’s account of legitimacy is importantly different from
Locke’s in that Rousseau does not attach normativity to the
process through which a civil state emerges from the state of nature.
Legitimate political authority is created by convention, reached
within the civil state. Specifically, Rousseau suggests that
legitimacy arises from the democratic justification of the laws of the
civil state (Social Contract I:6; cf. section 3.3.
below).
For Kant, as for Hobbes, political authority is created by the
establishment of political institutions in the civil state. It does
not pre-exist in individuals in the state of nature. What exists in
the pre-civil social state, according to Kant, is the moral authority
of each individual qua rational being and a moral obligation to form a
civil state. Establishing a civil state is “in itself an end
(that each ought to have)” (Kant, Theory and
Practice 8:289; see also Perpetual Peace, Appendix I).
Kant regards the civil state as a necessary first step toward a moral
order (the “ethical commonwealth”). It helps people
conform to certain rules by eliminating what today would be called the
free-riding problem or the problem of partial compliance. By creating
a coercive order of public legal justice, “a great step is taken
toward morality (though it is not yet a moral step), toward being
attached to this concept of duty even for its own sake” (Kant,
Perpetual Peace 8:376, notes to Appendix I; see also Riley
1982: 129f).
The civil state, according to Kant, establishes the rights necessary
to secure equal freedom. Unlike for Locke and his contemporary
followers, however, coercive power is not a secondary feature of the
civil state, necessary to back up laws. According to Kant, coercion is
part of the idea of rights. The thought can be explained as follows.
Coercion is defined as a restriction of the freedom to pursue
one’s own ends. Any right of a person—independently of
whether it is respected or has been violated—implies a
restriction for others. (cf. Kant, Theory and Practice, Part
2; Ripstein 2004: 8; Flikschuh 2008: 389f). Coercion, in this view, is
thus not merely a means for the civil state to enforce rights as
defenders of an authority-based concept of legitimacy claim. Instead,
according to Kant, it is constitutive of the civil state. This
understanding of rights links Kant’s conception of legitimacy to
the justification of coercion.
Legitimacy, for Kant, depends on a particular interpretation of the
social contract. For Kant, the social contract which establishes the
civil state is not an actual event. He accepts David Hume’s
objection to Locke that the civil state is often established in an act
of violence (Hume “Of the Original Contract”). Kant
invokes the social contract, instead, as the test “of any public
law’s conformity with right” (Kant Theory and
Practice 8:294). The criterion is the following: each law should
be such that all individuals could have consented to it. The social
contract, according to Kant, is thus a hypothetical thought
experiment, meant to capture an idea of public reason. As such, it
sets the standard for what counts as legitimate political authority.
Because of his particular interpretation of the social contract, Kant
is not a social contract theorist in the strict sense. The idea of a
contract is nevertheless relevant for his understanding of legitimacy.
(On the difference between voluntaristic and rationalistic strands in
liberalism, see Waldron 1987.)
Kant, unlike Hobbes, recognizes the difference between legitimate and
effective authority. For the head of the civil state is under an
obligation to obey public reason and to enact only laws to which all
individuals could consent. If he violates this obligation, however, he
still holds authority, even if his authority ceases to be legitimate.
This view is best explained in relation to Kant’s often
criticized position on the right to revolution. Kant famously denied
that there is a right to revolution (Kant, Perpetual Peace,
Appendix II; for a recent discussion, see Flikschuh 2008). Kant
stresses that while “a people”—as united in the
civil state—is sovereign, its individual members are under the
obligation to obey the head of the state thus established. This
obligation is such that it is incompatible with a right to revolution.
Kant offers a transcendental argument for his position (Kant
Perpetual Peace, Appendix II; Arendt 1992). A right to
revolution would be in contradiction with the idea that individuals
are bound by public law, but without the idea of citizens being bound
by public law, there cannot be a civil state—only anarchy. As
mentioned earlier, however, there is a duty to establish a civil
state. Kant’s position implies that the obligation of
individuals to obey a head of state is not conditioned upon the
ruler’s performance. In particular, the obligation to obey does
not cease when the laws are unjust.
Kant’s position on the right to revolution may suggest that he
regards political authority as similarly absolute as Hobbes. But Kant
stresses that the head of state is bound by the commands of public
reason. This is manifest in his insistence on freedom of the pen:
“a citizen must have, with the approval of the ruler himself,
the authorization to make known publicly his opinions about what it is
in the ruler’s arrangements that seems to him to be a wrong
against the commonwealth” (Kant Theory and Practice
8:304). While there is no right to revolution, political authority is
only legitimate if the head of state respects the social contract. But
political obligations arise even from illegitimate authority. If the
head of state acts in violation of the social contract and hence of
public reason, for example by restricting citizens’ freedom of
political criticism, citizens are still obligated to obey.
In 2004, Ripstein argued that much of the contemporary literature on
political legitimacy has been dominated by a focus on the
justification of authority, rather than coercive political power
(Ripstein 2004). In the literature since then, it looks as if the
tables are turning, especially if one considers the debates on
international and global legitimacy (section 5). But prominent earlier
coercion-based accounts include those by Nagel (1987) and by
contemporary Kantians such as Rawls and Habermas (to be discussed in
sections 3.3. and 4.3., respectively).
Let me briefly mention other important coercion-based interpretations.
Jean Hampton (1998; drawing on Anscombe 1981) offers an elegant
contemporary explication of Hobbes’ view. According to her,
political authority “is invented by a group of people who
perceive that this kind of special authority as necessary for the
collective solution of certain problems of interaction in their
territory and whose process of state creation essentially involves
designing the content and structure of that authority so that it meets
what they take to be their needs” (Hampton 1998: 77). Her theory
links the authority of the state to its ability to enforce a solution
to coordination and cooperation problems. Coercion is the necessary
feature that enables the state to provide an effective solution to
these problems, and the entitlement to use coercion is what
constitutes the authority of the state. The entitlement to use
coercion distinguishes such minimally legitimate political authority
from a mere use of power. Hampton draws a further distinction between
minimal legitimacy and what she calls full moral legitimacy, which
obtains when political authority is just.
Buchanan (2002) also argues that legitimacy is concerned with the
justification of coercive power. Buchanan points out that this makes
legitimacy a more fundamental normative concept than authority. Like
Hampton, he advocates a moralized interpretation of legitimacy.
According to him, “an entity has political legitimacy if and
only if it is morally justified in wielding political power”
(2002: 689). Political authority, in his approach, obtains if an
entity is legitimate in this sense and if some further conditions,
relating to political obligation, are met (2002: 691). Stilz (2009)
offers a coercion-centered account of state legitimacy that draws on
both Kant and Rousseau.
Historically speaking, the dominant view has been that legitimate
political authority entails political obligations. Locke, for example,
writes: “every man, by consenting with others to make one body
politic under one government, puts himself under an obligation to
every one of that society to submit to the determination of the
majority, and to be concluded by it; or else this original compact,
whereby he with others incorporates into one society, would signify
nothing, and be no compact if he be left free and under no other ties
than he was in before in the state of nature” (Locke 1990
[1690]: 52f).
While this is still the view many hold, not all do. Some take the
question of what constitutes legitimate authority to be distinct from
the question of what political obligations people have. Ronald Dworkin
(1986: 191) defends a view of this sort. Dworkin (1986) treats
political obligations as a fundamental normative concept in its own
right. What he calls “associative obligations” arise, not
from legitimate political authority, but directly from membership in a
political community. (For a critical discussion of this account, see
Simmons 2001; Wellman 1996.)
Applbaum (2010) offers a conceptual argument to challenge the view
that legitimate political authority entails an obligation to obey.
Applbaum grants that legitimate political authority has the capacity
to change the normative status of those under its rule, as Raz (1986),
for example, has influentially argued, and that this capacity should
be interpreted as a moral power in Hohfeld’s sense, not as a claim
right to rule. But, Applbaum argues, Hohfeldian powers, unlike rights,
are not correlated with duties; they are correlated with liabilities.
On Applbaum’s view, legitimate political authority thus has the
capacity to create a liability for those under its rule, but not an
obligation. To be liable to legitimate politcal authority means to not
be free from the authority’s power or control. To be sure, the
liability might be to be subject to a duty, but to be liable to be put
under a duty to obey should not be confused with being under a duty to
obey (see also Perry 2013 on this distinction).
Views that dissociate legitimate authority from political obligation
have some appeal to those who aim to counter Robert Paul Wolff’s
influential anarchist argument. The argument highlights what today is
sometimes called the subjection problem (Perry 2013): how can
autonomous individuals be under a
general—content-independent—obligation to subject their
will to the will of someone else? A content-independent obligation to
obey the state is an obligation to obey a state’s directives as
such, independently of their content. Wolff (1970) argues that because
there cannot be such a general obligation to obey the state, states
are necessarily illegitimate.
Edmundson (1998) has a first response to the anarchist challenge. He
argues that while legitimacy establishes a justification for the state
to issue directives, it does not create even a prima facie duty to
obey its commands. He claims that the moral duty to obey the commands
of legitimate political authority arises only if additional conditions
are met.
Simmons (2001) has a different response to Wolff. Simmons draws a
distinction between the moral justification of states and the
political legitimacy of a particular, historically realized, state and
its directives. According to Simmons, the state’s justification
depends on its moral defensibility. If it can successfully be shown
that having a state is morally better than not having a state (Simmons
2001: 125), the state is justified. But moral justification is only
necessary, not sufficient, for political legitimacy, according to
Simmons. The reason is that our moral obligations are to everyone,
including citizens of other states, not to the particular state we
live in. A particular state’s legitimacy, understood as the
capacity to generate and enforce a duty to obey, depends on
citizens’ actual consent. While there is no general moral duty
to obey the particular state we live in, we may have a political
obligation to obey if we have given our prior consent to this state.
The absence of a general moral duty to obey the state thus does not
imply that all states are necessarily illegitimate (Simmons 2001:
137).
Insofar as legitimacy, understood normatively, defines which political
institutions and which decisions made within them are acceptable, and,
in some cases, what kind of obligations people who are governed by
these institutions incur, there is the question what grounds this
normativity. This section briefly reviews different accounts that have
been given of the sources of legitimacy.
While there is a strong voluntarist line of thought in Christian
political philosophy, it was in the 17th century that
consent came to be seen as the main source of political legitimacy.
The works of Hugo Grotius, Hobbes, and Samuel Pufendorf tend to be
seen as the main turning point that eventually led to the replacement
of natural law and divine authority theories of legitimacy (see
Schneewind 1998; Hampton 1998). The following passage from
Grotius’ On the Law of War and Peace expresses the
modern perspective: “But as there are several Ways of Living,
some better than others, and every one may chuse which he pleases of
all those Sorts; so a People may chuse what Form of Government they
please: Neither is the Right which the Sovereign has over his Subjects
to be measured by this or that Form, of which divers Men have
different Opinions, but by the Extent of the Will of those who
conferred it upon him” (cited by Tuck 1993: 193). It was
Locke’s version of social contract theory that elevated consent
to the main source of the legitimacy of political authority.
Raz helpfully distinguishes among three ways in which the relation
between consent and legitimate political authority may be understood
(1995: 356): (i) consent of those governed is a necessary condition
for the legitimacy of political authority; (ii) consent is not
directly a condition for legitimacy, but the conditions for the
legitimacy of authority are such that only political authority that
enjoys the consent of those governed can meet them; (iii) the
conditions of legitimate political authority are such that those
governed by that authority are under an obligation to consent.
Locke and his contemporary followers such as Nozick (1974) or Simmons
(2001), but also Rousseau and his followers defend a version of
(i)—the most typical form that consent theories take. Greene
(2016) defends a version of this view she calls the quality consent
view. Versions of (ii) appeal to those who reject actual consent as a
basis for legitimacy, as they only regard consent given under ideal
conditions as binding. Theories of hypothetical consent, such as those
articulated by Kant or Rawls, fall into this category. Such theories
view political authority as legitimate only if those governed would
consent under certain ideal conditions (cf. section 3.3.).
David Estlund (2008: 117ff) defends a version of hypothetical consent
theory that matches category (iii). What he calls “normative
consent” is a theory that regards non-consent to authority,
under certain conditions as invalid. Authority, in this view, may thus
be justified without actual consent. Estlund defines authority as the
moral power to require action. Estlund uses normative consent theory
as the basis for an account of democratic legitimacy, understood as
the permissibility of using coercion to enforce authority. The work
that normative consent theory does in Estlund’s account is that
it contributes to the justification of the authority of the democratic
collective over those who disagree with certain democratically
approved laws.
Although consent theory has been dominating for a long time, there are
many well-known objections to it. As mentioned in section 2.1, Simmons
(2001) argues that hypothetical consent theories (and, presumably,
normative consent theories, too) conflate moral justification with
legitimation. Other objections, especially to Lockean versions, are
about as old as consent theory itself. David Hume, in his essay
“Of the Original Contract”, and many after him object to
Locke that consent is not feasible, and that actual states have almost
always arisen from acts of violence. The attempt to legitimize
political authority via consent is thus, at best, wishful thinking
(Wellman 1996). What is worse, it may obscure problematic structures
of subordination (Pateman 1988). Hume’s own solution was, like
Bentham later, to propose to justify political authority with
reference to its beneficial consequences.
In the utilitarian view, legitimate political authority should be
grounded on the principle of utility. This conception of legitimacy is
necessarily a moralized one: the legitimacy of political authority
depends on what morality requires. Christian Thomasius, a student of
Pufendorf and contemporary of Locke, may be seen as a precursor of the
utilitarian approach to political legitimacy, as he rejected
voluntarism and endorsed the idea that political legitimacy depends on
principles of rational prudence instead (Schneewind 1998: 160; Barnard
2001: 66). Where Thomasius differs from the utilitarians, however, is
in his attempt to identify a distinctively political—not moral
or legal—source of legitimacy. He developed the idea of
“decorum” into a theory of how people should relate to one
another in the political context. Decorum is best described as a
principle of “civic mutuality” (Barnard 2001: 65):
“You treat others as you would expect them to treat you”
(Thomasius, Foundations of the Law of Nature and of Nations,
quoted by Barnard 2001: 65). By thus distinguishing legitimacy from
legality and justice, Thomasius adopted an approach that was
considerably ahead of his time.
Jeremy Bentham rejects the Hobbesian idea that political authority is
created by a social contract. According to Bentham, it is the state
that creates the possibility of binding contracts. The problem of
legitimacy that the state faces is which of its laws are justified.
Bentham proposes that legitimacy depends on whether a law contributes
to the happiness of the citizens. (For a contemporary take on this
utilitarian principle of legitimacy, see Binmore 2000.)
A well-known problem with the view that Bentham articulates is that it
justifies restrictions of rights that liberals find unacceptable. John
Stuart Mill’s answer to this objection consists, on the one
hand, in an argument for the compatibility between utilitarianism and
the protection of liberty rights and, on the other, in an
instrumentalist defense of democratic political authority based on the
principle of utility. According to Mill, both individual freedom and
the right to participate in politics are necessary for the
self-development of individuals (Mill On Liberty and
Considerations on Representative Government, see Brink 1992;
Ten 1998).
With regard to the defense of liberty rights, Mill argues that the
restriction of liberty is illegitimate unless it is permitted by the
harm principle, that is, unless the actions suppressed by the
restriction harm others (On Liberty, chapter 1; for a
critical discussion of the harm principle as the basis of legitimacy,
see Wellman 1996; see also Turner 2014). Mill’s view of the
instrumental value of (deliberative) democracy is expressed in the
following passage of the first chapter of On Liberty:
“Despotism is a legitimate mode of government in dealing with
barbarians, provided that the end be their improvement and the means
justified by actually effecting that end. Liberty, as a principle, has
no application to any state of things anterior to the time when
mankind have become capable of being improved by free and equal
discussion.” Deliberation is important, according to Mill,
because of his belief in the power of ideas—in what Habermas
would later call the force of the better argument (Habermas 1990:
158f). Deliberation should keep partisan interests, which could
threaten legitimacy by undermining the general happiness, in check:
“The representative system ought … not to allow any of
the various sectional interests to be so powerful as to be capable of
prevailing against truth and justice and the other sectional interests
combined. There ought always to be such a balance preserved among
personal interests as may render any one of them dependent for its
successes, on carrying with it as least a large proportion of those
who act on higher motives, and more comprehensive and distant
views” (Mill, Collected Works XIX: 447, cited by Ten
1998: 379).
Many are not convinced that such instrumentalist reasoning provides a
satisfactory account of political legitimacy. Rawls (1971:175f) and
Jeremy Waldron (1987: 143f) object that the utilitarian approach will
ultimately only convince those who stand to benefit from the felicific
calculus, and that it lacks an argument to convince those who stand to
lose.
Fair play theories offer one answer to this problem (see Klosko 2004
and the entry on
 political obligation).
 Another answer comes from perfectionist theories. The best example is
Raz’ service conception of legitimate authority (section 2.1.).
Raz tries to show how an account of legitimacy based on beneficial
consequences is compatible with everyone having reasons to obey the
directives of a legitimate authority. According to Raz (1995: 359),
“[g]overnments decide what is best for their subjects and
present them with the results as binding conclusions that they are
bound to follow.” The justification for this view that Raz gives
(“the normal justification thesis”) is, as explained
above, that if the authority is legitimate, its directives are such
that they help those governed to better comply with reasons that apply
to them. (For criticisms of this approach, see Hershovitz 2003 and
2011, Nussbaum 2011, and Quong 2011).
Wellman’s (1996) samaritan account of political legitimacy is
also an attempt to overcome the problem that showing that political
institutions and the decisions made within them have beneficial
consequences is not sufficient for political legitimacy. In his
account, a state’s legitimacy depends on it being justified to
use coercion to enforce its laws. His suggestion is that the
justification of the state can be grounded in the samaritan duty to
help others in need. The thought is that “what ultimately
legitimizes a state’s imposition upon your liberty is
not merely the services it provides you, but the benefits it
provides others” (Wellman 1996: 213; his emphasis).
Wellman argues that because “political society is the only
vehicle with which people can escape the perils of the state of
nature” (Wellman 1996: 216), people have a samaritan duty to
provide to one another the benefits of a state. Associated
restrictions of their liberty by the state, Wellman claims, are
legitimate.
An important legacy of consent theory in contemporary thought is
manifest in accounts that attribute the source of legitimacy either to
an idea of public reason—taking the lead from Kant—or to a
theory of democratic participation—taking the lead from
Rousseau. Theories of deliberative democracy combine elements of both
accounts. 
Public reason accounts tend to focus on the problem of justifying
political coercion. The solution they propose is that political
coercion is justified if it is supported on the basis of reasons that
all reasonable persons can share. Interest in public reason accounts
started with Rawls’ Political Liberalism, but Rawls
developed the idea more fully in later works. Rawls’
starting-point is the following problem of legitimacy (Rawls 2001:
41): “in the light of what reasons and values … can
citizens legitimately exercise … coercive power over one
another?” The solution to this problem that Rawls proposes is
the following “liberal principle of legitimacy”:
“political power is legitimate only when it is exercised in
accordance with a constitution (written or unwritten) the essentials
of which all citizens, as reasonable and rational, can endorse in the
light of their common human reason” (Rawls 2001: 41).
Rawls idea of public reason, which is at the core of the liberal
principle of legitimacy, rests on the method of
“political”—as opposed to
“metaphysical”—justification that Rawls has
developed in response to critics of his theory of justice as fairness
(Rawls 1985). This means that public reason should be
“freestanding” in the same way as his theory of justice is. Public
reason should involve only political values and be independent
of—potentially controversial—comprehensive moral or
religious doctrines of the good. This restricts the content of public
reason to what is given by the family of what Rawls calls political
conceptions of justice (Rawls 2001: 26). Rawls recognizes that because
the content of the idea of public reason is restricted, the domain to
which it should apply must be restricted too. The question is: in what
context is it important that the restriction on reason is observed?
Rawls conceives of the domain of public reason as limited to matters
of constitutional essentials and basic justice and as applying
primarily—but not only—to judges, government officials,
and candidates for public office when they decide on matters of
constitutional essentials and basic justice.
Simmons (2001) criticizes Rawls’ approach for mistakenly
blurring the distinction between justifying the state and political
legitimacy (see also section 2.3.). A Rawlsian could reply, however,
that the problem of legitimacy centrally involves the justification of
coercion and that legitimacy should thus be understood as what
creates—rather than merely justifies—political authority.
The following thought supports this claim. Rawls—in
Political Liberalism—explicitly focuses on the
democratic context. It is a particular feature of democracy that the
right to rule is created by those who are ruled. As Hershovitz puts it
in his critique of the Razian approach to political legitimacy, in a
democracy there is no sharp division between the “binders”
and the “bound” (2003: 210f). The political authority of
the democratic assembly is thus entailed by some account of the
conditions under which citizens may legitimately exercise coercive
power over one another (Peter 2008; Kolodny 2014a,b). But even if
Simmons’ objection can be refuted in this way, a further problem for
public reason accounts is whether they can successfully show that some
form of public justification is indeed required for political
legitimacy (see Enoch 2015).
Recent public reason accounts have developed Rawls’ original idea in
different ways (see also the entry on public reason). Those following
Rawls more closely will understand public reasons as reasons that
attract a—hypothetical—consensus. On this interpretation,
a public reason is a reason that all reasonable persons can be
expected to endorse. The target of the consensus is either the
political decisions themselves or the procedure through which
political decisions are made. On a common reading today, the Rawlsian
idea of public reason is understood in terms of a hypothetical
consensus on substantive reasons (e.g. Quong 2011). On those
conceptions, the use of political coercion is legitimate if it is
supported by substantive reasons that all reasonable persons can be
expected to endorse. The problem with this interpretation of public
reason is that the demand for a consensus on substantive reasons in
circumstances of moral and religious pluralism and disagreement is
that it either relies on a very restrictive characterization of
reasonable persons or ends up with a very limited domain for
legitimate political coercion.
Rawls’ conception of political legitimacy can also be understood in
terms of procedural reasons (Peter 2008). On this interpretation, the
domain of public reason is limited to the justification of the process
of political decision-making, and need not extend to the substantive
(as opposed to the procedural) reasons people might hold to justify a
decision. For example, if the hypothetical consensus supports
democratic decision-making, then the justification for a decision is
that it has been made democratically. Of course, a political decision
that is legitimate in virtue of the procedure in which it has been
made may not be fully just. But this is just a reflection of the fact
that legitimacy is a weaker idea than justice.
An alternative interpretation of the public reason account focuses on
convergence, not consensus (Gaus 2011). A political decision is
legitimized on the basis of public reason, on this account, if
reasonable persons can converge on that decision. They need not agree
on the—substantive or procedural—reasons that support a
decision. Instead, it is argued, it is sufficient for political
legitimacy if all can agree that a particular decision should be made,
even if they disagree about the reasons that support this decision.
Note that the convergence needs not be actual; it can be
hypothetical.
Accounts that emphasize political participation or political influence
regard a political decision as legitimate if it has been made in a
process that allows for equal participation of all relevant persons.
They thus see political legitimacy as dependent on the participation
or influence of all, to paraphrase Bernard Manin’s (1987)
expression, not on the will of all, as consent theories do, or on a
justification all can access, as public reason accounts do. Older
accounts of this kind focus on democratic participation (Pateman
1970). Newer accounts include deliberative democracy accounts (Manin
1987) and Philipp Pettit’s equal control view (Pettit 2012).
Rousseau’s solution to the problem of how to explain the
legitimacy of political decisions has influenced many contemporary
democratic theorists (section 4.3.). One of the important departures
from Locke’s version of social contract theory that Rousseau
proposes is that tacit consent is not sufficient for political
legitimacy. Without citizens’ active participation in the
justification of a state’s laws, Rousseau maintains, there is no
legitimacy. According to Rousseau, one’s will cannot be
represented, as this would distort the general will, which alone is
the source of legitimacy: “The engagements that bind us to the
social body are obligatory only because they are mutual… the
general will, to be truly such, should be general in its object as
well as in its essence; … it should come from all to apply to
all; and … it loses its natural rectitude when it is directed
towards any individual, determinate object” (Rousseau,
Social Contract, II:4; see also ibid. I:3 and Rawls
2007: 231f).
Rousseau distinguishes among a citizen’s private will, which
reflects personal interests, a citizen’s general will, which
reflects an interpretation of the common good, and the general will,
which truly reflects the common good. A democratic decision is always
about the common good. In democratic decision-making, citizens thus
compare their interpretations of the general will. If properly
conducted, it reveals the general will. This is the legitimate
decision.
Active participation by all may not generate a consensus. So why would
those who oppose a particular decision be bound by that decision?
Rousseau’s answer to this question is the following. On
Rousseau’s view, citizens can—and will want to—learn
from democratic decisions. Since the democratic decision, if conducted
properly, correctly reveals the general will, those who voted against
a particular proposal will recognize that they were wrong and will
adjust their beliefs about what the general will is. In this ingenious
way, individuals are only bound by their own will, but everyone is
bound by a democratic decision.
This section takes a closer look at the relationship between democracy
and political legitimacy. In contemporary political philosophy, many,
but by no means all, hold that democracy is necessary for political
legitimacy. Democratic instrumentalism is the view that democratic
decision-making procedures are at best a means for reaching just
outcomes, and whether or not legitimacy requires democracy depends on
the outcomes that democratic decision-making brings about. Thomas
Christiano (2004) helpfully distinguishes between monistic conceptions
of political legitimacy and non-monistic ones. Democratic
instrumentalism is a monistic view. It reduces the normativity of
political legitimacy to a single dimension: only the quality of the
outcomes a particular political regime generates is relevant for
political legitimacy. The contrasting position in contemporary
political philosophy is that democratic forms of political
organization are necessary for political legitimacy, independently of
their instrumental value (Buchanan 2002). What conceptions of
democratic legitimacy, as I use the term here, have in common is that
they demand that political institutions respect democratic values.
Some such proceduralist conceptions of democratic legitimacy are also
monistic. What is commonly called pure proceduralism is an example of
a monistic view. According to pure proceduralism only procedural
features of decision-making are relevant for democratic legitimacy.
Many contributors are drawn to non-monistic conceptions of democratic
legitimacy. Such mixed conceptions of democratic legitimacy combine
conditions that refer to the quality of outcomes of democratic
decision-making with conditions that apply to procedural features.
Democratic instrumentalism is sometimes used to argue against
democracy. According to arguments of this kind, some ideal of good
outcomes, however defined, forms the standard that determines
political legitimacy. If democracy does not contribute to better
outcomes than an alternative decision-making procedure, it is not
necessary for political legitimacy (Raz 1995; Wall 2007).
Those who defend instrumentalism take it as a premise that there is an
ideal outcome that exists independently of the democratic process, and
in terms of which the value of the democratic process, its legitimacy,
can be gauged. The instrumentalist accounts of Richard Arneson (2003)
and Steven Wall (2007), for example, refer to some ideal egalitarian
distribution. In their view, the legitimacy of political institutions
and the decisions made within them depends on how closely they
approximate the ideal egalitarian distribution. If sacrificing
political equality allows for a better approximation of equality
overall, so their argument goes, then this does not undermine
legitimacy.
One problem with this view is that to get off the ground, it needs to
treat the value of political equality as less important than the value
of those other equalities that inform the perfectionist standard. This
is implausible to those who take political equality to be one of the
most important egalitarian values (e.g. Rawls 1993; Buchanan 2002;
Christiano 2008; Kolodny 2014a,b). In addition, democratic
instrumentalism is at odds with the view that many democrats
hold—that legitimate procedures of democratic decision-making
create or constitute political authority.
Instrumentalist defenses of democracy aim to show that democratic
decision-making procedures are best able to produce legitimate
outcomes. The most famous version of this argument is based on the
Condorcet jury theorem (for a recent discussion, see List and Goodin
2001). In its original formulation, the Condorcet jury theorem assumes
that there are two alternatives and one of them is the correct
outcome, however defined. Take the latter to be the legitimate
outcome. The theorem says that if each voter is more likely to be
correct than wrong, then a majority of all is also more likely to be
correct than wrong. In addition, the probability that a majority will
vote for the correct outcome increases with the size of the body of
voters. Since democracy has a greater constituency than any other
regime, the theorem gives an argument for why democracy is best able
to generate legitimate outcomes. In addition to arguments based on the
Condorcet jury theorem, there are other attempts to defend the
instrumental epistemic value of democracy. Landemore (2012), for
example, offers an argument for the instrumental epistemic value of
democracy that rests on the potential of decision-making mechanisms
that bring together diverse perspectives to outperform decision-making
by less diverse groups, e.g. groups of experts.
According to pure proceduralist conceptions of democratic legitimacy,
democratic decisions are legitimate as long as they are the result of
an appropriately constrained process of democratic decision-making.
These views place all the normative weight on the value of the
democratic procedure.
There are several ways in which pure proceduralism might be
understood. On an account of aggregative democracy—which takes
the aggregation of individual preferences, for example through voting,
to be the key feature of democracy—pure proceduralism implies
that democratic decisions are legitimate if the aggregative process is
fair. Kenneth O. May’s defense of majority rule (May 1952)
implies a view of this sort (see also Dahl 1956).
On a deliberative account of democracy, legitimacy depends, at least
in part, on the process of public deliberation (Manin 1987, Bohman
1996). Thomas Christiano has a good characterization of what pure
proceduralism entails in an account of deliberative democracy:
“democratic discussion, deliberation, and decisionmaking under
certain conditions are what make the outcomes legitimate for each
person. … [W]hatever the results of discussions, deliberation,
and decisionmaking …, they are legitimate. The results are made
legitimate by being the results of the procedure” (Christiano
1996: 35). The idea is that while democratic deliberation helps
sorting through reasons for and against particular candidates or
policy proposals, and perhaps even generates new alternatives, the
legitimacy of the outcomes of such a process only depends on the
fairness of the decision-making process, not on the quality of the
outcomes it produces. The justification for conceptions of democratic
legitimacy of this kind is that there is no shared standard for
assessing the quality of the outcomes—deep disagreement about
reasons for and against proposals will always remain. A fair way to
resolve such disagreements is thus the only source of the legitimacy
of the outcomes (Waldron 1996; Gaus 1997; Christiano 2008).
Estlund (2008) has raised a challenge against fairness-based versions
of democratic proceduralism. He points out that other decision-making
procedures—flipping a coin, for example—also satisfy a
fairness requirement. An argument from fairness is thus insufficient
to establish the superior legitimacy of democratic decision-making.
Pure proceduralists can respond to this challenge by pointing to the
distinctive fairness of democratic decision-making procedures.
Christiano and Kolodny, for example, argue that the legitimacy of
democratically made decisions stems from the kind of political
equality that democracy, and only democracy, constitutes. According to
Christiano (2008), only in a democracy are people publicly treated as
equals. According to Kolodny (2014a, b), only a democracy offers the
kind of equal opportunity to influence decision-making that avoids
subordinating some to the decisions of others.
A different proceduralist reponse to Estlund’s challenge is to point
to the procedural epistemic values that the democratic process
realizes—on how inclusive it is, for example, or how thoroughly
the knowledge claims on which particular proposals rest have been
subjected to criticism. The thought is that political legitimacy may
be jeopardized not just by unequal access to political, social and
economic institutions, but also by unjustified epistemic privilege.
What Peter calls pure epistemic proceduralism is a conception of
democratic legitimacy according to which political decisions are
legitimate if they are the outcome of a deliberative democratic
decision-making process that satisfies some conditions of political
and epistemic fairness (Peter 2008; on procedural epistemic values,
see also Peter 2013).
Yet another response is to focus on the kind of freedom that democracy
offers, rather than on egalitarian considerations. Pettit’s equal
control view, already mentioned in sections 1 and 3.3, rests on this
strategy. Pettit republican theory defends democracy as uniquely able
to secure the non-domination of the citizens.
Rational proceduralist conceptions of democratic legitimacy add
conditions that refer to the quality of outcomes to those that apply
to the procedural properties of democratic decision-making. While pure
proceduralists argue that the inevitable contestedness of standards
that define the quality of outcomes makes it impossible to ground
legitimacy in them, defenders of mixed conceptions are concerned that
a fair process may lead to irrational outcomes—outcomes of
unnecessarily and unacceptably low quality. The general thought
underlying rational proceduralist conceptions is that the fairness of
the democratic decision-making process is not sufficient to establish
the legitimacy of its outcomes.
As is the case with pure proceduralist conceptions, mixed conceptions
of democratic legitimacy also vary with the underlying account of
democracy. A version of rational proceduralism is implicit in
Arrow’s approach to aggregative democracy (Arrow 1963; see Peter
2008 for a discussion). The problem he poses is: are there methods of
democratic decision-making that are based on equal consideration of
individual interests and are conducive to rational social choice? As
is well known, his impossibility theorem shows a problem with finding
such decision-making mechanisms. Arrow’s way of posing the
problem—which contrasts with May’s (1952)—suggests
that the possible irrationality of majority rule undermines its
legitimacy, even if it respects certain procedural values. His view
implies that democratic legitimacy only obtains if the outcomes
themselves satisfy certain quality conditions—specifically, he
postulated that they should satisfy certain rationality axioms.
The default conception of democratic legitimacy that many deliberative
democrats favor is also a mixed conceptions. Habermas’
conception of democratic legitimacy is an example. Drawing on
discourse ethics, Habermas (1990; 1996) argues that people’s
participation in the justificatory processes of deliberative democracy
is necessary for political legitimacy. According to him, “the
procedures and communicative presuppositions of democratic opinion-
and will-formation function as the most important sluices for the
discursive rationalization of the decisions of an administration bound
by law and statute” (1996: 300). The legitimacy of democratic
decisions, then, depends on both procedural values and on the
substantive quality of the outcomes that these deliberative
decision-making procedures generate. As Habermas puts it:
“Deliberative politics acquires its legitimating force from the
discursive structure of an opinion- and will-formation that can
fulfill its socially integrative function only because citizens expect
its results to have a reasonable quality” (Habermas
1996: 304; see also Benhabib 1994; Knight and Johnson 1994; Cohen
1997a,b; Bohman 1997). In his view, only deliberative democratic
decision-making can produce a decision everyone has reasons to
endorse.
Other deliberative democrats, while still pegging the legitimacy of
democratic decisions to features of both the procedure and its
outcomes, are more skeptical about the ability of deliberative
processes to reach an ideally justified decision (e.g. Gutmann and
Thompson 1996). A case in point is Philip Pettit’s and Christian
List’s work on the discursive dilemma (e.g. Pettit 2001, 2003;
List and Pettit 2002; List 2006). They show how occurrences of the
discursive dilemma may undermine the rationality of the outcome of
public deliberation. This problem arises when the evaluation of
alternative outcomes is logically connected to a set of independent
premises. It is possible that the deliberative constellation is such
that a decision made based on the evaluation of the premises will
produce the opposite result than a decision based on the evaluation of
the outcomes directly. For example: while a majority might hold (P1)
that health is the most important good and there might also a be a
majority that holds (P2) that affordable health care is a good
strategy to secure people’s health, it is still possible that a
majority will reject a health care reform (C) which would improve
people’s health. This can happen if participants will only
endorse the reform if they endorse both premises and if only a
minority does so—even though there are majorities for each
premise individually.
The potential irrationality of deliberative processes (see also
Sunstein 2003) is an important motivation for some democratic
theorists to take into account epistemic features of democratic
decision-making. Many advocates of epistemic democracy favor either an
instrumentalist or a mixed conception of legitimacy. As mentioned
above, some accounts of epistemic democracy draw on the Condorcet jury
theorem. Grofman and Feld (1988) interpret the Condorcet jury theorem
as an explanation of Rousseau’s theory of how a democratic
decision reflects the general will. Such interpretations of epistemic
democracy rely on what David Estlund calls “the correctness
theory of democratic legitimacy” (Estlund 2008: 99). According
to this conception, a version of rational proceduralism, a democratic
decision is legitimate if it is correct. 
Estlund’s own account of epistemic democracy puts forward a
different conception of legitimacy. His main objection is that
accounts based on the Condorcet jury theorem fail to give a sufficient
explanation for why those who disagree with the outcome of the
democratic decision-making process ought to treat it as binding and
hence demand too much deference from the participants of democratic
decision-making. To correct for that, Estlund’s alternative
conception of democratic legitimacy puts more emphasis on procedures.
The conception of legitimacy that he advocates “requires that
the procedure can be held, in terms acceptable to all qualified points
of view, to be epistemically the best (or close to it) among those
that are better than random” (Estlund 2008: 98). He calls this
conception “epistemic proceduralism”. He sometimes refers
to it as a “purely” procedural conception of legitimacy
(e.g. Estlund 2008: 108, 116). This is misleading, however, as pure
proceduralist conceptions of legitimacy do not depend on
procedure-independent standards. In Estlund’s epistemic
proceduralism, a procedure-independent standard functions as a
selection device. His conception of legitimacy is thus better
described as a version of what Rawls calls imperfect proceduralism
(Rawls 1971: 85). It assumes a procedure-independent standard for
correct outcomes and defends a particular democratic procedure in
terms of how closely it approximates these outcomes while allowing
that no procedure can guarantee that the right outcome is reached
every time. It is a feature of an imperfect proceduralist conception
of democratic legitimacy that a particular decision may fail to reach
the ideal outcome—here, the correct outcome—yet still be
legitimate. To put the point differently, whereas pure proceduralist
conceptions of democratic legitimacy are monistic about legitimacy,
Estlund’s “epistemic proceduralism” is non-monistic,
as it both insists that (deliberative) democratic procedures of
decision-making are essential for political legitimacy and requires
that these procedures approximate, as much as possible, an ideal
outcome.
Political cosmopolitanism is the view that national communities are
not the exclusive source of political legitimacy in the global realm.
This is a minimal characterization. It is compatible with a system in
which nation states and their governments remain the main political
agents, as long as there is some attribution of legitimate political
authority to international conventions. For even if states and their
governments are the main political entities, there is still the
question about appropriate relations among national actors. When
should nation states recognize another political entity as legitimate?
And what are appropriate sanctions against entities that do not meet
the legitimacy criteria? Let us call this problem the problem of
international legitimacy.
Political cosmopolitanism is also compatible with the much more
demanding idea of replacing nation states and national
governments—at least in certain policy areas—by global
institutions. Examples of relevant policy areas are trade or the
environment. The associated global institutions may include both
global rules (e.g. the rules of the WTO treaty) and global political
agents (e.g. the UN General Assembly). This raises the question of
what conditions such global governance institutions have to satisfy in
order to qualify as legitimate. Let us call this the problem of global
legitimacy.
The more familiar, contrasting position is political nationalism. It
is the view that only the political institutions of nation states pose
and can overcome the legitimacy problem and hence be a source of
political legitimacy. Political nationalism is usually defended on the
grounds that there is something unique either about the coercion
deployed by states or about the political authority which states
possess which needs justification.
Political nationalism has had much influence on debates on global
justice. Some have argued that because moral cosmopolitan commitments
trump commitments to (national) legitimacy, a conception of global
justice can be detached from concerns with legitimacy (Beitz 1979a,b,
1998; Pogge 2008). Others have argued—again assuming political
nationalism—that legitimate authority at the level of the nation
state is necessary to pursue moral cosmopolitan goals (Ypi 2008
provides an empirical argument). Yet others have argued against the
idea of global justice altogether, on the grounds that political
legitimacy ties obligations of justice to nation states (Blake 2001;
Nagel 2005). What these approaches to global justice have failed to
address is the possibility of sound political cosmopolitan conceptions
of political legitimacy. Hassoun (2012) takes this issue as her
starting-point. She argues that the coercive power of global
governance institutions raises a legitimacy problem of its own and,
turning the arguments of Blake (2001) and Nagel (2005) on their heads,
that securing the legitimacy of those institutions entails obligations
of global justice.
There are two main approaches to both international and global
legitimacy: the state-centered approach and the people-centered
approach. The former takes appropriate relations among states as
basic. As Charles Beitz characterizes this approach:
“international society is understood as domestic society writ
large, with states playing the roles occupied by persons in domestic
society. States, not persons, are the subjects of international
morality, and the rules that regulate their behavior are supposed to
preserve a peaceful order of sovereign states” (1979b: 408; see
also Beitz 1998). Locke, Bentham, and Mill, among others, approached
the issue of international legitimacy in this way. Among contemporary
thinkers, Michael Walzer (1977, 1980) defends a state-based—or
as he calls it—community-based approach. The most important
criterion of international legitimacy that he proposes is the
criterion of non-interference. (For discussions of Walzer’s
proposal, see Beitz 1979a, b). Others have put forward conceptions
based on state consent. Rawls advocates a conception based on the
consent of “well-ordered” (either “liberal” or
“decent”) peoples (Rawls 1999; for critical discussions,
see e.g. Buchanan 2000; Wenar 2002; Cavallero 2003).
The second approach takes features of individuals—their
interests or their rights—as basic for legitimacy. At present,
the most comprehensive contemporary philosophical treatment of
international legitimacy of this kind is probably Allen
Buchanan’s Justice, Legitimacy, and Self-Determination
(2003). As mentioned above (section 2.2.), Buchanan advocates a
moralized conception of legitimacy, according to which entities are
legitimate if they are morally justified to wield political power.
Specifically, political legitimacy requires that a minimal standard of
justice is met.
On the basis of this moralized conception of legitimacy, Buchanan
argues against the state-based conception and against state consent
theories of legitimacy in particular. State consent, Buchanan claims,
is neither necessary nor sufficient for legitimacy. It is not
sufficient because it is well-known that states tend to be the worst
perpetrators in matters of human rights and there is thus need for an
independent international standard of minimal justice to obtain
legitimacy. It is not necessary, because international law recognizes
many obligations as binding even without the consent of acting
governments. As long as these obligations are compatible with the
minimal standard of justice, they are legitimate even if they have
arisen without state consent.
Buchanan also rejects the idea that the source of a legitimacy deficit
at the international level is the inequality among states. He does not
believe that states need to have equal weight in international
institutions. What he regards as the main problem of legitimacy at the
international level is, instead, that “a technocratic elite,
lacking in democratic accountability to individuals and nonstate
groups, is playing an increasingly powerful role in a system of
regional and global governance” (2003: 289). The more efficient
remedy for this problem, he argues, is protecting basic human rights
and improving democratic accountability.
Buchanan uses his conception of legitimacy to answer the question when
a political entity—as formed, for example, by secession or by
union—should be recognized as legitimate. He lists three
criteria (Buchanan 2003: 266ff). The first is a “minimal
internal justice requirement”. It specifies how political
entities should treat those upon whom it wields political power.
Specifically, it requires that basic human rights are protected. This
requirement includes a demand for minimal democracy. But not all
political entities that satisfy this requirement deserve to be
recognized as legitimate. They also need to be formed in the right
way. The second criterion is thus a criterion of procedural justice
and requires that a political entity has not come about through
usurpation (“nonusurpation requirement”). Finally, there
is a “minimal external justice requirement”. It contains
conditions about how political entities should interact with one
another.
Näsström (2007) uses the people-centered approach to push against
the tendency to associate state legitimacy with the legitimacy of
governments. The more fundamental question, she argues, is what makes
the constitution of a people legitimate. And it would be a mistake to
think that the constitution of a people is a historical issue or an
empirical given. What makes the constitution of a people legitimate is
a normative question in its own right that must be asked before we can
ask about the legitimacy of the government of a people.
The question Näsström articulates, which is also discussed in the
literature on the constitution of the demos (Goodin 2007), is
important for the debate on the ethics of immigration. What is the
scope for legitimate border controls? Do states have a unilateral
right to control their borders or do potential immigrants have a right
to participate in the determination of immigration policies? Abizadeh
(2008) has argued, on the basis of the claim that the constitution of
the demos is not a historical given, that a commitment to a democratic
theory of domestic political legitimacy implies that one ought to
reject the unilateral domestic right to control and close the
state’s boundaries. His key claim is that state borders are coercive
to potential immigrants. In light of this, and because, in a
democracy, the exercise of coercive political power requires some form
of democratic justification, he concludes that both citizens and
foreigners should have say in the determination of border policies.
(See Miller 2008 for a critical discussion of this argument.)
Conceptions of global legitimacy broaden the scope of legitimate
authority to global governance institutions. One of the precursors of
global legitimacy is Kant. Kant is often read as advocating a
conception of international legitimacy based on a loose “league
of nations”—especially in Perpetual Peace. But
Sharon Byrd and Joachim Hruschka (2008) argue that Kant, especially in
The Doctrine of Right, can also be read as favoring, a
“state of nation states” as the right approach to global
legitimacy. This conception, while stopping short of requiring a
single world state, confers more coercive political power to the
global level than the league of nations, which essentially leaves
untouched the sovereignty of nation states.
The philosophical literature on global legitimacy is very much work in
progress. But most proposals favor a multilevel system of governance
in which global legitimacy is to be achieved through an appropriate
division of labor between nation states and issue-specific global
governance institutions (e.g. Caney 2006; Valentini 2012).
Any successful theory of global legitimacy has to cover the following
three issues. First, what are global governance institutions and in
what ways can and should they be thought of as taking over roles from
states or their governments? This is a question about the subject of
global legitimacy (Hurrell and MacDonald 2012). Second, what is the
legitimacy problem that such governance institutions face? And, third,
how can they solve this problem of legitimacy and what are legitimacy
criteria that apply to them? How, if at all, do these criteria differ
from those that apply at the level of nation states?
In response to the first question, Buchanan and Keohane (2006) argue
that global governance institutions such as the WTO or the IMF
“are like governments in that they issue rules and publicly
attach significant consequences to compliance or failure to comply
with them—and claim authority to do so” (Buchanan and
Keohane 2006: 406). These institutions are set up to handle certain
issues in similar fashion as national political agencies would. Just
like national political institutions, they are coordination devices.
Only they are created to solve problems that arise at the global
level.
Joshua Cohen and Charles Sabel (2005) have a slightly broader account
of global governance institutions—one that is not limited to
them being coordination devices, but that emphasizes coercion instead.
According to Cohen and Sabel 2005: 765), “[t]o a substantial and
growing extent … rulemaking directly affecting the freedom of
action of individuals, firms, and nation states (and the making of
rules to regulate this rulemaking) is taking place … in global
settings created by the world’s nations but no longer under
their effective control.” In their answer to the second
question, they relate the legitimacy problem of global governance
institutions to the absence of political authority, understood as
legitimate exercises of coercive political power, at the global level.
To overcome this problem, they argue, new modes of governance must be
created, with their own structures of accountability. These structures
are necessary to properly deal with the coercive power that these
institutions exercise. 
Buchanan and Keohane agree that the attempt to rule without legitimacy
is an unjustified exercise of power. They also argue that the attempt
to rule without legitimacy raises not only a normative problem, but
has direct practical consequences, as institutions that appear
unjustified will not be effective. The problem of legitimacy that
global governance institutions face is that even when there is
widespread agreement that global institutions that can take on the
role of co-ordination devices are necessary, there will be widespread
disagreement about which particular institutions are necessary and
what rules they should issue (Buchanan and Keohane 2006: 408ff).
In answer to the third question, Buchanan and Keohane (2006) propose a
moralized conception of legitimacy: legitimacy “is the right to
rule, understood to mean both that institutional agents are morally
justified in making rules and attempting to secure compliance with
them and that people subject to those rules have moral,
content-independent reasons to follow them and/or to not interfere
with others’ compliance with them” (2006: 411).
Substantively, they propose that an institution is morally justified
in this way if it does not contribute to grave injustices
(“minimal moral acceptability”), if there is no obvious
alternative that would perform better (“comparative
benefit”), and if it respects its own guidelines and procedures
(“institutional integrity”) (Buchanan and Keohane 2006:
419ff).
An important question for political cosmopolitanism is to what extent
international and global legitimacy require democracy—either at
the level of national states and governments or at the level of global
governance institutions. Many writers on the subject have tended to
take a cautiously positive stance on this issue (e.g. Beitz, 1979,
1998; Held 1995, 2002; Buchanan 2003; Buchanan and Keohane 2006). An
exception is Rawls in The Law of Peoples, however,
who advocates a conception of international legitimacy that demands
that peoples and their states are well-ordered, but does not associate
well-orderedness with democracy.
There are two worries that tend to underlie the cautious attitude. One
is feasibility: it is often argued that democracy at the international
level, let alone at the level of global governance institutions, is
utopian and cannot be realized. The second worry is of a moral nature:
democracy should not be imposed on people and peoples who endorse a
different set of values (see Valentini 2014 for a discussion). 
In response to the second worry, Christiano (2015) argues that a human
right to democracy is compatible with a right to self-determination
and that, properly understood, the right to self-determination
presupposes the human right to democracy. Christiano’s work offers
the most comprehensive defense of a human right to democracy at the
domestic level (Christiano 2011; 2015). Christiano’s instrumental
argument aims to show that democracies offer better protection of a
range of human rights than non-democracies. His intrinsic argument for
a human right to democracy builds on an argument discussed earlier
(section 4.2), namely that democracies are uniquely able to realize
the value of publicly treating people as equals.
Cohen and Sabel (2005) seek to rescue an ideal of global democracy
from more skeptical tendencies in the literature. They respond to
these considerations by advocating a notion of global democracy that
emphasizes the deliberative aspect. Granting to skeptics that
democratic decision-making mechanisms might be problematic for both
feasibility reasons and moral reasons, they argue that some form of
deliberation is primarily what is needed to address the legitimacy
deficit that global governance institutions face (see also Appiah
2006; List and Koenig-Archibugi 2010).