Like other classical political theorists, Thucydides
(c. 460–c. 400 B.C.E.)  saw politics as involving moral
questions. Most importantly, he asks whether relations among states to
which power is crucial can also be guided by the norms of
justice. His History of the Peloponnesian War is in fact
neither a work of political philosophy nor a sustained theory of
international relations. Much of this work, which presents a partial
account of the armed conflict between Athens and Sparta that took
place from 431 to 404 B.C.E., consists of paired speeches by
personages who argue opposing sides of an issue.  Nevertheless, if
the History is described as the only acknowledged classical
text in international relations, and if it inspires theorists from
Hobbes to contemporary international relations scholars, this is
because it is more than a chronicle of events, and a theoretical
position can be extrapolated from it. Realism is expressed in the very
first speech of the Athenians recorded in the
History—a speech given at the debate that took place in
Sparta just before the war. Moreover, a realist perspective is implied
in the way Thucydides explains the cause of the Peloponnesian War, and
also in the famous “Melian Dialogue,” in the statements
made by the Athenian envoys.
International relations realists emphasize the constraints imposed
on politics by the nature of human beings, whom they consider egoistic,
and by the absence of international government. Together these factors
contribute to a conflict-based paradigm of international relations, in
which the key actors are states, in which power and security become the
main issues, and in which there is little place for morality. The set
of premises concerning state actors, egoism, anarchy, power, security,
and morality that define the realist tradition are all present in
Thucydides.
(1) Human nature is a starting point for classical political realism. Realists view human beings as inherently egoistic and self-interested to the extent that self-interest overcomes moral
principles. At the debate in Sparta, described in Book I of
Thucydides’ History, the Athenians affirm the priority
of self-interest over morality. They say that considerations of right
and wrong have “never turned people aside from the opportunities
of aggrandizement offered by superior strength” (chap. 1 par.
76).
(2) Realists, and especially today’s neorealists, consider the
absence of government, literally anarchy, to be the primary
determinant of international political outcomes. The lack of a common
rule-making and enforcing authority means, they argue, that the
international arena is essentially a self-help system. Each state is
responsible for its own survival and is free to define its own
interests and to pursue power. Anarchy thus leads to a situation in
which power has the overriding role in shaping interstate relations. In
the words of the Athenian envoys at Melos, without any common authority
that can enforce order, “the independent states survive [only]
when they are powerful” (5.97).
(3) Insofar as realists envision the world of states as anarchic,
they likewise view security as a central issue. To attain security,
states try to increase their power and engage in power-balancing for
the purpose of deterring potential aggressors. Wars are fought to
prevent competing nations from becoming militarily stronger.
Thucydides, while distinguishing between the immediate and underlying
causes of the Peloponnesian War, does not see its real cause in any of
the particular events that immediately preceded its outbreak. He
instead locates the cause of the war in the changing distribution of
power between the two blocs of Greek city-states: the Delian League,
under the leadership of Athens, and the Peloponnesian League, under the
leadership of Sparta. According to him, the growth of Athenian power
made the Spartans afraid for their security, and thus propelled them
into war (1.23).
(4) Realists are generally skeptical about the relevance of morality
to international politics. This can lead them to claim that there is no
place for morality in international relations, or that there is a
tension between demands of morality and requirements of successful
political action, or that states have their own morality that is
different from customary morality, or that morality, if employed at all, is merely
used instrumentally to justify states’ conduct. A clear case of
the rejection of ethical norms in relations among states can be found
in the “Melian Dialogue” (5.85–113). This dialogue relates
to the events of 416 B.C.E., when Athens invaded the island of Melos. The
Athenian envoys presented the Melians with a choice, destruction or
surrender, and from the outset asked them not to appeal to justice, but
to think only about their survival. In the envoys’ words,
“We both know that the decisions about justice are made in human
discussions only when both sides are under equal compulsion, but when
one side is stronger, it gets as much as it can, and the weak must
accept that” (5.89). To be “under equal compulsion”
means to be under the force of law, and thus to be subjected to a
common lawgiving authority (Korab-Karpowicz 2006, 234). Since such an
authority above states does not exist, the Athenians argue that in this
lawless condition of international anarchy, the only right is the right
of the stronger to dominate the weaker. They explicitly equate right
with might, and exclude considerations of justice from foreign
affairs.
We can thus find strong support for a realist perspective in the
statements of the Athenians. The question remains, however, to what
extent their realism coincides with Thucydides’ own viewpoint.
Although substantial passages of the “Melian Dialogue,” as
well as other parts of the History support a realistic
reading, Thucydides’ position cannot be deduced from such
selected fragments, but rather must be assessed on the basis of the
wider context of his book. In fact, even the “Melian
Dialogue” itself provides us with a number of contending
views.
Political realism is usually contrasted by IR scholars with idealism
or liberalism, a theoretical perspective that emphasizes international
norms, interdependence among states, and international cooperation. The
“Melian Dialogue,” which is one of the most frequently
commented-upon parts of Thucydides’ History, presents
the classic debate between the idealist and realist views: Can
international politics be based on a moral order derived from the
principles of justice, or will it forever remain the arena of
conflicting national interests and power?
For the Melians, who employ idealistic arguments, the choice is
between war and subjection (5.86). They are courageous and love their
country. They do not wish to lose their freedom, and in spite of the
fact that they are militarily weaker than the Athenians, they are
prepared to defend themselves (5.100; 5.112). They base their arguments
on an appeal to justice, which they associate with fairness, and regard
the Athenians as unjust (5.90; 5.104). They are pious, believing that
gods will support their just cause and compensate for their weakness,
and trust in alliances, thinking that their allies, the Spartans, who
are also related to them, will help them (5.104; 5.112). Hence, one can
identify in the speech of the Melians elements of the idealistic or
liberal world view: the belief that nations have the right to exercise
political independence, that they have mutual obligations to one
another and will carry out such obligations, and that a war of
aggression is unjust. What the Melians nevertheless lack are resources
and foresight. In their decision to defend themselves, they are guided
more by their hopes than by the evidence at hand or by prudent
calculations.
The Athenian argument is based on key realist concepts such as
security and power, and is informed not by what the world should be,
but by what it is. The Athenians disregard any moral talk and urge the
Melians to look at the facts—that is, to recognize their military
inferiority, to consider the potential consequences of their decision,
and to think about their own survival (5.87; 5.101). There appears to
be a powerful realist logic behind the Athenian arguments. Their
position, based on security concerns and self-interest, seemingly
involves reliance on rationality, intelligence, and foresight. However,
upon close examination, their logic proves to be seriously flawed.
Melos, a relatively weak state, does not pose any real security threat
to them. The eventual destruction of Melos does not change the course
of the Peloponnesian War, which Athens will lose a few years later.
In the History, Thucydides shows that power, if it is
unrestrained by moderation and a sense of justice, brings about the
uncontrolled desire for more power. There are no logical limits to the
size of an empire. Drunk with the prospect of glory and gain, after
conquering Melos, the Athenians engage in a war against Sicily. They
pay no attention to the Melian argument that considerations of justice
are useful to all in the longer run (5.90). And, as the Athenians
overestimate their strength and in the end lose the war, their
self-interested logic proves to be very shortsighted indeed.
It is utopian to ignore the reality of power in international
relations, but it is equally blind to rely on power alone. Thucydides
appears to support neither the naive idealism of the Melians nor the
cynicism of their Athenian opponents. He teaches us to be on guard
“against naïve-dreaming on international politics,”
on the one hand, and “against the other pernicious extreme:
unrestrained cynicism,” on the other (Donnelly 2000, 193). If he
can be regarded as a political realist, his realism nonetheless prefigures neither realpolitik, in which traditional
ethics is denied, nor today’s scientific neorealism, in which moral
questions are largely ignored. Thucydides’ realism, neither immoral
nor amoral, can rather be compared to that of Hans Morgenthau, Raymond
Aron, and other twentieth-century classical realists, who, although
sensible to the demands of national interest, would not deny that
political actors on the international scene are subject to moral
judgment.
Idealism in international relations, like realism, can lay claim to
a long tradition. Unsatisfied with the world as they have found it,
idealists have always tried to answer the question of “what ought
to be” in politics. Plato, Aristotle, and Cicero were all
political idealists who believed that there were some universal moral
values on which political life could be based. Building on the work of
his predecessors, Cicero developed the idea of a natural moral law that
was applicable to both domestic and international politics. His ideas
concerning righteousness in war were carried further in the writings of
the Christian thinkers St. Augustine and St. Thomas Aquinas. In the
late fifteenth century, when Niccolò Machiavelli was born, the
idea that politics, including the relations among states, should be
virtuous, and that the methods of warfare should remain subordinated to
ethical standards, still predominated in political literature.
Machiavelli (1469–1527) challenged this well-established moral
tradition, thus positioning himself as a political innovator. The
novelty of his approach lies in his critique of classical Western
political thought as unrealistic, and in his separation of politics
from ethics. He thereby lays the foundations for modern politics. In
chapter XV of The Prince, Machiavelli announces that in
departing from the teachings of earlier thinkers, he seeks “the
effectual truth of the matter rather than the imagined one.” The
“effectual truth” is for him the only truth worth seeking.
It represents the sum of the practical conditions that he believes are
required to make both the individual and the country prosperous and
strong. Machiavelli replaces the ancient virtue (a moral
quality of the individual, such as justice or self-restraint) with
virtù, ability or vigor. As a prophet of
virtù, he promises to lead both nations and individuals
to earthly glory and power.
Machiavellianism is a radical type of political realism
that is applied to both domestic and international affairs. It is a
doctrine which denies the relevance of morality in politics, and claims
that all means (moral and immoral) are justified to achieve certain
political ends. Although Machiavelli never uses the phrase ragione
di stato or its French equivalent, raison
d’état, what ultimately counts for him is precisely
that: whatever is good for the state, rather than ethical scruples or
norms
Machiavelli justified immoral actions in politics, but never refused
to admit that they are evil. He operated within the single framework of
traditional morality. It became a specific task of his
nineteenth-century followers to develop the doctrine of a double
ethics: one public and one private, to push Machiavellian realism to
even further extremes, and to apply it to international relations. By
asserting that “the state has no higher duty than of maintaining
itself,” Hegel gave an ethical sanction to the state’s
promotion of its own interest and advantage against other states
(Meinecke 357). Thus he overturned the traditional morality. The good
of the state was perversely interpreted as the highest moral value,
with the extension of national power regarded as a nation’s right
and duty. Referring to Machiavelli, Heinrich von Treitschke declared
that the state was power, precisely in order to assert itself as
against other equally independent powers, and that the supreme moral
duty of the state was to foster this power. He considered international
agreements to be binding only insofar as it was expedient for the
state. The idea of an autonomous ethics of state behavior and the
concept of realpolitik were thus introduced. Traditional
ethics was denied and power politics was associated with a
“higher” type of morality. These concepts, along with the
belief in the superiority of Germanic culture, served as weapons with
which German statesmen, from the eighteenth century to the end of the
Second World War, justified their policies of conquest and
extermination.
Machiavelli is often praised for his prudential advice to
leaders (which has caused him to be regarded as a founding master of
modern political strategy) and for his defense of the republican form
of government. There are certainly many aspects of his thought that
merit such praise. Nevertheless, it is also possible to see him as the
thinker who bears foremost responsibility for the demoralization of Europe.
The argument of the Athenian envoys presented in Thucydides’
“Melian Dialogue,” that of Thrasymachus in Plato’s
Republic, or that of Carneades, to whom Cicero
refers—all of these challenge the ancient and Christian views of
the unity of politics and ethics. However, before Machiavelli, this
amoral or immoral mode of thinking had never prevailed in the
mainstream of Western political thought. It was the force and
timeliness of his justification of resorting to evil as a legitimate
means of achieving political ends that persuaded so many of the
thinkers and political practitioners who followed him. The effects of
Machiavellian ideas, such as the notion that the employment of all
possible means was permissible in war, would be seen on the
battlefields of modern Europe, as mass citizen armies fought against
each other to the bitter end without regard for the rules of justice.
The tension between expediency and morality lost its validity in the
sphere of politics. The concept of a double ethics, private and public,
that created a further damage to traditional, customary ethics was
invented. The doctrine of raison d’état
ultimately led to the politics of Lebensraum, two world wars,
and the Holocaust.
Perhaps the greatest problem with realism in international
relations is that it has a tendency to slip into its extreme version,
which accepts any policy that can benefit the state at the expense of
other states, no matter how morally problematic the policy is. Even if
they do not explicitly raise ethical questions, in the works of Waltz
and of many other of today’s neorealists, a double ethics is
presupposed, and words such realpolitik no longer have the
negative connotations that they had for classical realists, such as
Hans Morgenthau.
Thomas Hobbes (1588–1683) was part of an intellectual movement whose
goal was to free the emerging modern science from the constraints of
the classical and scholastic heritage. According to classical political
philosophy, on which the idealist perspective is based, human beings
can control their desires through reason and can work for the benefit
of others, even at the expense of their own benefit. They are thus both
rational and moral agents, capable of distinguishing between right and
wrong, and of making moral choices. They are also naturally social.
With great skill Hobbes attacks these views. His human beings,
extremely individualistic rather than moral or social, are subject to
“a perpetual and restless desire of power after power, that
ceases only in death” (Leviathan XI 2). They therefore
inevitably struggle for power. In setting out such ideas, Hobbes
contributes to some of the basic conceptions fundamental to the realist
tradition in international relations, and especially to neorealism.
These include the characterization of human nature as egoistic, the
concept of international anarchy, and the view that politics, rooted in
the struggle for power, can be rationalized and studied
scientifically.
One of the most widely known Hobbesian concepts is that of the
anarchic state of nature, seen as entailing a state of war—and
“such a war as is of every man against every man” (XII 8).
He derives his notion of the state of war from his views of both human
nature and the condition in which individuals exist. Since in the state
of nature there is no government and everyone enjoys equal status,
every individual has a right to everything; that is, there are no
constraints on an individual’s behavior. Anyone may at any time
use force, and all must constantly be ready to counter such force with
force. Hence, driven by acquisitiveness, having no moral restraints,
and motivated to compete for scarce goods, individuals are apt to
“invade” one another for gain. Being suspicious of one
another and driven by fear, they are also likely to engage in
preemptive actions and invade one another to ensure their own safety.
Finally, individuals are also driven by pride and a desire for glory.
Whether for gain, safety, or reputation, power-seeking individuals will
thus “endeavor to destroy or subdue one another” (XIII 3).
In such uncertain conditions where everyone is a potential aggressor,
making war on others is a more advantageous strategy than peaceable
behavior, and one needs to learn that domination over others is
necessary for one’s own continued survival.
Hobbes is primarily concerned with the relationship between
individuals and the state, and his comments about relations among
states are scarce. Nevertheless, what he says about the lives of
individuals in the state of nature can also be interpreted as a
description of how states exist in relation to one another. Once states
are established, the individual drive for power becomes the basis for
the states’ behavior, which often manifests itself in their
efforts to dominate other states and peoples. States, “for their
own security,” writes Hobbes, “enlarge their dominions upon
all pretences of danger and fear of invasion or assistance that may be
given to invaders, [and] endeavour as much as they can, to subdue and
weaken their neighbors” (XIX 4). Accordingly, the quest and
struggle for power lies at the core of the Hobbesian vision of
relations among states. The same would later be true of the model of
international relations developed by Hans Morgenthau, who was deeply
influenced by Hobbes and adopted the same view of human nature.
Similarly, the neorealist Kenneth Waltz would follow Hobbes’ lead
regarding international anarchy (the fact that sovereign states are not
subject to any higher common sovereign) as the essential element of
international relations.
By subjecting themselves to a sovereign, individuals escape the war
of all against all which Hobbes associates with the state of nature;
however, this war continues to dominate relations among states. This
does not mean that states are always fighting, but rather that they
have a disposition to fight (XIII 8). With each state deciding for
itself whether or not to use force, war may break out at any time. The
achievement of domestic security through the creation of a state is
then paralleled by a condition of inter-state insecurity. One can argue
that if Hobbes were fully consistent, he would agree with the notion
that, to escape this condition, states should also enter into a
contract and submit themselves to a world sovereign. Although the idea
of a world state would find support among some of today’s
realists, this is not a position taken by Hobbes himself. He does not
propose that a social contract among nations be implemented to bring
international anarchy to an end. This is because the condition of
insecurity in which states are placed does not necessarily lead to
insecurity for their citizens. As long as an armed conflict or other type
of hostility between states does not actually break out, individuals
within a state can feel relatively secure.
The denial of the existence of universal moral principles in the
relations among states brings Hobbes close to the Machiavellians and
the followers of the doctrine of raison d’état.
His theory of international relations, which assumes that independent
states, like independent individuals, are enemies by nature, asocial
and selfish, and that there is no moral limitation on their behavior,
is a great challenge to the idealist political vision based on human
sociability and to the concept of the international jurisprudence that
is built on this vision. However, what separates Hobbes from
Machiavelli and associates him more with classical realism is his
insistence on the defensive character of foreign policy. His political
theory does not put forward the invitation to do whatever may be
advantageous for the state. His approach to international relations is
prudential and pacific: sovereign states, like individuals, should be
disposed towards peace which is commended by reason.
What Waltz and other neorealist readers of Hobbes’s works
sometimes overlook is that he does not perceive international anarchy
as an environment without any rules. By suggesting that certain
dictates of reason apply even in the state of nature, he affirms that
more peaceful and cooperative international relations are possible.
Neither does he deny the existence of international law. Sovereign
states can sign treaties with one another to provide a legal basis for
their relations. At the same time, however, Hobbes seems aware that
international rules will often prove ineffective in restraining the
struggle for power. States will interpret them to their own advantage,
and so international law will be obeyed or ignored according to the
interests of the states affected. Hence, international relations will
always tend to be a precarious affair. This grim view of global
politics lies at the core of Hobbes’s realism.
Twentieth-century realism was born in response to the idealist
perspective that dominated international relations scholarship in the
aftermath of the First World War. The idealists of the 1920s and 1930s
(also called liberal internationalists or utopians) had the goal of
building peace in order to prevent another world conflict. They saw the
solution to inter-state problems as being the creation of a respected
system of international law, backed by international organizations.
This interwar idealism resulted in the founding of the League of
Nations in 1920 and in the Kellogg-Briand Pact of 1928 outlawing war
and providing for the peaceful settlements of disputes. U.S. President
Woodrow Wilson, scholars such as Norman Angell, Alfred Zimmern, and
Raymond B. Fosdick, and other prominent idealists of the era, gave
their intellectual support to the League of Nations. Instead of
focusing on what some might see as the inevitability of conflict
between states and peoples, they chose to emphasize the common
interests that could unite humanity, and attempted to appeal to
rationality and morality. For them, war did not originate in an
egoistic human nature, but rather in imperfect social conditions and
political arrangements, which could be improved. Yet their ideas were
already being criticized in the early 1930s by Reinhold Niebuhr and
within a few years by E. H. Carr. The League of Nations, which the
United States never joined, and from which Japan and Germany withdrew,
could not prevent the outbreak of the Second World War. This fact,
perhaps more than any theoretical argument, produced a strong realist
reaction. Although the United Nations, founded in 1945, can still be
regarded as a product of idealist political thinking, the discipline of
international relations was profoundly influenced in the initial years
of the post-war period by the works of “classical” realists
such as John H. Herz, Hans Morgenthau, George Kennan, and Raymond Aron.
Then, during the 1950s and 1960s, classical realism came under
challenge of scholars who tried to introduce a more scientific approach
to the study of international politics. During the 1980s it gave way to
another trend in international relations theory—neorealism.
Since it is impossible within the scope of this article to introduce
all of the thinkers who contributed to the development of
twentieth-century classical realism, E. H. Carr and Hans Morgenthau, as
perhaps the most influential among them, have been selected for
discussion here.
In his main work on international relations, The Twenty
Years’ Crisis, first published in July 1939, Edward Hallett
Carr (1892–1982) attacks the idealist position, which he describes as
“utopianism.” He characterizes this position as
encompassing faith in reason, confidence in progress, a sense of moral
rectitude, and a belief in an underlying harmony of interests.
According to the idealists, war is an aberration in the course of
normal life and the way to prevent it is to educate people for peace,
and to build systems of collective security such as the League of
Nations or today’s United Nations. Carr challenges idealism by
questioning its claim to moral universalism and its idea of the harmony
of interests. He declares that “morality can only be relative,
not universal” (19), and states that the doctrine of the harmony
of interests is invoked by privileged groups “to justify and
maintain their dominant position” (75).
Carr uses the concept of the relativity of thought, which he traces
to Marx and other modern theorists, to show that standards by which
policies are judged are the products of circumstances and interests.
His central idea is that the interests of a given party always
determine what this party regards as moral principles, and hence, these
principles are not universal. Carr observes that politicians, for
example, often use the language of justice to cloak the particular
interests of their own countries, or to create negative images of other
people to justify acts of aggression. The existence of such instances
of morally discrediting a potential enemy or morally justifying
one’s own position shows, he argues, that moral ideas are derived
from actual policies. Policies are not, as the idealists would have it,
based on some universal norms, independent of interests of the parties
involved.
If specific moral standards are de facto founded on interests,
Carr’s argument goes, there are also interests underlying what
are regarded as absolute principles or universal moral values. While
the idealists tend to regard such values, such as peace or justice, as
universal and claim that upholding them is in the interest of all, Carr
argues against this view. According to him, there are neither universal
values nor universal interests. He claims that those who refer to universal
interests are in fact acting in their own interests (71). They think that what is best for them is best for everyone, and identify their own
interests with the universal interest of the world at large.
The idealist concept of the harmony of interests is based
on the notion that human beings can rationally recognize that they have
some interests in common, and that cooperation is therefore possible.
Carr contrasts this idea with the reality of conflict of
interests. According to him, the world is torn apart by the
particular interests of different individuals and groups. In such a
conflictual environment, order is based on power, not on morality.
Further, morality itself is the product of power (61). Like Hobbes,
Carr regards morality as constructed by the particular legal system
that is enforced by a coercive power. International moral norms are
imposed on other countries by dominant nations or groups of nations
that present themselves as the international community as a whole. They
are invented to perpetuate those nations’ dominance.
Values that idealists view as good for all, such as peace, social
justice, prosperity, and international order, are regarded by Carr as
mere status quo notions. The powers that are satisfied with
the status quo regard the arrangement in place as just and therefore
preach peace. They try to rally everyone around their idea of what is
good. “Just as the ruling class in a community prays for domestic
peace, which guarantees its own security and predominance, … so
international peace becomes a special vested interest of predominant
powers” (76). On the other hand, the unsatisfied powers consider
the same arrangement as unjust, and so prepare for war. Hence, the way
to obtain peace, if it cannot be simply enforced, is to satisfy the
unsatisfied powers. “Those who profit most by [international]
order can in the longer run only hope to maintain it by making
sufficient concessions to make it tolerable to those who profit by it
least” (152). The logical conclusion to be drawn by the reader of
Carr’s book is the policy of appeasement.
Carr was a sophisticated thinker. He recognized himself that the logic
of “pure realism can offer nothing but a naked struggle for
power which makes any kind of international society impossible”
(87). Although he demolishes what he calls “the current
utopia” of idealism, he at the same time attempts to build
“a new utopia,” a realist world order
(ibid.). Thus, he acknowledges that human beings need certain
fundamental, universally acknowledged norms and values, and
contradicts his own argument by which he tries to deny universality to
any norms or values. To make further objections, the fact that the
language of universal moral values can be misused in politics for the
benefit of one party or another, and that such values can only be
imperfectly implemented in political institutions, does not mean that
such values do not exist. There is a deep yearning in many human
beings, both privileged and unprivileged, for peace, order,
prosperity, and justice. The legitimacy of idealism consists in the
constant attempt to reflect upon and uphold these values. Idealists
fail if in their attempt they do not pay enough attention to the
reality of power. On the other hand, in the world of pure realism, in
which all values are made relative to interests, life turns into
nothing more than a power game and is unbearable.
The Twenty Years’ Crisis touches on a number of
universal ideas, but it also reflects the spirit of its time. While we
can fault the interwar idealists for their inability to construct
international institutions strong enough to prevent the outbreak of the
Second World War, this book indicates that interwar realists were
likewise unprepared to meet the challenge. Carr frequently refers to
Germany under Nazi rule as if it were a country like any other. He says
that should Germany cease to be an unsatisfied power and “become
supreme in Europe,” it would adopt a language of international
solidarity similar to that of other Western powers (79). The inability
of Carr and other realists to recognize the perilous nature of Nazism,
and their belief that Germany could be satisfied by territorial
concessions, helped to foster a political environment in which the
latter was to grow in power, annex Czechoslovakia at will, and be
militarily opposed in September 1939 by Poland alone.
A theory of international relations is not just an intellectual
enterprise; it has practical consequences. It influences our thinking
and political practice. On the practical side, the realists of the
1930s, to whom Carr gave intellectual support, were people opposed to
the system of collective security embodied in the League of Nations.
Working within the foreign policy establishments of the day, they
contributed to its weakness. Once they had weakened the League, they
pursued a policy of appeasement and accommodation with Germany as an
alternative to collective security (Ashworth 46). After the annexation
of Czechoslovakia, when the failure of the anti-League realist
conservatives gathered around Neville Chamberlain and of this policy
became clear, they tried to rebuild the very security system they had
earlier demolished. Those who supported collective security were
labeled idealists.
Hans J. Morgenthau (1904–1980) developed realism into a
comprehensive international relations theory. Influenced by the
Protestant theologian and political writer Reinhold Niebuhr, as well as
by Hobbes, he places selfishness and power-lust at the center of his
picture of human existence. The insatiable human lust for power,
timeless and universal, which he identifies with animus
dominandi, the desire to dominate, is for him the main cause of
conflict. As he asserts in his main work, Politics among Nations:
The Struggle for Power and Peace, first published in 1948,
“international politics, like all politics, is a struggle for
power” (25).
Morgenthau systematizes realism in international relations on the
basis of six principles that he includes in the second edition of
Politics among Nations. As a traditionalist, he opposes
the so-called scientists (the scholars who, especially in the
1950s, tried to reduce the discipline of international relations to a
branch of behavioral science). Nevertheless, in the first principle he states that
realism is based on objective laws that have their roots in unchanging
human nature (4). He wants to develop realism into both a theory of
international politics and a political art, a useful tool of foreign
policy.
The keystone of Morgenthau’s realist theory is the concept
of power or “of interest defined in terms of power,”
which informs his second principle: the assumption that political
leaders “think and act in terms of interest defined as
power” (5). This concept defines the autonomy of politics, and
allows for the analysis of foreign policy regardless of the different
motives, preferences, and intellectual and moral qualities of
individual politicians. Furthermore, it is the foundation of a rational
picture of politics.
Although, as Morgenthau explains in the third principle, interest
defined as power is a universally valid category, and indeed an
essential element of politics, various things can be associated with
interest or power at different times and in different circumstances.
Its content and the manner of its use are determined by the political
and cultural environment.
In the fourth principle, Morgenthau considers the relationship between
realism and ethics. He says that while realists are aware of the moral
significance of political action, they are also aware of the tension
between morality and the requirements of successful political
action. “Universal moral principles,” he asserts,
“cannot be applied to the actions of states in their abstract
universal formulation, but …they must be filtered through the
concrete circumstances of time and place” (9). These principles
must be accompanied by prudence for as he cautions “there can be
no political morality without prudence; that is, without consideration
of the political consequences of seemingly moral action”
(ibid.).
Prudence, and not conviction of one’s own moral or ideological
superiority, should guide political action. This is stressed in the
fifth principle, where Morgenthau again emphasizes the idea that all
state actors, including our own, must be looked at solely as political
entities pursuing their respective interests defined in terms of power.
By taking this point of view vis-à-vis its counterparts and thus
avoiding ideological confrontation, a state would then be able to
pursue policies that respected the interests of other states, while
protecting and promoting its own.
Insofar as power, or interest defined as power, is the concept that
defines politics, politics is an autonomous sphere, as Morgenthau says
in his sixth principle of realism. It cannot be subordinated to ethics.
However, ethics does still play a role in politics. “A man who
was nothing but ‘political man’ would be a beast, for he
would be completely lacking in moral restraints. A man who was nothing
but ‘moral man’ would be a fool, for he would be completely
lacking in prudence” (12). Political art requires that these two
dimensions of human life, power and morality, be taken into
consideration.
While Morgenthau’s six principles of realism contain
repetitions and inconsistencies, we can nonetheless obtain from them
the following picture: Power or interest is the central concept that
makes politics into an autonomous discipline. Rational state actors
pursue their national interests. Therefore, a rational theory of
international politics can be constructed. Such a theory is not
concerned with the morality, religious beliefs, motives or ideological
preferences of individual political leaders. It also indicates that in
order to avoid conflicts, states should avoid moral crusades or
ideological confrontations, and look for compromise based solely on
satisfaction of their mutual interests.
Although he defines politics as an autonomous sphere, Morgenthau
does not follow the Machiavellian route of completely removing ethics
from politics. He suggests that, although human beings are political
animals, who pursue their interests, they are moral animals. Deprived
of any morality, they would descend to the level of beasts or
sub-humans. Even if it is not guided by universal moral principles,
political action thus has for Morgenthau a moral significance.
Ultimately directed toward the objective of national survival, it also
involves prudence. The effective protection of citizens’ lives
from harm is not merely a forceful physical action; it has prudential
and moral dimensions.
Morgenthau regards realism as a way of thinking about international
relations and a useful tool for devising policies. However, some of the
basic conceptions of his theory, and especially the idea of conflict as
stemming from human nature, as well as the concept of power itself,
have provoked criticism.
International politics, like all politics, is for Morgenthau a
struggle for power because of the basic human lust for power. But
regarding every individual as being engaged in a perpetual quest for
power—the view that he shares with Hobbes—is a questionable premise. Human nature cannot be revealed by observation and experiment. It cannot be proved by any empirical research, but only disclosed by philosophy, imposed on us as a matter of belief, and inculcated by education.
Morgenthau himself reinforces the belief in the human drive for power by introducing a normative aspect of his theory, which is rationality. A rational foreign policy
is considered “to be a good foreign policy” (7). But he defines rationality as a process of calculating the costs and benefits of all alternative policies in order to determine their relative
utility, i.e. their ability to maximize power. Statesmen “think
and act in terms of interest defined as power” (5). Only
intellectual weakness of policy makers can result in foreign policies
that deviate from a rational course aimed at minimizing risks and
maximizing benefits. Hence, rather than presenting an actual portrait of human
affairs, Morgenthau emphasizes the pursuit of power and the rationality of this pursuit, and sets it up as a norm.
As Raymond Aron and other scholars have noticed, power, the
fundamental concept of Morgenthau’s realism, is ambiguous. It can
be either a means or an end in politics. But if power is only a means
for gaining something else, it does not define the nature of
international politics in the way Morgenthau claims. It does not allow
us to understand the actions of states independently from the motives
and ideological preferences of their political leaders. It cannot serve
as the basis for defining politics as an autonomous sphere.
Morgenthau’s principles of realism are thus open to doubt.
“Is this true,” Aron asks, “that states, whatever
their regime, pursue the same kind of foreign policy” (597) and
that the foreign policies of Napoleon or Stalin are essentially
identical to those of Hitler, Louis XVI or Nicholas II, amounting to no
more than the struggle for power? “If one answers yes, then the
proposition is incontestable, but not very instructive” (598).
Accordingly, it is useless to define actions of states by exclusive
reference to power, security or national interest. International
politics cannot be studied independently of the wider historical and
cultural context.
Although Carr and Morgenthau concentrate primarily on international
relations, their realism can also be applied to domestic politics. To
be a classical realist is in general to perceive politics as a
conflict of interests and a struggle for power, and to seek peace by
recognizing common interests and trying to satisfy them, rather than
by moralizing. Bernard Williams and Raymond Geuss, influential
representatives of the new political realism, a movement in
contemporary political theory, criticize what they describe as
“political moralism” and stress the autonomy of politics
against ethics. However, political theory realism and international
relations realism seem like two separate research programs. As noted
by several scholars (William Scheuerman, Alison McQueen, Terry
Nardin. Duncan Bell), those who contribute to realism in political
theory give little attention to those who work on realism in
international politics.
In spite of its ambiguities and weaknesses, Morgenthau’s
Politics among Nations became a standard textbook and
influenced thinking about international politics for a generation or
so. At the same time, there was an attempt to develop a more methodologically rigorous approach to theorizing about international affairs. In the 1950s and 1960s a large influx of scientists from different fields entered the discipline of International Relations and attempted to replace the “wisdom literature” of classical realists with scientific concepts and reasoning (Brown 35). This in turn provoked a counterattack by Morgenthau and scholars associated with the so-called English School, especially Hedley Bull, who defended a traditional approach (Bull 1966).
As a result, the IR discipline has been divided into two main strands: traditional or non-positivist and scientific or positivist (neo-positivist). At a later stage the third strand: post-positivism has been added. The traditionalists raise normative questions and engage with history, philosophy and law. The scientists or positivists stress a descriptive and explanatory form of inquiry, rather than a normative one. They have established a strong presence in the field. Already by the mid-1960s, the majority of American students in international relations were trained in quantitative research, game theory, and other new research techniques of the social sciences. This, along with the changing international environment, had a significant effect on the discipline.
The realist assumption was that the state is the key actor in international politics, and that relations among states are the core of actual international relations. However, with the receding of the Cold War during the 1970s, one could witness the growing importance of international and non-governmental organizations, as well as of multinational corporations. This development led to a revival of idealist thinking, which became known as neoliberalism or pluralism. While accepting some basic assumptions of realism, the leading pluralists, Robert Keohane and Joseph Nye, have proposed the concept of
complex interdependence to describe this more sophisticated picture of global politics. They would argue that there can be progress in international relations and that the future does not need to look like the past.
The realist response came most prominently from Kenneth N. Waltz,
who reformulated realism in international relations in a new and
distinctive way. In his book Theory of International Politics,
first published in 1979, he responded to the liberal challenge and
attempted to cure the defects of the classical realism of Hans
Morgenthau with his more scientific approach, which has became known as
structural realism or neorealism. Whereas Morgenthau rooted his theory
in the struggle for power, which he related to human nature, Waltz made
an effort to avoid any philosophical discussion of human nature, and
set out instead to build a theory of international politics analogous
to microeconomics. He argues that states in the international system
are like firms in a domestic economy and have the same fundamental
interest: to survive. “Internationally, the environment of
states’ actions, or the structure of their system, is set by the
fact that some states prefer survival over other ends obtainable in the
short run and act with relative efficiency to achieve that end”
(93).
Waltz maintains that by paying attention to the individual state,
and to ideological, moral and economic issues, both traditional
liberals and classical realists make the same mistake. They fail to
develop a serious account of the international system—one that
can be abstracted from the wider socio-political domain. Waltz
acknowledges that such an abstraction distorts reality and omits many
of the factors that were important for classical realism. It does not
allow for the analysis of the development of specific foreign policies.
However, it also has utility. Notably, it assists in understanding the
primary determinants of international politics. To be sure, Waltz’s
neorealist theory cannot be applied to domestic politics. It cannot
serve to develop policies of states concerning their international or
domestic affairs. His theory helps only to explain why states behave in
similar ways despite their different forms of government and diverse
political ideologies, and why, despite their growing
interdependence, the overall picture of international relations is
unlikely to change.
According to Waltz, the uniform behavior of states over centuries
can be explained by the constraints on their behavior that are imposed
by the structure of the international system. A system’s
structure is defined first by the principle by which it is organized,
then by the differentiation of its units, and finally by the
distribution of capabilities (power) across units. Anarchy, or the
absence of central authority, is for Waltz the ordering principle of
the international system. The units of the international system are
states. Waltz recognizes the existence of non-state actors, but
dismisses them as relatively unimportant. Since all states want to
survive, and anarchy presupposes a self-help system in which each state
has to take care of itself, there is no division of labor or functional
differentiation among them. While functionally similar, they are
nonetheless distinguished by their relative capabilities (the power
each of them represents) to perform the same function.
Consequently, Waltz sees power and state behavior in a different way
from the classical realists. For Morgenthau power was both a means and
an end, and rational state behavior was understood as simply the
course of action that would accumulate the most power. In contrast,
neorealists assume that the fundamental interest of each state is
security and would therefore concentrate on the distribution of power.
What also sets neorealism apart from classical realism is
methodological rigor and scientific self-conception (Guzinni 1998,
127–128). Waltz insists on empirical testability of knowledge and on
falsificationism as a methodological ideal, which, as he himself
admits, can have only a limited application in international
relations.
The distribution of capabilities among states can vary; however,
anarchy, the ordering principle of international relations, remains
unchanged. This has a lasting effect on the behavior of states that
become socialized into the logic of self-help. Trying to refute
neoliberal ideas concerning the effects of interdependence, Waltz
identifies two reasons why the anarchic international system limits
cooperation: insecurity and unequal gains. In the context of anarchy,
each state is uncertain about the intentions of others and is afraid
that the possible gains resulting from cooperation may favor other
states more than itself, and thus lead it to dependence on others.
“States do not willingly place themselves in situations of
increased dependence. In a self-help system, considerations of security
subordinate economic gain to political interest.” (Waltz 1979,
107).
Because of its theoretical elegance and methodological rigor,
neorealism has become very influential within the discipline of
international relations. In the eyes of many scholars, Morgenthau’s
realism has come to be seen as anachronistic—“an
interesting and important episode in the history of thinking about the
subject, no doubt, but one scarcely to be seen as a serious
contribution of the rigorously scientific theory” (Williams
2007, 1). However, while initially gaining more acceptance than
classical realism, neorealism has also provoked strong critiques on a
number of fronts.
In 1979 Waltz wrote that in the nuclear age the international
bipolar system, based on two superpowers—the United States and
the Soviet Union—was not only stable but likely to persist
(176–7). With the fall of the Berlin Wall and the subsequent
disintegration of the USSR this prediction was proven wrong. The
bipolar world turned out to have been more precarious than most realist
analysts had supposed. Its end opened new possibilities and challenges
related to globalization. This has led many critics to argue that
neorealism, like classical realism, cannot adequately account for
changes in world politics.
The new debate between international (neo)realists and (neo)liberals
is no longer concerned with the questions of morality and human nature,
but with the extent to which state behavior is influenced by the anarchic
structure of the international system rather than by institutions, learning and other factors that are conductive to cooperation. In his 1989 book International
Institutions and State Power, Robert Keohane accepts Waltz’s
emphasis on system-level theory and his general assumption that states
are self-interested actors that rationally pursue their goals. However,
by employing game theory he shows that states can widen the perception
of their self-interest through economic cooperation and involvement in
international institutions. Patterns of interdependence can thus affect
world politics. Keohane calls for systemic theories that would be able
to deal better with factors affecting state interaction, and with
change.
Critical theorists, such as Robert W. Cox, also focus on the alleged
inability of neorealism to deal with change. In their view,
neorealists take a particular, historically determined state-based
structure of international relations and assume it to be universally
valid. In contrast, critical theorists believe that by analyzing the
interplay of ideas, material factors, and social forces, one can
understand how this structure has come about, and how it may
eventually change. They contend that neorealism ignores both the
historical process during which identities and interests are formed,
and the diverse methodological possibilities. It legitimates the
existing status quo of strategic relations among states and considers
the scientific method as the only way of obtaining knowledge. It
represents an exclusionary practice, an interest in domination and
control.
While realists are concerned with relations among states, the focus
for critical theorists is social emancipation. Despite their
differences, critical theory, postmodernism and feminism all take issue
with the notion of state sovereignty and envision new political
communities that would be less exclusionary vis-à-vis marginal
and disenfranchised groups. Critical theory argues against state-based
exclusion and denies that the interests of a country’s citizens
take precedence over those of outsiders. It insists that politicians
should give as much weight to the interests of foreigners as they give
to those of their compatriots and envisions political structures beyond
the “fortress” nation-state. Postmodernism questions the
state’s claim to be a legitimate focus of human loyalties and its
right to impose social and political boundaries. It supports cultural
diversity and stresses the interests of minorities. Feminism argues
that the realist theory exhibits a masculine bias and advocates the
inclusion of woman and alternative values into public life.
Since critical theories and other alternative theoretical perspectives question the existing status quo, make knowledge dependent on power, and emphasize identity formation and social change, they are not traditional or non-positivist. They are sometimes called “reflectivist” or “post-positivist” (Weaver 165) and represent a radical departure from the neorealist and neoliberal “rationalist” or “positivist” 
international relation theories. Constructivists, such as Alexander Wendt, try to build a bridge between these two approaches by on the one hand, taking the present state system and anarchy seriously, and on the other hand, by focusing on the formation of identities and interests. Countering neorealist ideas, Wendt argues that self-help does not follow logically or casually from the principle of anarchy. It is socially constructed. Wendt’s idea that states’ identities and
interests are socially constructed has earned his position the label
“constructivism”. Consequently, in his view,
“self-help and power politics are institutions, and not essential
features of anarchy. Anarchy is what states make of it” (Wendt
1987 395). There is no single logic of anarchy but rather several,
depending on the roles with which states identify themselves and each
other. Power and interests are constituted by ideas and norms. Wendt
claims that neorealism cannot account for change in world politics, but
his norm-based constructivism can.
A similar conclusion, although derived in a traditional way, comes
from the non-positivist theorists of the English school (International Society
approach) who emphasize both systemic and normative constraints on the
behavior of states. Referring to the classical view of the human being
as an individual that is basically social and rational, capable of
cooperating and learning from past experiences, these theorists
emphasize that states, like individuals, have legitimate interests that
others can recognize and respect, and that they can recognize the
general advantages of observing a principle of reciprocity in their
mutual relations (Jackson and Sørensen 167). Therefore, states
can bind themselves to other states by treaties and develop some common
values with other states. Hence, the structure of the international
system is not unchangeable as the neorealists claim. It is not a
permanent Hobbesian anarchy, permeated by the danger of war. An
anarchic international system based on pure power relations among
actors can evolve into a more cooperative and peaceful international
society, in which state behavior is shaped by commonly shared values
and norms. A practical expression of international society are
international organizations that uphold the rule of law in
international relations, especially the UN.
An unintended and unfortunate consequence of the debate about
neorealism is that neorealism and a large part of its critique (with
the notable exception of the English School) has been expressed in abstract
scientific and philosophical terms. This has made the theory of
international politics almost inaccessible to a layperson and has
divided the discipline of international relations into incompatible
parts. Whereas classical realism was a theory aimed at supporting
diplomatic practice and providing a guide to be followed by those
seeking to understand and deal with potential threats, today’s
theories, concerned with various grand pictures and projects, are
ill-suited to perform this task. This is perhaps the main reason why
there has been a renewed interest in classical
realism, and particularly in the ideas of Morgenthau. Rather than
being seen as an obsolete form of pre-scientific realist thought,
superseded by neorealist theory, his thinking is now considered to be
more complex and of greater contemporary relevance than was
earlier recognized (Williams 2007, 1–9). It fits uneasily in the
orthodox picture of realism he is usually associated with.
In recent years, scholars have questioned prevailing narratives about
clear theoretical traditions in the discipline of international
relations. Thucydides, Machiavelli, Hobbes and other thinkers have
become subject to re-examination as a means of challenging prevailing
uses of their legacies in the discipline and exploring other lineages
and orientations. Morgenthau has undergone a similar process of
reinterpretation. A number of scholars (Hartmut Behr, Muriel Cozette, Amelia Heath, Sean Molloy) have endorsed the importance of his thought as a source of change for the standard interpretation of realism. Murielle Cozette stresses Morgenthau’s critical dimension of
realism expressed in his commitment to “speak truth to
power” and to “unmask power’s claims to truth and morality,” and in his tendency to assert different claims at different times (Cozette 10–12). She writes: “The protection of human life and freedom are given central importance by Morgenthau, and constitute a ‘transcendent standard of ethics’ which should always animate scientific enquiries” (19). This shows the flexibility of his classical realism and reveals his normative assumptions based on the promotion of universal moral values. While Morgenthau assumes that states are power-oriented actors, he at the same time acknowledges that international politics would be more pernicious than it actually is were it not for moral restraints and the work of international law(Behr and Heath 333).
Another avenue for the development of a realist theory of international relations is offered by Robert Gilpin’s seminal work War and Change in World Politics. If this work were to gain greater prominence in IR scholarship, instead of engaging in fruitless theoretical debates, we would be better prepared today “for rapid power shifts and geopolitical change ”(Wohlforth, 2011 505). We would be able to explain the causes of great wars and long periods of peace, and the creation and waning of international orders. Still another avenue is provided by the application of the new scientific discoveries to social sciences. The evidence for this is, for example, the recent work of Alexander Wendt, Quantum Mind and Social Science. A new realist approach to international politics could be based on the organic and holistic world view emerging from quantum theory, the idea of human evolution, and the growing awareness of the role of human beings in the evolutionary process (Korab-Karpowicz 2017).
Realism is thus more than a static, amoral theory, and cannot be
accommodated solely within a positivist interpretation of international
relations. It is a practical and evolving theory that depends on the actual
historical and political conditions, and is ultimately judged by its
ethical standards and by its relevance in making prudent political
decisions (Morgenthau 1962). Realism also performs a useful cautionary
role. It warns us against progressivism, moralism, legalism, and other
orientations that lose touch with the reality of self-interest and
power. Considered from this perspective, the neorealist revival of the 1970s can also be interpreted as a necessary corrective to an overoptimistic liberal belief in
international cooperation and change resulting from
interdependence.
Nevertheless, when it becomes a dogmatic enterprise, realism fails to
perform its proper function. By remaining stuck in a state-centric and
excessively simplified “paradigm” such as neorealism and by
denying the possibility of any progress in interstate relations, it
turns into an ideology. Its emphasis on power politics and national
interest can be misused to justify aggression. It has therefore to be
supplanted by theories that take better account of the dramatically
changing picture of global politics. To its merely negative,
cautionary function, positive norms must be added. These norms extend
from the rationality and prudence stressed by classical realists;
through the vision of multilateralism, international law, and an
international society emphasized by liberals and members of the
English School; to the cosmopolitanism and global solidarity advocated
by many of today’s writers.