“I can't define pornography,” one judge once famously said, “but I
know it when I see it.” (Justice Stewart in Jacobellis v. Ohio
378 US 184 (1964).) Can we do better?
The word “pornography” comes from the Greek for writing about
prostitutes. However, the etymology of the term is not much of a guide
to its current usage, since many of the things commonly called
“pornography” nowadays are neither literally written nor literally
about prostitutes.
Here is a first, simple definition. Pornography is any material
(either pictures or words) that is sexually explicit. This
definition of pornography may pick out different types of material in
different contexts, since what is viewed as sexually explicit can vary
from culture to culture and over time. “Sexually explicit” functions as
a kind of indexical term, picking out different features depending on
what has certain effects or breaks certain taboos in different contexts
and cultures. Displays of women's uncovered ankles count as sexually
explicit in some cultures, but not in most western cultures nowadays
(although they once did: the display of a female ankle in Victorian
times was regarded as most risqué). There may be borderline
cases too: do displays of bared breasts still count as sexually
explicit in various contemporary western cultures? However, some
material seems clearly to count as sexually explicit in many contexts
today: in particular, audio, written or visual representations of
sexual acts (e.g., sexual intercourse, oral sex) and exposed body parts
(e.g., the vagina, anus and penis-especially the erect penis).
Within the general class of sexually explicit material, there is
great variety in content. For example, some sexually explicit material
depicts women, and sometimes men, in postures of sexual display (e.g.,
Playboy centrefolds). Some depicts non-violent sexual acts (both
homosexual and heterosexual) between adults who are portrayed as equal
and consenting participants. Other sexually explicit representations
depict acts of violent coercion: people being whipped, beaten, bound,
tortured, mutilated, raped and even killed. Some
sexually explicit material may be degrading, without necessarily being
overtly violent. This material depicts people (most often women) in
positions of servility and subordination in their sexual relations with
others, or engaged in sexual acts that many people would regard as
humiliating. Some sexually explicit material involves or depicts
children. Some portrays bestiality and necrophilia; and so on.
On the first definition of pornography as sexually explicit
material, all such material would count as pornography, insofar as it
is sexually explicit. But this simple definition is not quite right.
Anatomy textbooks for medical students are sexually explicit-they
depict exposed genitalia, for example-but are rarely, if ever, viewed
as pornography. Sexual explicitness may be a necessary condition for
material to count as pornographic, but it does not seem to be
sufficient. So something needs to be added to the simple definition.
What else might be required?
Here is a second definition. Pornography is sexually explicit
material (verbal or pictorial) that is primarily designed
to produce sexual arousal in viewers. This definition is better:
it deals with the problem of anatomy textbooks and the like. Indeed,
this definition is one that is frequently employed (or presupposed) in
discussions of pornography and censorship. (See e.g., Williams 1981.)
Of course, it is important to distinguish here between sexually
explicit material that is wholly or primarily
designed to produce sexual arousal (i.e., whose only or overriding aim
is to produce sexual arousal) and material whose aim is to do this in
order to make some other artistic or political point. The film,
Last Tango in Paris arguably aims to arouse audiences, but
this is not its primary aim. It does so in order to make a broader
political point.
It is sometimes assumed that pornography, in this second sense, is
published and consumed by a small and marginalized minority. But, while
exact estimates of the size and profitability of the international
trade in pornography vary somewhat, it is generally agreed that the
pornography industry is a massive international enterprise, with a
multi-billion dollar annual turnover. In 2003, the pornography industry
(taken to include adult videos, magazines, Cable/Pay per view, Internet
and CD-Rom) is estimated to have grossed US$34 billion world-wide; and
in excess of $8 billion in the U.S. alone, greater than the combined
revenue of ABC, CBS, and NBC ($6.2. billion). (See “Internet Filter
Review: Internet Pornography Statistics” in
 Other Internet Resources.)
 Pornography is much more widely consumed than
is sometimes supposed, and is a large and extremely profitable
international industry.
However, the term “pornography” is often used with an additional
normative force that the first and second definitions leave
out. When many people describe something (e.g., a book such as
Tropic of Capricorn or a film such as Baise Moi)as
“pornographic”, they seem to be doing more than simply dispassionately
describing its sexually explicit content or the intentions of its
producers-indeed, in these debates, the intentions of producers are
sometimes treated as irrelevant to the work's status as pornography.
They seem to be saying, in addition, that it is bad-and
perhaps also that its badness is not redeemed by other artistic,
literary, or political merit the work may possess. (Consider, for
example, how people use the term “visual pornography” to condemn
certain sorts of art or television, often when the material is not even
sexually explicit).
This suggests a third definition: pornography is sexually explicit
material designed to produce sexual arousal in consumers that is
bad in a certain way. This definition of pornography makes it
analytically true that pornography is bad: by definition, material that
is not bad in the relevant way is not pornography. It might be that
all and only sexually explicit material is bad in a certain
way (e.g., obscene): in which case, “pornography” will refer to all and
only the class of sexually explicit materials. But it might be that
only some sexually explicit material is objectionable (e.g.,
degrading to women), in which case only the bad subset of
sexually explicit material will count as pornography. And, of course,
it is possible that no sexually explicit material is bad in
the relevant way (e.g., harmful to women), in which case we would have
an error theory about pornography: there would be no pornography, so
defined, merely harmless, sexually explicit “erotica”.
A number of approaches define pornography as sexually explicit
material that is bad—although they disagree as to the relevant source of its badness, and consequently about what material is pornographic. A particularly
dominant approach has been to define pornography in terms of
obscenity. (For critical discussions of this approach see
Schauer 1982, Feinberg 1987, MacKinnon 1987.) The obscenity might be
taken to be intrinsic to the content of the material itself (for
example, that it depicts deviant sexual acts that are immoral in
themselves) or it may lie in contingent effects that the material has
(for example, that it tends to offend “reasonable” people, or to
deprave and corrupt viewers, or to erode traditional family and
religious values). If all sexually explicit material is obscene by
whichever of these standards is chosen, then all sexually explicit
material will be pornography on this definition. This is the definition
of pornography that moral conservatives typically favour.
But the badness of pornography need not reside in obscenity.
Pornography might be defined, not as sexually explicit material that is
obscene, but as that sexually explicit material that harms
women. Thus many contemporary feminist definitions define
“pornography” as sexually explicit material that depicts women's
subordination in such a way as to endorse that subordination.
(See Longino 1980, MacKinnon 1987.) This definition of pornography
leaves it open in principle that there might be sexually explicit
material that is not pornography: sexually explicit material that does
not subordinate women will count as harmless “erotica”.
Of course, women may not be the only people harmed by the production
or consumption of certain sorts of sexually explicit material. The
consumption of sexually explicit material has often been thought to be
harmful to its (mostly male) consumers: for example, by corrupting
their morals or by making them less likely to have loving,
long-term sexual relationships. Many people strongly object to
“child pornography”: that subset of sexually explicit material that
involves depictions of actual children engaged in sexual activity. This class of sexually explicit material is
widely regarded as objectionable because it involves the actual sexual
exploitation of children, together with a permanent record of that
abuse which may further harm their interests.
I have discussed how, on this third approach to defining
“pornography” as sexually explicit material that is bad or harmful in a
certain way, there are three possibilities: “pornography” might name
all, some or even no sexually explicit
material, depending on what (if any) class of sexually explicit
material is in fact bad in the relevant way. But it is worth noting
that there is an interesting fourth possibility. It is possible that
some non-sexually explicit material might also turn
out to be bad in the relevant way. It might be that some non-sexually
explicit material is obscene in the relevant sense (e.g., Andres
Serrano's famously controversial artwork entitled “Piss Christ”, which
displays a plastic crucifix in urine with cow's blood). Or it might
turn out that non-sexually explicit advertising that depicts women in
positions of sexual servility in such a way as to endorse that
subordination is also bad in the relevant way. (As many
philosophers might be inclined to put the point, the sexually explicit
materials that subordinate women via their depiction of women as
subordinate may turn out not to form a natural kind.) In this case,
there are two options. “Pornography” might be taken to name only the
sexually explicit subset of material that is bad in
the relevant sense (e.g., that depicts women as men's sexual
subordinates in such a way as to endorse their subordination); or
“pornography” might be taken to refer to all the material that
is bad in that way, whether that material is sexually explicit or not.
The former option would clearly stick more closely to the everyday
conception of pornography as involving the sexually explicit. But it
might be that this ordinary conception, on reflection, turns out not to
capture what is of moral and political interest and importance. There
may thus be a theoretical reason to conceive of pornography more
broadly than simply sexually explicit material that is bad in a certain
way, or perhaps simply to invent a new term that captures the
theoretically interesting kind. Some feminists seem inclined to this
broader approach, suggesting that material that explicitly depicts
women in postures of sexual submission, servility or display in such a
way as to endorse it counts as pornography (See Longino 1980 and
MacKinnon 1984). This may include some non-sexually explicit material
that would not ordinarily be thought of as pornography: for example,
photographs in artwork, advertising or fashion spreads that depict
women bound, chained or bruised in such a way as to glamorise these
things.
The term “pornography” is used in all of these different ways in
everyday discourse and debate, as well as in philosophical discussions:
sometimes it is used to mean merely material which is sexually
explicit; sometimes it is used to mean material which is sexually
explicit and objectionable in some particular way; and so on. (For further discussion, see Rea 2001.) 
It seems to me that we do not need to choose between these different
definitions, for all of them capture something of the term's everyday
use. What matters crucially is that we know which definition is being
used in a particular case. For the fact that “pornography” has
different senses can have two very unfortunate consequences if these
differences are not clearly noted and kept in mind: it can make it seem
that there is disagreement when there is not; and it can obscure the
real nature of the disagreement when there is.
Here is one topical example of how this might happen. Some feminists
object to pornography on the grounds that it harms women. Other
feminists claim that pornography may not always be harmful to women,
and may even sometimes be beneficial. It seems that there is genuine
disagreement here. But is there? Not necessarily. For the two sides
might mean different things by “pornography”. Suppose that feminists
who object to pornography are defining “pornography” as sexually
explicit material that subordinates women. So pornography, for them, is
that subset of sexually explicit material that in fact harms women.
This definition makes it an analytic truth that pornography, wherever
it exists, is bad from a feminist point of view. Feminists who defend
pornography, however, may be using “pornography” to mean simply
sexually explicit material (regardless of whether it is harmful to
women). There may thus be no genuine disagreement here. For both sides
might agree that sexually explicit material that harms women
is objectionable. They might also agree that there is nothing
objectionable about sexually explicit material that does not harm women
(or anyone else). If protagonists in the debate are using “pornography”
in different senses in this way, they may simply be talking past each
other.
Two really substantive issues at stake in the feminist debate over
pornography are 1) whether any sexually explicit material is
in fact harmful to women; and, if so, what should be done about it?;
and 2) whether all sexually explicit material is in fact
harmful to women; and, if so, what should be done about it? (We can
thus phrase two of the important issues, if we like, without mentioning
“pornography” at all.) If we define “pornography” simply as sexually
explicit material (regardless of whether it is harmful to women), then
the first substantive issue must be posed in this way: “is there
any pornography that is harmful to women; and, if so, what
should be done about it?” However, if “pornography” is defined as that
sexually explicit material that subordinates women then, while we can
ask this question, we must pose it differently: we must ask “which
pieces of sexually explicit material, if any, are pornographic; and
what should be done about any pornography that exists?” A second
substantive issue at stake in the debate is whether all
sexually explicit material, either in principle or under current social
conditions, is or would be harmful to women. Again, it should be noted
that this question can be asked using either conception of
“pornography”, but it must be posed differently. If we define
“pornography” simply as sexually explicit material (regardless of
whether it is harmful), the question must be posed like this: “is all
pornography as a matter of fact harmful?” On the other hand, if we
define “pornography” as sexually explicit material that harms women, we
must ask: “is all sexually explicit material as a matter of fact
pornographic?” These are just terminological variants of the same
substantive question: but when different terminology is used by
different participants in the debate, the exact questions at issue,
which are actually very simple to state, can be obscured.
Until comparatively recently, the main opposition to pornography
came from moral and religious conservatives, who argue that pornography
should be banned because its sexually explicit content is obscene and
morally corrupting. By “pornography”, conservatives usually mean simply
sexually explicit material (either pictures or words), since
conservatives typically view all such material as obscene.
According to conservatives, the sexually explicit content of
pornography is an affront to decent family and religious values and
deeply offensive to a significant portion of citizens who hold these
values. The consumption of pornography is bad for society. It
undermines and destabilizes the moral fabric of a decent and stable
society, by encouraging sexual promiscuity, deviant sexual practices
and other attitudes and behaviour that threaten traditional family and
religious institutions, and which conservatives regard as intrinsically
morally wrong. Furthermore, pornography is bad for those who consume
it, corrupting their character and preventing them from leading a good
and worthwhile life in accordance with family and religious values.
According to conservatives, the state is justified in using its
coercive power to uphold and enforce a community's moral convictions
and to prevent citizens from engaging in activities that offend
prevailing community standards of morality and decency. (See e.g.,
Devlin 1968, Sandel 1984.) This position is sometimes called ‘legal
moralism’. Governments also have a responsibility to prevent citizens
from harming themselves. This is true, even where the citizen is not a
child (who may not yet be competent to make responsible judgements for
themselves about what is in their own best interests), but a mature
adult who is voluntary engaged in an activity which they judge to be
desirable and which causes no harm to others. The view that the state
is entitled to interfere with the freedom of mentally competent adults
against their will for their own good is often called ‘legal
paternalism’.
Conservatives therefore think that it is entirely legitimate for the
state to prohibit consenting adults from publishing and viewing
pornography, even in private, in order to protect the moral health of
would-be consumers and of society as a whole. (See Baird and Rosenbaum
1991.)
Traditional liberal defenders of pornography famously disagree,
rejecting both the principle of legal moralism and the principle of
legal paternalism, at least where consenting adults are concerned. This
is not to say that liberal defenders of pornography necessarily approve
of it. Indeed, they frequently personally find pornography-especially
violent and degrading pornography-mindless and offensive. Many concede
that pornography-by which they usually mean sexually explicit material
whose primary function is to produce sexual arousal in viewers-is “low
value” speech: speech that contributes little, if anything, of
intellectual, artistic, literary or political merit to the moral and
social environment. But this does not mean that it should not be
protected-quite the opposite. A vital principle is at stake for
liberals in the debate over pornography and censorship. The principle
is that mentally competent adults must not be prevented from expressing
their own convictions, or from indulging their own private tastes,
simply on the grounds that, in the opinion of others, those convictions
or tastes are mistaken, offensive or unworthy. Moral majorities must
not be allowed to use the law to suppress dissenting minority opinions
or to force their own moral convictions on others. The underlying
liberal sentiment here is nicely captured in the famous adage (often
attributed to the French philosopher, Voltaire):“I disapprove of what
you say, but I will defend to the death your right to say
 it.”[1]
For liberals, there is a very strong presumption in favour of
individual freedom, and against state regulation that interferes with
that freedom. The only grounds that liberals typically regard
as providing a legitimate reason for state restrictions on individual
freedom is in order to prevent harm to others. Hence, in
debates over censorship and other forms of state regulation that
restrict the liberty of individuals against their will, the burden of
proof is always firmly on those who argue for censorship to demonstrate
that the speech or conduct in question causes significant harm to
others. It must either be shown to directly cause actual physical
violence to others (e.g., murder, rape, assault, battery), on a
narrower understanding of “harm”; or to deliberately or negligently
violate sufficiently important interests or rights of
others, on a broader, interest-based conception of “harm”. (For further
discussion of these different conceptions of harm to others see e.g.,
Dyzenhaus 1992, Feinberg 1987.)
Liberals have traditionally defended a right to pornography on three
main grounds. (By the “right to pornography” here, and in what follows,
I mean the negative right of consenting adults not to be prevented from
making, publishing, exhibiting, distributing and consuming pornography
in private). Firstly, on the grounds of freedom of speech or
expression, which protects the freedom of individuals (in this
case, pornographers) to express their opinions and to communicate those
opinions to others, however mistaken, disagreeable or offensive others
may find
 them.[2]
 Liberals have tended to conceive of freedom, including freedom of
expression, as negative freedom-as non-interference by
others-rather than as positive freedom, which involves having the
positive goods and facilities required to exercise the
 freedom.[3]
 Freedom is thus something that individuals have just so long as there
are no coercive external obstacles-notably, physical or legal
restrictions-in their way.
Few liberals nowadays think that the (negative) right to freedom of
speech is an absolute right: a freedom that can never legitimately be
restricted by the state. If the speech causes sufficiently great harm
to others then the state may have a legitimate interest in regulating
or preventing it. There is no simple general formula or algorithm for
determining when the harm caused to others is “sufficiently great” to
justify legal restrictions in the case of speech and more generally.
This will depend on the outcome of a complex process of carefully
weighing and balancing the strength and nature of the harm and the
competing interests at stake, and an analysis of the costs and benefits
of alternative policies, that needs to be undertaken on a case by case
basis.
However, when it comes to legislation that interferes with free
speech, the liberal presumption against legislation is especially high.
For liberals take freedom of expression to be an especially important
right that takes precedence over most other rights and interests
(including equality) should they ever conflict. Levels of harm that
would normally be sufficient to justify regulating the conduct which
causes them may be not be sufficiently great to justify restrictions in
cases where the harm is caused by speech or expression. Hence, for
liberals, justifying censorship of pornography requires that there is
extremely reliable evidence to show that the publication or voluntary
private consumption of pornography by consenting adults causes
especially great and serious harm to others. The harm caused
by expression must be very certain and very great before it is
legitimate for a state to prohibit it. We would be justified in banning
a certain type of pornography (e.g., bondage pictures) only when we are
very sure that, on average, tokens of that type (i.e., most particular
bondage pictures) cause very great harm.
Secondly, liberals have defended a right to pornography on the
grounds of a right to privacy (or “moral independence”, as one
prominent liberal defender of pornography calls it), which protects a
sphere of private activity within which individuals can explore and indulge
their own personal tastes and convictions, free from the threat of
coercive pressure or interference by the state and other individuals.
The spectre of state intrusion into the private lives of individuals
underpins much of the liberal discomfort about censorship of
pornography.
Like the right to freedom of speech, the liberal commitment to
privacy is not absolute. It can be overridden if the private activities
of individuals are such as to cause significant harm to others. Thus,
if there is reliable evidence to suggest that the voluntary private
consumption of pornography causes sufficiently great harm to others
then- providing this harm is sufficiently great and that state
prohibitions are the only effective way of preventing it-the state
would have a legitimate interest in prohibiting it.
But-and this is the third prong of the traditional liberal
defence-pornography is comparatively harmless. Neither the
expression of pornographic opinions, nor the indulging of a private
taste for pornography, causes significant harm to others, in the
relevant sense of ‘harm’ (i.e., crimes of physical violence or other
significant wrongful rights-violations). Hence, the publication and
voluntary private consumption of pornography is none of the state's
business.
These three central ingredients in the liberal defence of
pornography find their classic expression in a famous and influential
passage from John Stuart Mill's On Liberty (1859). In this
passage, Mill sets out the principle that underpins the prevailing
liberal view about when it is justified for the state to coercively
interfere with the liberty of its citizens. It is a principle that
continues to provide the dominant liberal framework for the debate over
pornography and censorship. Mill writes:
Mill's central claim is that society is justified in interfering
with the freedom of mentally competent adults to say and do what they
wish only when their conduct will cause harm to others. This
has come to be known as the ‘liberty principle’ or ‘harm principle’;
and it forms the cornerstone of the traditional liberal defence of
individual liberty. It protects the freedom of all mentally competent
individuals to live and shape their own lives in accordance with their
own preferences and beliefs, so long as they do not harm others in the
process.
Mill goes on to stress that the harm principle is meant to apply
“only to human beings in the maturity of their faculties”(Mill
1975:15). So the principle permits paternalistic intervention in the
case of those who are not competent to make an informed decision about
what is in their best interests for themselves, and so who “must be
protected against their own actions as well as external injury”: for
example, young children or those adults whose decision-making abilities
are temporarily or permanently impaired.
It is generally thought to follow that child pornography, which is
taken to involve the actual sexual abuse or exploitation of
children (with or without their apparent consent), can legitimately be
banned in order to protect the interests of children, who are not yet
competent to fully understand the nature of the choice they are making
or to grasp the impact of their decisions on their present and future
interests. (This is not entirely uncontroversial, however: for it might
be denied that children are harmed by participating in pornography. The
North American Man Boy Love Association (NAMBLA), for example, denies
that having sex with adults is harmful for children.) For the same
reason, liberals think that children can quite rightly be prevented by
parents or by the state from purchasing or viewing pornography, if this
is thought likely to harm them. That child pornography should be banned
is common ground between liberals and conservatives. However,
pornography that involves the simulated abuse of children (for
example, consenting adult actors dressed up as schoolgirls) cannot
legitimately be prohibited under the harm principle, unless there is
good evidence to suggest that consumption of this material causes
significant harm to people other than those who consume it: by, for
example, causing those who consume it to abuse children.
We are now in a better position both to see what it would take for
liberals to think that censorship of pornography is justified and why
liberals have been so unsympathetic to the sort of argument against
pornography that conservatives make. Conservatives wish to prevent
mentally competent adults from publishing and consuming pornography on
the grounds that the choice to consume pornography is deeply morally
misguided. But, as Mill insists, this is “not a sufficient warrant” for
coercive interference with individual liberty. Neither the state nor
moral majorities are entitled to restrict the private choices and
activities of individuals against their will simply because, in the
opinion of state officials or the social majority, that way of life is
unworthy or unrewarding. Mill thinks that this sort of legal moralism
will lead inevitably to a terrible “tyranny of the majority”, crushing
individual diversity and blocking human progress and flourishing.
However, following Mill, liberals are generally happy to allow that
considerations of the individual or common good may entitle the state
to use other, so-called non-coercive means to persuade
citizens to make wise or better choices. Thus public education
campaigns designed to inform citizens of the dangers of smoking or
excessive alcohol consumption, or to persuade them to make “wise”
choices (for example, to eat more fruit and vegetables) may be
justified. While others cannot force an individual to do something (or
to forbear from doing it) when they are not harming others, it is
entirely legitimate to seek to advise, instruct or persuade them. So,
if there are reasons to think that pornography is not good for the
individual who consumes it (say, because it makes them less likely to
be able to have successful loving or long-term relationships), public
education campaigns to warn consumers of these dangers may be
justified. Indeed this-education and debate-is precisely the solution
that liberals typically recommend to counter any harm that pornography
may cause. (See e.g., Feinberg 1985, Donnerstein et al. 1987, Dworkin
1985) This solution respects the freedom of rational agents to exercise
their own rational capacities in deciding what to think and how to
live.
However, liberals insist that if attempts at persuasion should fail,
and where an individual's conduct poses no significant threat to the
physical security or interests of others, the state may not use
coercive legal mechanisms to enforce these “wise” choices. “The only
freedom which deserves the name is that of pursuing our own good in our
own way, so long as we do not attempt to deprive others of theirs, or
impede their efforts to obtain it” (Mill 1975: 18). For Mill, the
individual person is in the best position to judge what is in his or
her own best interests; and, even if individuals may sometimes make bad
choices, it is better in general that they be left free to make these
mistakes. For no one's opinion about the good life is infallible; and,
in any case, a life lived ‘from the inside’, in accordance with values
that the individual endorses, is more likely to be a fulfilling one
than a life where the individual is forced against their will to live
as others as believe best.
In an influential liberal defence of pornography, Ronald Dworkin
expresses this commitment in terms of a right to “moral independence”.
People, he says, “have the right not to suffer disadvantage in the
distribution of social goods and opportunities, including disadvantages
in the liberties permitted to them by the criminal law, just on the
ground that their officials or fellow-citizens think that their
opinions about the right way for them to lead their own lives are
ignoble or wrong.” (Dworkin 1985: 353.) The fact, if it is one, that
the majority of people in a society prefer that pornography be banned
because they regard it as immoral or offensive is not a legitimate
reason for interfering with (pornographers') freedom of speech or for
preventing consenting adults from consuming it in private. For allowing
such illegitimate “external” preferences of a majority to dictate
government policy would violate the right to moral independence of the
producers and consumers of pornography. It would give moral majorities
the power to dictate how members of minority or non-mainstream groups
can live on the basis of the majority's opinions about what sort of
people are most worthy and what sorts of lives are worth living, and
this violates the basic right of all individuals to be treated with
equal concern and respect.
However, Dworkin thinks, considerations of offence may provide some
justification for preventing or restricting the public display of
pornography so as to avoid its causing offense to
non-consenting adults who might otherwise involuntarily or
unwittingly be exposed to it. Joel Feinberg, another well-known liberal
defender of pornography, agrees. But Feinberg thinks that such
restrictions must be justified by a separate principle to the harm
principle, for he thinks that certain sorts of unpleasant psychological
states are not in themselves harms. Feinberg calls this additional
principle the offense principle. The offense principle says
that “It is always a good reason in support of a proposed criminal
prohibition that it would probably be an effective way of preventing
serious offense (as opposed to injury or harm) to persons other than
the actor, and that it is probably a necessary means to that end (i.e.,
there is probably no other means that is equally effective at no
greater cost to the other values).” (Feinberg 1999:78. For a more
detailed discussion see Feinberg 1985.)
Like Dworkin, Feinberg thinks that the voluntary private consumption
of pornography does not cause harm to others. Hence, wholesale criminal
prohibitions on the publication and private voluntary consumption of
pornography cannot be justified. But the public display of pornography
may nonetheless constitute an “offensive nuisance” to non-consenting
adults who are involuntarily exposed to it (just as neighbours who play
bad music loudly into the wee hours of the morning may be an “offensive
nuisance”). Since the harm-or rather, pseudo-harm-of pornography is the
offense it may cause unwitting viewers involuntarily exposed to it, the
solution is to restrict its exhibition to domains where such
involuntary exposure will not occur, such as inside well sign-posted
adult bookshops and cinemas where those who will be offended will know
not to venture. (See Feinberg 1983: 105–13.) Although this may prevent
pornographers from distributing their opinions as widely as they might
like, and may also cause some minor inconvenience to consumers (who may
have to go further out of their way to find and view pornography, or
suffer the embarrassment of having to sneak into known adult
bookstores), these costs may be relatively small compared with the
level of offense that involuntary exposure is likely to cause. Such
restrictions on the public display of pornography would not amount to
censorship, for pornographers are still free to publish and distribute
their opinions. Nor would they violate consumers' right to privacy, for
pornography would be freely available for willing consumers to view in
private. The Williams Committee Report into Obscenity and Film
Censorship in England made a similar recommendation, pointing to
general considerations of public decency that prevent “offensive”
public displays of conduct (e.g., nudity or sexual intercourse) that is
appropriately seen or done only in private. Susan Wendell also agrees
that the public display of certain sorts of pornography-visual, audio
and written material that depicts and condones the unjustified physical
coercion of women or other human beings-should be prohibited, although
her particular concern is to remove the anxiety that involuntarily
exposure to such coercive material is likely to cause women and the
harm it is likely to do to their self-esteem (Wendell 1983).
Liberal defenders of the right to pornography may thus allow that
restrictions on its public display may be justified. But only if
pornography can reliably be shown to cause significant harm to people
other than those who voluntarily consume it will there be a legitimate
case for prohibiting its voluntary private consumption. When
an individual's private activities cause harm to others then they
become no longer merely a private matter, but of legitimate public
interest; and the state may be justified in regulating them. Thus,
Dworkin says, were excessive consumption of pornography shown to cause
absenteeism from work, then the public and the state might
have some legitimate interest in preventing it. But, Dworkin thinks,
there is as yet no reliable evidence that firmly establishes that the
voluntary private production or consumption of pornography by
consenting adults causes this or any other sufficiently significant
harm to others, in the relevant sense of ‘harm’. Hence, pornography
satisfies only harmless personal preferences for sexual gratification;
and is therefore none of the state's business.
Liberals also have technical concerns about how censorship laws
might work in practice. Many liberal (and feminist) objections to
censorship of pornography point to the practical costs and dangers of
censorship, arguing that even if pornography does cause some harm to
others, the risks involved in censoring it are too great. They point to
the difficulties involved in formulating a legal definition of
‘pornography’ that will be sufficiently precise to minimize the danger
that censorship laws targeting pornography will be used (intentionally
or unintentionally) to censor other unpopular material, including
valuable literary, artistic and political works. Censoring pornography
may thus place us on a dangerous “slippery slope” to further censorship
of other material; and may have a general “chilling effect” on
expression, making people reluctant to say or publish things that might
be construed as pornography and for which they could be prosecuted.
(For further discussion see Williams 1981, Schauer 1982, Easton,
1994.)
These are serious dangers; and they need to be carefully taken into
account in weighing the costs and benefits of censorship as a solution
to any harm that pornography might cause. But it is worth noting that
they are inherent in many existing forms of legislation, and are not
always taken to be insoluble or to constitute a decisive reason against
censorship in themselves.
Although traditional defenders of a right to pornography have been
liberals, it is important to note that not all contemporary liberals
defend such a right. Indeed, the question of whether there might be
good liberal grounds for prohibiting or otherwise regulating the
voluntary private consumption of (some) pornography has become the
subject of increasing and lively debate. Inspired by more recent
feminist arguments against pornography, some scholars argue that the
liberal commitment to protecting individual autonomy, equality,
freedom of expression and other important liberal values may in fact
support a policy that prohibits certain kinds of pornography, rather
than the permissive stance that liberals have traditionally
favoured. (See e.g., Dyzenhaus 1992, Easton 1994: 42–51, Langton 1990,
Okin 1987, West 2003.) These theorists do not normally reject the harm
principle, broadly understood: They generally agree that the crucial
question in determining whether censorship of pornography is justified
is whether there is reliable evidence to show that the publication or
viewing of pornography by consenting adults causes sufficiently great
harm to significant interests of others. Rather, they are open to the
legitimacy of censorship because they think that the production and
consumption of certain sorts of sexually explicit material—in
particular, violent pornography and non-violent but degrading
pornography—may in fact cause sufficiently significant harm to
others, particularly women.
These theorists often follow social science researchers in drawing
more fine-grained distinctions within the general category of
pornography (i.e., the sexually explicit material whose primary
function is to produce sexual arousal in those who view or read them).
They often distinguish between 1) violent pornography; 2) non-violent
but degrading pornography; and 3) non-violent and non-degrading
pornography, since there is some evidence to suggest that some of these
materials (e.g., in categories 1 and 2) may be harmful in ways that
other material (e.g., category 3) is not. I will summarize some of this
important evidence shortly.
One important dimension of the disagreement between those liberals
who defend a right to pornography and those who think that liberals
should be open to the legitimacy of censorship is empirical:
they disagree about the crucial empirical issue of whether there is
reliable evidence to show that the production and consumption of
pornography by consenting adults in fact causes harm to others,
particularly women. But frequently they also disagree about some
important conceptual matters as well. In particular, they may
disagree (albeit sometimes implicitly) about how three central elements
of the harm principle should be understood: (i) exactly what counts as
“harm” to others, in the relevant sense; (ii) when can we say that
something is a “cause”, or a sufficiently “direct cause”, of a harm;
and (iii) how much harm to others is “sufficiently great” to justify
coercive sanctions against the speech or conduct that produces it. In
other words, they disagree about how the harm principle should be
interpreted and applied.
Many argue that more traditional liberal conceptions of the
interests or rights that individuals have, and so of what activities
can cause harm to them, is too narrow. It ignores the way in which
threats to individuals' interests can come not just from the state, but
also from other social practices and circumstances (e.g., substantive
socio-economic disadvantage) that can prevent the meaningful exercise
of freedom just as effectively. The state may thus have a legitimate
role to play in promoting the social conditions that enable individuals
to exercise their rights in meaningful ways, and in regulating such
activities of non-governmental agents or groups as may serve
significantly to infringe them.
According to anti-pornography feminists, pornography is not harmless
entertainment or cathartic, therapeutic fantasy. Nor is the harm it
causes merely that of ‘offence’. Unlike moral conservatives, who object
to pornography on the grounds of the obscenity of its sexual explicit
content and its corrosive effect on the conservative way of life, the
primary focus of the feminist objection to pornography is on the
central role that pornography is thought to play in the
exploitation and oppression of women. (See e.g., Lederer 1980,
Itzin 1992, MacKinnon 1984, 1987, 1995.)
This concern is reflected in the distinctive way anti-pornography
feminists tend to define “pornography”. As we have seen, conservatives
typically define “pornography” as including all sexually explicit
material. This definition reflects the fact that conservatives object
to pornography's sexual explicitness, which is obscene or appeals to
“prurient interests”. Anti-pornography feminists, however, do not
object to pornography's sexually explicit content per se. They
typically draw a more fine-grained distinction within the
class of sexually explicit materials, between “pornography”, on the one
hand, and “erotica”, on the other. “Erotica” is generally defined as
sexually explicit material premised on equality, which depicts women as
genuinely equal and consenting participants in sexual encounters.
“Pornography”, in contrast, is typically defined as that subset of
sexually explicit material that depicts women being coerced, abused,
dominated or degraded in such a way as to endorse their
subordination. Unlike conservatives, anti-pornography feminists have no
objection to material which is merely sexually explicit i.e., erotica.
For sexually explicit material of this sort does not harm women. The
objection is to pornography: that subset of sexually explicit
material that subordinates women.
In 1983, two of the most prominent anti-pornography feminists in the
United States, Catharine MacKinnon and Andrea Dworkin, drafted an
anti-pornography ordinance at the behest of the Minneapolis Council. A
similar ordinance was passed by the Indianapolis City Council in 1984,
but later overturned on appeal by the U.S. Supreme Court, on the
grounds that the ordinance violated pornographers First Amendment right
to freedom of speech. Importantly, the ordinance did not seek to impose
criminal prohibitions or sanctions on pornography: it did not seek to
make the production, sale or consumption of pornography a criminal
offence, punishable by imprisonment (as, for example, producing,
selling or consuming heroin is a criminal offence). MacKinnon and
Dworkin thought that criminalizing the production, publication or
consumption of pornography would be counterproductive, serving to drive
the industry underground, thereby only further obscuring the harm it
causes to women. Rather, the ordinance sought civil remedies
that would enable women who are harmed in the making of pornography, or
as a result of its consumption, to sue for a future ban on sexually
explicit material demonstrated to be harmful and to collect damages
from pornographers for provable harm done by that material. There is
some argument about whether the proposed legislation would have
amounted to censorship, strictly speaking, since it did not seek to
place a prior ban on the publication of pornographic materials. But
insofar as the legislation allowed for courts to award and enforce
injunctions against publication of material demonstrated to be harmful,
many think that the legislation may have been functionally equivalent
to censorship in practice (assuming that courts would in fact have been
willing to award and enforce injunctions).
The ordinance has been the subject of a heated debate among
feminists, many of whom are dubious both about the centrality of
pornography's role in the subordination of women and about the
desirability of employing strategies of legal regulation in the pursuit
of feminist goals. (See e.g., Hunter and Law 1985, Lacey 1998: 71–97,
Cornell 2000.) But the ordinance was significant, not least for
reconceptualizing the question of pornography in the public arena in
feminist terms: not as an issue about obscenity or public indecency, as
it had hitherto tended to be viewed in legal and political contexts
under the influence of moral conservatives, but as an issue about the
civil rights of women. It also provided the definition of
pornography that has since featured most prominently in feminist
discussions. The ordinance defined “pornography” as a civil rights
violation, as a systematic practice of sexual discrimination
that violates women's right to equality:
We define pornography as the graphic sexually explicit subordination
of women through pictures and words that also includes (i) women are
presented dehumanized as sexual objects, things, or commodities; or
(ii) women are presented as sexual objects who enjoy humiliation or
pain; or (iii) women are presented as sexual objects experiencing
sexual pleasure in rape, incest or other sexual assault; or (iv) women
are presented as sexual objects tied up, cut up or mutilated or bruised
or physically hurt; or (v) women are presented in postures or positions
of sexual submission, servility, or display; or (vi) women's body parts
— including but not limited to vaginas, breasts, or buttocks
— are exhibited such that women are reduced to those parts; or
(vii) women are presented being penetrated by objects or animals; or
(viii) women are presented in scenarios of degradation, humiliation,
injury, torture, shown as filthy or inferior, bleeding, bruised, or
hurt in a context that makes these conditions sexual. (MacKinnon
1987:176.)
Dworkin and MacKinnon allow that sexually explicit material that
treats men, children or transsexuals in sexually dehumanising or
subordinating ways also counts as pornography.
The Dworkin-MacKinnon definition has two parts or stages. The first
part of the definition defines “pornography” broadly in terms of a
certain functional role or, as MacKinnon puts it, in terms of “what it
does”: it defines “pornography” as that sexually explicit material,
whatever it is, that subordinates
 women.[4]
 The second part of the definition, the content list (i)-(viii), goes
on to list of the sorts of sexually explicit material that MacKinnon
and Dworkin think in fact functions to subordinate women, as
revealed by the testimonial, experimental, social and clinical
evidence. The content list aims to be sufficiently precise so as to
minimize the likelihood of legislation against pornography, so
defined, threatening other forms of speech-although many
“anti-censorship” feminists, along with traditional liberal defenders
of pornography, are not convinced that it succeeds (See e.g., Hunter
and Law 1985, R. Dworkin 1993).
I draw attention to the two-stages of the definition to reinforce a
point made in section 1: that one might agree with Dworkin and
MacKinnon that pornography, defined purely functionally or conceptually
as sexually explicit material that subordinates women, would be a bad
thing; and yet disagree that the material with the features that they
go on to list in fact does this. (I think this might help to defuse
some of the frequently acrimonious debate in feminist circles
surrounding MacKinnon's now famous claim that one cannot genuinely be a
feminist and be pro- (or at least fail to be anti-) pornography. For of
course feminists are opposed to anything that subordinates or oppresses
women. Yet there is surely room for reasonable disagreement about what,
if any, sexually explicit material does this, and whether pursuing
legal regulation of it is a desirable feminist strategy).
The harms that most concern anti-pornography feminists fall into two
broad categories: 1) coercion and exploitation of women actors in the
production of pornography; and 2) harms to women, both as individuals
and as a group, resulting from the consumption of pornography.
One particularly graphic example of the first sort of harm is
documented in a book called Ordeal, written by Linda Marchiano
who starred as ‘Linda Lovelace’ in the famous pornographic film ‘Deep
Throat’ (see Lovelace 1980). In Ordeal, Marchiano tells of how
she was abducted, hypnotized, drugged, beaten and tortured in order to
perform her starring role. Marchiano was one of a number of women who
testified about their experience of the harm caused by pornography at
the Minneapolis hearings into pornography in 1983. (The transcript of
the hearings is published as Pornography and Sexual Violence:
Evidence of the Links 1988.) Marchiano's case is a particularly
horrifying and extreme example of how women may be harmed in the making
of pornography; and much of what was done to Marchiano (the abduction,
the beatings and the torture) are criminal offences in their own right.
Many, both liberals and feminists, think that since these physical
assaults should not be allowed, enduring pornographic representations
of these crimes that cause further harm to the victim's interests
should not be permitted to be distributed or consumed either (See e.g.,
MacKinnon 1987, Wendell 1983).
Of course, not all women who perform in pornography are literally
physically coerced as paradigm slaves are, and as Marchiano was.
Nonetheless, many anti-pornography feminists are concerned that there
is an important sense in which the ‘choice’ to participate in the
making of pornography may not be a genuinely free one for many of the
women who perform in it, who often come from underprivileged
socio-economic backgrounds and who have few alternative options for
making a living. Under these circumstances, there may be an important
sense in which the choice to perform in pornography is ‘coerced’,
insofar as the women would not have chosen to perform in pornography
had other reasonable options been available to them. The pornography
industry may take unfair advantage of underprivileged women, preying on
their psychic and economic vulnerability, to reap enormous profits at
their expense. MacKinnon puts the point graphically: pornography is a
public institution of sexual slavery, trafficking in vulnerable women
and children, and profiting from their suffering and subjugation.
Some of the women who perform in pornography vigorously reject the
claim that they are exploited. At least in their own case, they argue,
the decision to become a porn star was a genuinely autonomous one. (See
Gruen and Panichas 1997.) They regard the claim that they are victims
of exploitation as offensively patronizing and paternalistic, implying
that pornography is not a worthwhile or valid career choice, and
portraying the women who act in pornography as hapless dupes of
patriarchy. In reality, female porn actors may be fully autonomous and
intelligent citizens pursuing a perfectly valid and rewarding career of
their own choosing. Banning pornography, they argue, would constitute
unjustified paternalistic interference with their right to pursue their
career of choice. Of course, that the decision to pursue a career in
pornography is a free and fulfilling one for some women does
not go to show that it is necessarily a free and fulfilling choice for
all or even most of the women who perform in pornography.
Even if the pornography industry does exploit some of the women who
perform in it, however, there is a question about whether this
justifies disallowing it. As a number of feminists and liberals have
noted in reply, other industries (such as supermarkets or fast food
chains) may likewise take advantage of workers with few alternative
opportunities. Should these too be banned on grounds of exploitation?
Surely not, they think. The best solution to such exploitation is
arguably not to ban pornography (or fast food chains). For this would
only further deprive those already deprived of one more option, and one
that they might prefer over others of the limited range available to
them. We may do better to focus our efforts on redressing the
underlying economic and material conditions of disadvantage that make
exploitation possible, so that the choice to perform in pornography
might be made, if it is made, as a genuinely free one, under fuller
conditions of equality. (See e.g., Dworkin 1993; Wendell, 1983.)
Second, anti-pornography feminists point to a range of harms to
women that result from the consumption of pornography. (For a variety
of analyses here see A. Dworkin 1981, MacKinnon 1987, Jeffreys 1990,
Kappeler 1986, Coward 1984, Smart 1989: ch. 6, Itzin 1998.) These may
include, but are not limited to, pornography's role as a cause of
violent sexual crime. Some feminists in the U.K. have argued for
anti-pornography legislation on the model of existing U.K. laws
preventing racial incitement: pornography is speech that incites sexual
violence, and prohibition of such speech as incites sexual violence is
justified for the same reason as prohibitions against racially
incendiary speech, namely, to protect the physical security and bodily
integrity of individuals. (See e.g., Itzin 1992)
Other feminist arguments focus instead, or as well, on the broader
role pornographic representations may play in harming other of women's
significant interests. Some have suggested that pornography can be
viewed as a sort of false advertising about women and sexuality, or as
being akin to libellous speech: speech that defames women as a group,
causing corresponding harm to their reputation, credibility,
opportunities and income expectations. They argue that women as a group
have a right to (civil) legal protection from these harms, and to claim
for compensation for such harm as pornographic speech can be
demonstrated to have produced. (See Longino 1980, Hill 1987, MacKinnon
1995: 3–28. For criticism see Soble 1985). This is a promising strategy
for anti-pornography feminists, since many liberals already accept that
individuals have a right to protection from libellous or defamatory
speech.
Other feminist arguments focus on the related role pornography may
play in restricting women's autonomy, by reproducing and reinforcing a
dominant public perception of the nature of women and sexuality that
prevents women from articulating and exploring their own conceptions of
sexuality and of the good life. (Easton 1994, Dyzenhaus 1992.)
Yet another line of feminist argument draws on the work of the
prominent liberal philosopher, John Rawls, to suggest that regulation
of pornography is justified insofar as rational, self-interested
individuals in the original position would not agree to basic social
institutions that “asymmetrically either forced or gave strong
incentives to members of one sex to become sex objects for the other”
(Okin 1987:68). Rae Langton (1990) also seeks to use liberals' own
theoretical commitments to make a (liberal) case for the legitimacy of
censorship, though her chosen liberal is Ronald Dworkin. Langton seeks
to turn the tables on Dworkin's argument in an ingenious way, arguing
that a consistent application of Dworkin's own principles actually
supports a policy that prohibits pornography, rather than the
permissive policy he himself favours. For preferences to consume
pornography necessarily depend on external preferences about the
inferior worth of women that violate women's right to moral
independence. Furthermore, positive arguments for prohibiting
pornography may aim at securing social equality for women. If this is
the goal then, by Dworkin's own lights, pornographers would have no
rights against a prohibitive policy.
Many of these concerns figure in a somewhat new light in a
significant, rights-based strand of feminist argument, associated most
prominently with Catharine MacKinnon. Since this approach has provoked
particular interest and discussion among both liberals and feminists,
and has come to constitute a dominant framework for much of the
contemporary debate between liberals and feminists over pornography, it
is worth examining it in more detail. According to MacKinnon,
pornography harms women in a very special and serious way: by violating
their civil rights (MacKinnon 1984, 1987, 1992). In
particular, pornography subordinates women or violates their right
to equal civil status; and it silences them or violates their
civil right to freedom of speech.
Pornography subordinates women by sexualising their
inequality. Pornography both expresses the view that women exist
primarily as objects for men's sexual gratification-that they are men's
sexual slaves, and frequently their willing sexual slaves-and it
propagates this view, by conditioning consumers to regard women's
subordination as a sexy, natural and legitimate feature of normal
heterosexual relations. Pornography “sexualises rape, battery, sexual
harassment, prostitution and child sexual abuse, it thereby celebrates,
promotes, authorizes and legitimises them.” (MacKinnon 1987:171–72). By
authorizing and legitimating the subjection of women, pornography makes
the very real harm of women's subordination invisible as harm: rape,
harassment and other forms of oppression come to be seen simply as sex.
“The harm of pornography, broadly speaking, is the harm of the civil
inequality of the sexes made invisible as harm” (MacKinnon 1987: 178).
The view of women and sexuality that pornography helps to form and
perpetuate manifests itself not simply in crimes of sexual violence
against women, but in discrimination against women more generally: in
the legal system, in politics and public debate, and in the workplace.
Pornography “institutionalizes the sexuality of male supremacy...Men
treat women as who they see women as being. Pornography constructs who
that is” (MacKinnon 1987:172). By conditioning consumers to view and
treat women as their sexual subordinates, pornography undermines
women's ability to participate as full and equal citizens in public, as
well as private, realms.
One significant dimension of this inequality is that women's speech,
where it occurs, lacks the credibility, authority and influence of
men's. Women as a group are systematically and differentially
silenced, MacKinnon thinks; and pornography contributes to
this in at least three ways (MacKinnon 1987, 1995).
First, pornography silences women by helping to shape and reinforce
a hostile and uncomprehending social environment which makes many women
reluctant to speak at all. Thus, for example, rape, sexual harassment
and other violent sexual crime is significantly underreported by
women.
Second, pornography creates a social climate in which, even where
women do speak, their opinions are frequently paid little serious
attention-especially where what women say contradicts the picture of
women contained in pornography. Thus women who do report sexual crime
are often disbelieved, ignored, ridiculed, or dismissed as neurotic. In
MacKinnon's words, pornography “strips and devastates women of
credibility, from our accounts of sexual assault to our everyday
reality of sexual subordination. We are stripped of authority and
reduced and devalidated and silenced”. (MacKinnon 1992: 483–4.)
Third, pornography may silence women by causing their speech to fail
to be understood, or to be misunderstood. For example, pornography may
help to form and reinforce the general view that women who utter ‘no’
in sexual contexts frequently do not intend to refuse a man's sexual
advantages by so speaking, and indeed may often intend to further
encourage them. In a social environment in which this expectation is
prevalent, women may not be able to successfully communicate the idea
of refusal to others: although they may utter the appropriate sounds
(e.g., ‘no’), those sounds may frequently fail to communicate the idea
they were intended to express. Pornography may thus prevent women from
communicating their ideas to others, not by preventing them from
producing or distributing sounds and scrawls, but by preventing those
sounds and scrawls from being understood by hearers as expressing the
idea they were intended to express. (See Langton 1993, Hornsby 1995,
Hornsby and Langton 1998, Maitra 2009, McGowan 2003, West 2003. For replies to Hornsby and Langton, see Jacobsen 2001, Bird 2002). If pornography silences women in this
way, there may be some reason to be sceptical that the solution
preferred by many liberals (and feminists) of countering the harms of
pornography with more speech-protest, satire, education and public
debate-will be effective. For pornography may make the relevant speech
acts “unspeakable” for women.
For MacKinnon, then, a desire for pornography and sexual violence is
not an epiphenomenal symptom or side-effect of other material and
social conditions that lie at the root of women's subordinate position
in society, as some other feminists are inclined to think. Rather, it
is a central cause of the subordinate position of women in society. So
long as there is pornography, MacKinnon thinks, women will remain
subordinate and silenced.
One novel and strategically ingenious feature of MacKinnon's
argument against pornography (and one that has provoked much of the
more recent interest and debate) is her conceptualisation of the harm
of pornography as the violation of women's civil rights, of
which sexual violence against women may be but one, albeit significant,
dimension. The violation of civil rights is a harm that most liberals
have special reason for taking very seriously. For while some liberals
understand the notion of “harm” to others very narrowly, as including
only physical interference with a person's bodily integrity (e.g.,
murder, battery, torture, kidnap, rape and other such physical assaults
etc.), most liberals nowadays are inclined to accept a slightly broader
interpretation of the harm principle. On this broader, interest- or
rights-based interpretation of the harm principle, any speech or
conduct that wilfully or negligently interferes with important
interests or rights of others is harmful conduct. On this
interest-based interpretation of the harm principle, the state is
entitled to pass laws against conduct that deliberately or negligently
interferes with the rights of others, just so long as the
rights-violation is sufficiently serious and the harm cannot
effectively be prevented by other, less costly means (for example,
through public education or debate). Of course, how this version of the
harm principle applies depends crucially on the nature and relative
importance of the rights that individuals have; and this is the subject
of much ongoing debate.
Some liberals have accepted that pornography may contribute to
women's subordination: if not by directly causing crimes of sexual
violence, then at least by conditioning consumers to view women as sex
objects, rather than as autonomous individuals worthy of equal concern
and respect. They grant that this may contribute to discrimination
against women in society, and that it may prevent women from having the
same social and political influence that men generally possess. But,
they argue, this harm is not sufficiently great to justify interfering
with pornographers' freedom of speech. The right to freedom of
expression is a more important right. So, if we have to choose between
the right to equality (of women) and the right to freedom of speech (of
pornographers), we must choose freedom of

 speech.[5]
 But MacKinnon's argument, if successful, would turn the tables on
these traditional liberal defences of pornography: pornography could
no longer be defended simply on the grounds of the primacy of the
right to freedom of speech, for permitting pornography
violates women's right to freedom of speech too. We now
seem to have a conflict of rights: not simply between pornographers'
right to freedom of speech and women's right to equal civil status,
but within the right to freedom of expression itself-between
pornographers' right to freedom of speech and women's right to freedom
of speech. Why should pornographers' right to freedom of expression
take precedence over women's? I will return to the debates surrounding
this question in the next section.
Of course, not all feminists object to pornography, even in
MacKinnon's sense (see e.g., Burstyn 1985, Chester and Dickey 1988,
Cornell 2000, Hunter and Law 1985, Gruen and Panichas 1997). The
question of pornography and censorship has divided feminists, just as
it has begun to divide liberals. Some feminists argue that pornography
is an important form of sexual expression that does not harm women, and
may even benefit them by liberating women and women's sexuality from
the oppressive shackles of tradition and sexual conservatism.
Pornography, on this view, is an important tool for exploring and
expressing new or minority forms of female sexuality. Far from making
downtrodden victims of women, pornography may have a vital role to play
in challenging traditional views about femininity and female sexuality
and in empowering women, both homosexual and heterosexual, to shape
their own identities as sexual beings. (Note that material that
benefits women ought to count as erotica, rather than pornography, on
MacKinnon's definition. So, as noted in section 1, if there is
substantive disagreement between “pro-pornography” feminists and
MacKinnon here, it will be about whether there really is any sexually
explicit material that is beneficial).
There are also a significant number of feminists who object to
pornography, or to certain forms of it, on the grounds that it harms
women, but who do not think that regulating or banning it is the most
desirable or effective way to remedy the harms that pornography causes.
These feminists, though not always liberals, nonetheless share some
general liberal concerns about using the ‘blunt and treacherous’
instrument of the law in the quest to redress harms, especially in
light of the way in which the law has frequently been used to oppress
women, or where laws enacted with the best of intentions have
nonetheless had this unintended effect. Censorship, they think, may
well cause more harm to women than it removes. They recommend
more speech-education, protest, picketing, satire and public
debate-rather than censorship or other forms of legal regulation, as
less dangerous and more effective tools for raising public
consciousness and effecting the desired attitudinal and cultural
change. These feminists are anti-pornography (in the sense that they
think material that degrades women is objectionable), but they are also
anti-censorship.
Indeed, eighty individual feminists, along with the Feminist
Anti-Censorship Taskforce (F.A.C.T.) and the Women's Legal Defense
Fund, presented an Amici Brief to the Hudnut court
outlining a range of feminist concerns about the anti-pornography
legislation proposed by MacKinnon and Dworkin (Hunter and Law 1985).
These included concerns about the political dangers of feminists
aligning themselves with the conservative, evangelical right; the
possibility of the legislation discriminating against minority forms of
sexuality (e.g., lesbianism); interference with women's freedom to
choose to produce and perform in pornography; perpetuating traditional
ideas that sex is bad for women; and diverting attention and resources
away from more important immediate efforts to bring an end to violence
against women.
Despite the efforts of anti-pornography feminists, many traditional
liberal defenders of pornography remain unconvinced. They typically
continue to maintain either that pornography does not cause harm to
women (in the relevant, usually narrow, sense of ‘harm’), or they admit
that pornography probably does cause some harm to women's interests,
but deny that this harm is sufficiently great to offset the dangers
inherent in censorship and to justify the violation of the rights of
pornographers and would-be consumers.
Liberal defenders of pornography readily admit that, if there were
reliable evidence to show that consumption of pornography significantly
increases the incidence of violence sexual crime, there would be a very
strong liberal case for prohibiting it. However, liberal defenders of
pornography remain unconvinced that there is reliable evidence to show
that pornography is a cause of rape or other sexual crime. Ronald
Dworkin, for example, writes “…in spite of MacKinnon's fervent
declarations, no reputable study has concluded that pornography is a
significant cause of sexual crime: many of them conclude, on the
contrary, that the causes of violent personality lie mainly in
childhood, before exposure to pornography can have had any effect, and
that desire for pornography is a symptom rather than a cause of
deviance” (Dworkin 1993: 38).
The question of whether pornography causes harm raises tricky
conceptual issues about the notion of causality, as well as empirical
and methodological ones. (See Eaton 2007, Schauer 1987, and The Attorney General's
Commission on Pornography 1986, excerpts from which are reprinted in
Mappes and Zembaty 1997: 212–218.). The causal connection between
consumption of pornography and violent sexual crime, if there is one,
is unlikely to be a simple one. As some liberals have argued, it seems
implausible to think that consumption of pornography, on a single or
even repeated occasions, will cause otherwise “normal, decent chaps”
with no propensity to rape suddenly “to metamorphose into rapists”.
(Feinberg, 1985:153, also see entry on
 Freedom of Speech.)
 However, we might
agree with Feinberg, and yet think that pornography might still be a
cause of rape. Consumption of pornography might cause rape by making it
more likely that those who are already inclined to rape will actually
rape, thereby increasing the overall incidence of rape. Of course,
pornography may not be the only cause of rape or other violent
sexual crime. The contributing causes of violence against women are
likely to be numerous and connected in complex ways: they may include,
among other things, “macho values” (as Feinberg suggests) and certain
sorts of childhood events and circumstances (as Dworkin says). But the
mere fact that there may be other causes of sexual violence
against women does not show that consumption of pornography cannot
also be a cause. Consumption of pornography may, on its own,
be neither necessary nor sufficient for violent sexual crime (or for
sexist attitudes and behaviour more generally); yet it might still be a
cause of violent sexual crime and these other harms, if it increases
the incidence of them.
It might be helpful to consider an analogy with smoking. Smoking
cigarettes, on its own, is neither a necessary, nor a sufficient,
condition for developing lung cancer: since there are people who smoke
like chimneys who never develop lung cancer and live perfectly healthy
lives to a ripe old age; and there are people who have never smoked a
cigarette in their whole life who develop lung cancer. Yet it is
generally agreed nowadays that smoking cigarettes is a cause of lung
cancer. This is because smoking (in combination with other factors such
as genetics, diet and exercise) makes it significantly more likely that
a person will develop lung cancer, or so the studies suggest. Likewise,
we might think that consumption of pornography will be a cause of
violent sexual crime (or of sexist attitudes and behaviour more
generally) if there is good evidence to suggest that consumption of
pornography increases the incidence of sexual violence or sexist
behaviour, holding fixed other known causes of these harmful states of
 affairs.[6]
There is considerable disagreement, among social science researchers
as well as liberal and feminist philosophers, about whether
pornography is a cause of violent sexual crime (see Donnerstein et
al. 1987, Copp and Wendell 1983, Itzin 1992). Both the final report of
the Commission of Obscenity and Pornography in the U.S. in 1970 and
the Williams Committee Report into Obscenity and Film Censorship in
the U.K.  surveyed the data from clinical and experimental trials then
available and found no evidence of a causal connection between
pornography and rape (although the 1970 Commission did not review the
evidence concerning sexually violent material). However, the Attorney
General's Commission on Pornography in the U.S., which submitted its
final report in 1986, found that the clinical and experimental
research ‘virtually unanimously’ shows that exposure to
sexually violent material increases the likelihood of aggression
toward women; and that “the available evidence strongly supports
the hypothesis that substantial exposure to sexually violent
materials…bears a causal relationship to antisocial acts of
sexual violence and, for some subgroups, possibly to unlawful acts of
sexual violence” (Mappes and Zembaty 1997: 215). The report also
found that non-violent but degrading pornographic material produced
effects “similar to, although not as extensive as that involved
with violent material”. However, the report concluded that
non-degrading and non-violent material (erotica, in feminist terms)
“does not bear a causal relationship to rape and other acts of
sexual violence”.
A number of studies have found a positive correlation between
exposure to violent pornographic images (for example, of rape, bondage,
molestation involving weapons and mutilation) and positive reactions to
rape and other forms of violence against women. Studies suggest, among
other things, that exposure to violent pornography can significantly
enhance a subject's arousal in response to the portrayal of rape, that
exposure to films that depict sexual violence against women can act as
a stimulus for aggressive acts against women, and that prolonged
exposure to degrading pornography (of a violent or non-violent sort)
leads to increased callousness towards victims of sexual violence, a
greater acceptance of ‘rape-myths’ (for example, that women enjoy rape
and do not mean no when they say ‘no’), a greater likelihood of having
rape-fantasies, and a greater likelihood of reporting that one would
rape women or force women into unwanted sex acts if there was no chance
of being caught.
The empirical evidence remains the subject of ongoing debate and
investigation. But in the absence of sufficiently conclusive evidence
that pornography causes crimes of sexual violence, many liberal
defenders of pornography continue to view censorship as
unjustified.
However, the rights-based feminist arguments against pornography do
not rest entirely on the claim that consumption of pornography is a
significant cause of violent sexual crime. The claim that pornography
contributes to women's inequality, and the claim that it violates
women's right to freedom of speech, can rest on more moderate empirical
claims about which there is likely to be more agreement: for example,
that pornography helps to form and reinforce the view that women are
sex objects, which manifests itself in how women are perceived and
treated in society and so perpetuates women's inequality. Among other
things, it may increase the likelihood of sexual harassment and other
forms of discrimination against women, undermine women's credibility in
certain contexts, encourage a general expectation that women who say
‘no’ in sexual contexts often do not intend to refuse, and so on.
Ronald Dworkin is one prominent liberal who has explicitly
considered, and rejected, MacKinnon's version of the rights-based
arguments for anti-pornography legislation. This is not primarily
because he rejects the moderate empirical claims. Rather it is because
he thinks that, even if those claims were true, there would be no
legitimate sense in which the publication and voluntary private
consumption of pornography violate women's civil rights.
According to Dworkin, the argument for anti-pornography legislation
on the grounds that pornography subordinates women rests on the
“frightening principle that considerations of equality require that
some people not be free to express their tastes or convictions or
preferences anywhere.” (Dworkin 1993: 39.) Accepting this principle
would have “devastating consequences”: namely, that “government could
forbid the graphic or visceral or emotionally charged expression of any
opinion that might reasonably offend a disadvantaged group. It could
outlaw performances of The Merchant of Venice, or films about
professional women who neglect their children, or caricatures or
parodies of homosexuals in nightclub routines.” Dworkin's concern is a
kind of logical slippery slope objection that that he takes to
constitute a reductio of MacKinnon's view. The worry is that
the principle that underpins MacKinnon's argument would, if
consistently applied, threaten many other forms of speech in clearly
unacceptable ways.
Note that Dworkin construes-or misconstrues-MacKinnon's argument as
a version of the old moralistic argument that objects to pornography on
grounds of its offensiveness; and, as we have seen, liberals reject
offense as legitimate grounds for preventing the voluntary consumption
of pornography in private. However, MacKinnon's argument does not-or
need not-rest on this ‘frightening’ principle. The feminist case is not
that pornography should be regulated because it expresses opinions that
are offensive to feminists. Rather, it should be regulated because,
offensive or not, it contributes significantly to a regime of sexual
inequality.
Nonetheless, this principle-that government is justified in
prohibiting speech that contributes significantly to a group's
inequality- is one that some liberals may find equally disturbing. For
it may well apply to speech other than pornography, including perhaps
the examples that Dworkin mentions.
Dworkin is not alone in this concern. Other liberals and feminists
have questioned MacKinnon's focus on pornography as the key site of
women's oppression, when it seems that many other non-sexually
explicit materials plausibly also endorse and perpetuate a view of
women as sex objects, albeit perhaps in less graphic and explicit
forms. (Perhaps this lack of explicitness makes them more insidious;
and hence of more, rather than less, concern). Pornography may
sexualise women's inequality, but advertising and romance
novels plausibly glamorise and romanticize it
respectively; and hence may celebrate, authorize and legitimise women's
inequality in the same way as pornography. (See e.g., Cocks 1989,
Coward 1984, Valverde 1985, Kappeler 1986, Skipper 1993.) Indeed some
of these other representations may be especially worrying, not simply
because they may be more pervasive, but also insofar they may condition
women to be complicit in their own subjection. MacKinnon's focus on the
graphic sexually explicit material that celebrates women's inequality
may thus seem arbitrary, in the absence of evidence that the sexually
explicit subset of material is an especially significant cause of
women's inequality.
Perhaps there are principled, pragmatic reasons for singling out
pornography (i.e., the sexually explicit subset of the material that
conditions people to view women as willing sex objects) for censorship
or regulation, even if we were to agree that non-sexually explicit may
also condition consumers to this view of women. For it might be that
censorship of pornography would alleviate a considerable amount of this
harm, without incurring the same costs as censoring some or all of the
non-sexually explicit material that contributes to the harm. But this
is controversial.
What about the claim that pornography violates women's right to
freedom of speech? The argument rests on a “dangerous confusion”,
Dworkin thinks: the confusion of positive and negative liberty. It
rests on the “unacceptable proposition: that the right to free speech
includes a right to circumstances that encourage one to speak, and a
right that others grasp and respect what one means to say...These are
obviously not rights that any society can recognise or enforce.
Creationists, flat-earthers, and bigots, for example, are ridiculed in
many parts of America now; that ridicule undoubtedly dampens the
enthusiasm that many of them have for speaking out and limits the
attention others pay to what they have to say” (Dworkin 1993: 38). But,
Dworkin suggests, we surely should not think that that this violates
their right to freedom of speech: e.g., that creationists have a
legitimate claim on the state to ban the publication of books or videos
recommending the theory of evolution on the grounds that these may
cause the speech of creationists to receive an unsympathetic or
dismissive reception.
Dworkin concedes that it is perhaps true that the right to freedom
of speech, if it is to be meaningful, requires that everyone has some
opportunity to have their ideas heard: a society in which only the rich
and powerful have access to the media may be one in which there is not
genuine freedom of speech. But it goes far beyond this, Dworkin thinks,
to claim that a meaningful right to freedom of speech requires “a
guarantee of a sympathetic or even competent understanding of what one
says” (Dworkin 1993: 38). This would license state regulation of speech
on a massive scale, paving the way to terrible “tyranny” (Dworkin
1993:42).
A number of commentators have developed Mackinnon's claims in the
face of Dworkin's response, arguing that freedom of speech (even
negative freedom of speech) requires more than simply being
free to produce and distribute word-like sounds and symbols. It also
requires at least that would-be hearers are not prevented from
comprehending the intended meaning of those sounds and
scrawls-otherwise there is not free speech, merely the freedom
to produce and distribute word-like sounds and scrawls. (See e.g.,
Hornsby and Langton 1998, West 2003. For replies see Jacobson 2001,
Green 1998.) In different ways, these commentators argue that the
traditional liberal conception of free speech, and of the right to free
speech, fails to pay sufficient attention to the way language works;
and, in particular, to the way in which what words mean-and so what it
is possible for speakers to say or communicate-depends on social
context, a context that pornography may help to shape and
perpetuate.
The traditional liberal conception of freedom of speech assumes that
people are free to speak just so long they are not prevented from
producing sounds and scrawls that others are not prevented from hearing
or seeing. But we might wonder whether this sufficient to protect free
speech, even by liberals' own lights. For we might think that a
government that allowed people the freedom to produce whatever sounds
and scrawls they like, but who implanted some device in the heads of
hearers that systematically prevented would-be hearers from
comprehending the intended meaning of those sounds and scrawls, would
be just as bad as a government who prevented speakers from producing
the sounds and scrawls altogether. Either way, speakers are prevented
from communicating their opinions to others, which defeats what
liberals take to be the point of free speech: the right of speakers not
to be prevented by the actions of other agents from communicating their
ideas or opinions to others who might wish to hear them (West
2003).
How should the harm principle be understood? How should liberals
conceptualise important values such as equality and the right to
freedom of speech? What role should the state play in protecting and
promoting values such as autonomy and equality? Can liberal ideals be
reconciled with feminist principles and goals? The search for answers
to important questions such as these, accounts for much of the ongoing
philosophical interest in the question of pornography and
censorship.