Antoine Arnauld, the primary author of the Port-Royal Logic,
was born in Paris on February 8, 1612, to Antoine and Catherine
Arnauld. His father was one of the most famous lawyers of his
time. The son Antoine, the youngest of their 20 children, originally
wanted to study law, but because his father had died in 1619, he
decided to honor his mother's wish that he study theology. He entered
the Sorbonne, becoming a disciple of Lescot, the confessor of Cardinal
Richelieu. In addition to the Port-Royal Grammar and
the Port-Royal Logic, Arnauld is best known as the author of
the Fourth Objections to Descartes' Meditations. He also
engaged in lengthy correspondence with Leibniz, carried on a polemic
against Malebranche in the Treatise on True and False Ideas,
and wrote several theological essays, including The Perpetuity of
the Faith. Pierre Nicole, the secondary author, was born at
Chartres in 1625. His father was also a prominent lawyer, with ties to
literary circles in Paris. Nicole studied theology at the Sorbonne,
where he came into contact with teachers inclined towards
Jansenism. When Jansenism came under attack at the Sorbonne, he
withdrew and went to the abbey at Port-Royal-des-Champs. He eventually
became one of the most prominent Jansenist writers of the seventeenth
century; his Moral Essays (1671–7) was his most famous
work.
Jansenism was a radical reform movement within French Catholicism
based on Augustine's views of the relation between free will and the
efficacy of grace. The movement was named after Cornelis Jansen (or
Cornelius Jansenius), a Dutch theologian born in 1585 who studied at
the Sorbonne. He became the Bishop of Ypres in the Spanish Netherlands
in 1636 and died two years later. His major work Augustinus
was published posthumously in 1640. A second figure in Jansenism was
the Abbot of Saint-Cyran, born Jean Duvergier de Hauranne in 1581. He
received his M.A. in theology at the Sorbonne in 1600, where he met
Jansen. The two worked together from 1611–1617 on scriptural
questions. The issues bringing Jansenism into conflict with Catholic
orthodoxy concerned the efficacy of grace, the role of free will in
salvation, and the nature of penitence. The attack on Jansen began
with Isaac Habert's sermons and writings during 1643–44. By 1653
Pope Innocent X issued an encyclical, Cum occasione,
declaring five propositions in Augustinus to be
heretical. They expressed the views that a just person who wishes to
obey God's commandments cannot do so without the necessary grace to
carry them out; that in the state of corrupt nature one can never
resist interior grace; and that meritorious actions require only a
liberty exempt from constraint rather than one exempt from
necessity. 
Although he did not agree with all of Jansen's views on grace and free
will, Arnauld devoted several major works to defending aspects of
Jansenism, including On Frequent Communion, the Defense
of Monsieur Jansenius and a Second Defense. These
writings resulted in a trial and his expulsion from the Sorbonne in
1656. From 1669 to the late 1670's there was a truce between the
Catholic Church and the Jansenists. But in 1679, after attacks had
resumed, Arnauld went into exile in the Netherlands; he died at
Brussels on August 8, 1694. Pierre Nicole, the coauthor of
the Port-Royal Logic, had joined Arnauld in exile. But he
returned to Paris in 1683 where he reconciled with the authorities. He
died in Paris in 1695.
The Port-Royal Abbey was the center of Jansenist thought in the
seventeenth century, thanks largely to the Arnauld family. Two of
Arnauld's sisters, Angélique (born Jacqueline) and Agnès (born Jeanne)
were nuns at the convent of Port-Royal (later known as
Port-Royal-des-Champs), a Cistercian abbey founded in the thirteenth
century near Versailles. Angélique had become the abbess of the
convent in 1602, at the age of thirteen.  Because of unhealthy
conditions, in 1626 the nuns relocated to the Faubourg-Saint-Jacques
in Paris. The following year the Vatican removed Port-Royal from the
Cistercian order and placed it under the jurisdiction of the
Archbishop of Paris. In 1636 Saint-Cyran became the spiritual director
of the convent, and became associated with a group of men later known
as the solitaires of Port-Royal. They eventually included,
besides Arnauld, Nicole, and Lancelot, Arnauld's brother Robert and
brother-in-law Antoine Le Maistre. Their most important project was
founding the Little Schools of Port-Royal, whose most famous pupil was
Jean Racine.  By that time Saint-Cyran had come into conflict with the
Jesuits and Cardinal Richelieu over several theological issues. In
1638 Richelieu had Saint-Cyran arrested and imprisoned at Vincennes on
charges of heresy. He was released from prison in 1643 but died a year
later. 
In April 1661 the Council of State decreed that all churchmen must
sign a formulary drawn up in 1657, condemning the heretical
propositions in Jansen's work Augustinus. Arnauld and Nicole
had taken the position that the propositions were heretical but did
not appear in the Augustinus. In June 1664 the Archbishop of
Paris interrogated the nuns at Port-Royal-de-Paris; he removed those
who refused to sign to other convents and put those remaining at
Port-Royal under supervision of another order. In 1665 the nuns who
had been dispersed were permitted to go to
Port-Royal-des-Champs. During the 1670s Port-Royal-des-Champs
experienced a few years of tranquility, but by 1679 Port-Royal was
under siege by King Louis XIV, and all confessors, postulants and
pensioners were expelled. In 1709 Louis dispersed the nuns and had the
buildings leveled. Despite the end of Port-Royal, Jansenism survived
until the Revolution of 1789.
Although St. Augustine shaped the theology of Jansenism, René
Descartes was the true philosophical father of the Port-Royal
Logic. Unlike the Jansenists, who suspected the efficacy of
reason, Arnauld and Nicole wholeheartedly embraced Descartes'
rationalism. In fact, their theory of knowledge is taken almost
verbatim from Descartes. But since Cartesian rationalism is in its
broad outlines compatible with Augustinian views, Arnauld and Nicole
often cite both philosophers. Furthermore, because Descartes' theory
of knowledge is inextricably linked with his metaphysics, Arnauld and
Nicole endorse Cartesian dualism as well as the principles of
Descartes' mechanistic physics. 
Descartes' influence is evident in two basic features of the semantics
of the Port-Royal Logic. First is the view that thought is
prior to language, that words are merely external, conventional signs
of independent, private mental states.  Although the association
between words and ideas is conventional and thus arbitrary, language
can signify thought insofar as the structure of a linguistic
expression mirrors the structure of the ideas it expresses. The second
feature is the framework of the Cartesian theory of ideas. This
includes the traditional view that there are four mental operations
required for scientific knowledge: conceiving, judging, reasoning, and
ordering. These operations must occur in this order, since each
operation takes for its elements the product of the preceding
operation. Conceiving consists in the apprehension of ideas by the
understanding, whereas judging is an action of the will. One can
operate on ideas without making judgments, as in forming complex ideas
out of simpler ones, and analyzing complex ideas into their
parts. The Logic differs from Descartes in identifying
forming a proposition with making a judgment. Descartes himself
sharply distinguished the voluntary act of judging from apprehending a
proposition, since in mere apprehension the mind is passive, and
Descartes thought an idea could take propositional form. Port-Royal
has difficulty with this issue in their treatment of
assertion. Reasoning takes place when one produces judgments from
other judgments. By ordering the authors mean putting knowledge into a
methodical system.
The text of the Logic is organized around the four mental
operations described above. Introductory material to the final (1683)
edition includes a Preface (added 1683), a Foreword and First
Discourse (1662), and a Second Discourse (added 1664). The First
Discourse lays out the plan of the Logic, explaining that its
main purpose is to educate judgment to make it more precise, in order
to make the speculative sciences more useful. Thus the Logic
contains not only rules for correct reasoning but also examples of how
reasoning can go wrong. The Second Discourse offers a reply to
objections to the first edition. The main point is to justify their
critical treatment of Aristotle, on the ground that knowing how a
great mind can err can help others avoid making the same mistakes. But
they also take pains to point out how much the Logic owes to
Aristotle's Analytics and other works. The main text that
follows consists of parts devoted to the four mental operations.
Part I contains “reflections on ideas, or the first action of
the mind, which is called conceiving”. It consists of 15
chapters devoted to five topics: the nature and origin of ideas
(chapter 1); the objects ideas represent (chapters 2–4); simple
vs. compound ideas (chapter 5); the extension and restriction of
ideas, including a logical analysis of universal, particular, and
singular ideas and the extension and comprehension of terms (chapters
6–8); and clear and distinct vs. obscure and confused ideas,
including a discussion of types of definition (chapters
9–15).
Part II consists of 20 chapters treating “reflections people
have made about their judgments”. Recognizing that the mind
closely links ideas with the words that express them, their discussion
begins with an analysis of parts of speech in chapters 1 and 2.
Chapters 3 and 4 present a version of the Aristotelian theory of
categorical proposition and the square of opposition. Chapters
5–14 treat the properties of simple, compound, and complex
propositions, including how to identify and classify them. This
section contains the famous distinction between restrictive
(“determinative”) and non-restrictive
(“explicative”) subordinate clauses (chapter 6), as well
as a discussion of logical connectives and non-truth-functional
propositions (chapter 9). The theory of definition is the subject of
chapters 15 and 16. Finally, chapters 17–20 on the conversion of
propositions contain part of the Port-Royal version of the medieval
doctrine of distribution.
Part III focuses on the rules of reasoning, and is divided into 20
chapters. Although the authors admit that most erroneous reasoning is
based on false premises rather than incorrect inferences, they believe
the study of syllogistic forms is helpful to exercise the mind. The
authors classify syllogisms into simple and conjunctive, and simple
syllogisms into complex and noncomplex.  After defining terms in
chapters 1 and 2, they present general rules for simple, noncomplex
syllogisms in chapter 3. This chapter completes their theory of the
distribution of terms, begun in the last four chapters of Part
II. Chapters 4 through 8 explain in tedious detail the figures and
moods of simple syllogisms, again reproducing traditional Aristotelian
views. In chapters 9 through 12 the authors treat in a less formal way
principles for recognizing validity in complex syllogisms. Chapters
14, 15, and 16 discuss respectively enthymemes, sorites (syllogisms
with more than three propositions) and dilemmas. Despite their view of
the uselessness of the theory of topics (the method for finding
arguments), the authors treat it in chapters 17 and 18. Here they
criticize Aristotle, Ramus and the Scholastics. Finally, chapters 19
and 20 discuss sophisms and fallacies.
The Logic ends in Part IV with a theory of scientific
knowledge. Chapter 1 lays the groundwork in Descartes' and Augustine's
rationalism, criticizing the role of the senses in providing
knowledge, as well as the claims of Academic and Pyrrhonian
skeptics. After spelling out the methods of analysis and synthesis in
chapter 2, the authors spend chapters 3 through 10 on the methods of
geometry, including rules of definitions, axioms, and
demonstrations. Chapter 11 then offers eight rules of scientific
method. Finally, chapters 12 through 16 contrast the nature of
knowledge with faith or belief.
As mentioned above, the semantics of the Logic is an
interesting amalgam of medieval and seventeenth-century theories.
Arnauld and Nicole attempt to force a Cartesian view of judgment onto
the traditional theory of categorical propositions and a medieval term
logic. This attempt to graft a new theory of knowledge onto an
existing logical framework inevitably raises problems. This section
will focus on three major aspects of the theory, namely their account
of the proposition and judgment, the semantics of general terms, and
the theory of distribution and truth conditions of propositions. It
will highlight two major contributions to semantics -- the
analysis of subordinate clauses and the distinction between the
comprehension and extension of terms -- as well as some problematic
views of the structure of judgment, the nature of assertion, and their
treatment of predication.
The Port-Royal theory of judgment (or proposition) is an example of
what Geach and others have called the ‘two-name’
view. Every simple judgment is composed of the same three elements: a
subject, a predicate, and a copula connecting the two. These elements
are expressed linguistically in the simplest case by a proper or
substantive noun, a common noun or adjective, and a verb, as in the
sentences ‘Socrates is mortal’ and ‘All men are
mortal’. The authors use the terms ‘subject’ and
‘predicate’ to refer indifferently to the ideas making up
the judgment as well as to their linguistic expressions. As indicated
above, Port-Royal is wedded to the theory of categorical propositions,
classifying them in terms of quantity as universal, particular, or
singular, and in terms of quality as affirmative or negative. The
authors take the traditional stand that singular propositions function
logically like universals, and so all simple propositions have one of
the following four forms, labeled A, E, I,
and O: ‘All S is P’,
‘No S is P’, ‘Some S
is P’, and ‘Some S is
not P’. Also following the tradition, Port-Royal treats
the quantifiers ‘all’ and ‘some’ as part of
the subject, so that ‘all men’ and ‘some men’
are logically significant units. In explaining the rules of
conversion, in Part II, chapter 17, they argue that predicates are
implicitly quantified: when one says ‘All lions are
animals’, one does not mean that all lions are all the
animals, but only some of the animals. So ‘All S
is P’ in general means ‘All S is
(some) P’ (Logic II.17: 130).
Most propositions, however, are more complex than this classification
suggests, for subjects and predicates need not be simple. In the
proposition ‘God who is invisible created the world which is
visible’, both the subject and predicate include subordinate
clauses that appear to contain propositions (Logic
II.5–8).  But because of the overall subject-predicate structure
of all propositions, embedded propositions must be located in the
subject or predicate. This becomes problematic when Arnauld and Nicole
discuss rules of inference, since they have to force all propositions,
including conditionals and disjunctives, into standard categorical
forms. Their treatment of the proposition, then, requires that
subjects and predicates have unlimited complexity.  Thus the
Port-Royal theory provides no basic inventory of simple parts
permitting a recursive analysis, as in the modern classification of
variables, function or predicate symbols, and logical symbols. On the
classical view the proposition has a simple organic unity from the
outside and a reiterable complexity from the inside.
When it comes to making judgments, the part of a proposition that
represents the act of willing distinguishing a judgment from a mere
conception is the copula, expressed linguistically by the verb.  The
copula has two functions in a judgment: it relates the subject and the
predicate, and it signifies affirmation
or denial. Arnauld and Nicole criticize Aristotle and other
philosophers who combine the copula with features of the predicate
(time) and subject (person); in a well-formed language there would be
only one substantive verb, namely to be. In fact,
natural languages often combine the predicate with the verb, as in
‘Peter lives’, and Latin verbs sometimes express all three
elements of judgment in one word, as in cogito
and sum. Descartes thought that in judging one holds a
complex idea or proposition before the mind and then affirms or denies
that it corresponds to reality. But the Port-Royal treatment of the
copula raises serious problems for the accounts of negation and
assertive force.
Negative judgments are those expressed by sentences containing a
negative word or syllable attached to the verb, and are understood
as denials, or judgments having an effect opposite
to affirmations. Since in affirming one unites two ideas, in
denying one separates the subject from the predicate:
 If I say God is not unjust, the
word is when joined to the particle not signifies
the action contrary to affirming, namely denying, in which I view
these ideas as repugnant to one another, because the
idea unjust contains something contrary to what is
contained in the idea God.  (Logic II.3:
82–3)
 Since the ‘not’ is attached to the verb, negation
extends to the entire judgment. As Frege points out in his essay
‘Negation’ (1918, for English version see Frege 1966),
this account makes it impossible to recognize a false thought or grasp
true thoughts that have false thoughts as their components, such as
true conditionals with false antecedents or consequents. For example,
to recognize that ‘3 is greater than 5’ is false requires
having a complete thought, and not merely fragments of a thought. In
addition, this account makes it impossible to understand the force of
double negation: if denying dissolves the thought into its parts, then
double negation would function as a sword that magically unites the
parts it had sundered. (Frege 1966: 122–29) The root problem in
treating negation as denial is the failure to distinguish the thought
or proposition that is grasped from the act of judging it.
This same problem surfaces in the Port-Royal view that the copula has
assertive force, which makes it impossible to distinguish making a
judgment from merely thinking a proposition. According to
the Logic, every time one connects a subject and a predicate
one is ipso facto judging. Thus there is no room for thinking
propositions while suspending judgment, as Descartes advocates in his
method of doubt. This view of the copula also creates a problem for
embedded generality. Because of the ‘two-name’ view,
Port-Royal must locate subordinate clauses in either the subject or
the predicate. But some embedded clauses make assertions and some do
not. Despite the two verbs in the complex proposition ‘Men who
are pious are charitable’, for example, it is clear that one is
not asserting of all men or even some men that they are pious. On the
other hand, ‘God who is invisible created the world which is
visible’ permits three assertions: ‘God is
invisible’, ‘The world is visible’, and ‘God
created the world’ (II.5: 87). Port-Royal explains the
difference between these two kinds of embedding in terms of
‘determinative’ and ‘explicative’ subordinate
clauses (or, as they say, relative pronouns) (see
II.6–8). Determinative subordinate clauses restrict the
signification of the antecedent of the relative pronoun (e.g.,
‘men who are pious’) whereas explicative clauses do not
(e.g., ‘God who is invisible’). In fact both
determinations and explications can be carried out as well without
embedded or subordinate clauses, as in the sentences ‘Pious men
are charitable’ and ‘The invisible God created the visible
world’. So this view of the copula again fails to distinguish
complex ideas containing assertions from those that do not, showing
how far Port-Royal was from a satisfactory treatment of assertion and
embedded generality (see Buroker 1994).
In a recent article Van der Schaar amends the account given above,
pointing out that although Port-Royal generally assumes the
proposition has assertive force, the authors recognize deviant
contexts in which this is not true. She draws attention to their
treatment of modality (Logic II.8) where modal terms such as
‘possible’ and ‘necessary’ function to modify
the act of judging rather than the content of the proposition (see Van
der Scharr 2008: 334–5). The authors label such acts
‘tacit’ or ‘virtual’ affirmations (II.7:
93). She concludes that although for Port-Royal the notion of asserted
proposition is prior in the order of explanation, the authors in fact
analyze some complex propositions as lacking assertive force.
The Port-Royal semantics is based on a theory of the relations between
words, ideas, and things. Like Descartes, Arnauld and Nicole hold that
the representative relation between ideas and things is
both objective and natural. They specify that when
they speak of ideas, they mean “anything in the mind
when we can truthfully say that we are conceiving something, however we
conceive it” (Logic I.1: 26). Thus the idea viewed as
the element of logic and knowledge is the objective content
of thought. And since ideas represent things, the structure of ideas
is isomorphic to the structure of the real: one cannot change the
content of the idea of a right triangle. By contrast, the relation
between words and ideas is not natural, for words are conventional
signs of thoughts (I.4: 37). Humans assign words their meaning through
acts of institution. So the expressive relation between words and
ideas differs in important ways from the representative relation
between ideas and things. First, the relation between the linguistic
sign and its idea is causal-psychological. That is, words, like
natural signs, signify by prompting an idea in the perceiver's
mind. In practice, however, Port-Royal tends to assimilate words to
ideas, calling both ‘terms’, and treats significance as
transitive, claiming the words used to express ideas also signify the
things signified by ideas. There is a second difference between
linguistic and eidetic significance, namely that the correspondence
between words and ideas is imperfect. Port-Royal assumes that if
language coincided exactly with thought, each word would express one
simple idea, and the structure of the sentence would mirror the
structure of ideas. But humans use single words like
‘triangle’ to express complex ideas, and are sometimes
confused as to which ideas are connected with which words.
Consequently there is no guarantee that the structure of linguistic
discourse accurately reflects the structure of ideas. As this overview
suggests, the semantic theory in Port-Royal is carried out on two
levels, first with respect to ideas, and second with respect to
language. 
Port-Royal first classifies ideas with respect to their
objects. According to Cartesian metaphysics, there are three sorts of
things: substances, attributes or primary essential properties of
substances, and modes or accidental properties.  Port-Royal condenses
this framework into the simpler distinction between things or
substances and manners of things. A thing is “conceived as
subsisting by itself and as the subject of everything conceived
about it”; examples of nouns signifying things are
‘earth’, ‘sun’, ‘mind’, and
‘God’. A manner is “conceived as in the thing and not
able to subsist without it, determines it to be in a certain way
and causes it to be so named”.  Manners are expressed by
abstract nouns such as ‘hardness’ and
‘justice’, as well as by adjectives such as
‘hard’ and ‘just’ (I.2: 30–31). As will
become apparent below, adjectives have a more complex form of
signification than nouns. But at this first level the theory depends
on a distinction between things, that is, complete or independent
entities, and manners of things, incomplete or dependent entities. The
table below gives a general sketch of the theory so far:
Simple Port-Royal
This treatment in some ways resembles a modern analysis of
predication: ideas of substances would function as subjects of
judgment; ideas of attributes or manners would be predicates. The
analysis also looks Fregean given the emphasis on the distinction
between complete and incomplete objects of thought. Thus Cartesian
metaphysics has the resources to analyze an atomic proposition as
composed of an expression for an attribute and a name of an
object. But because of the subject-predicate analysis of all judgment
and their semantics of general terms, the final theory is more
complex. What results is a systematic confusion between names and
predicates. (This discussion is based on Buroker 1993.)
The first complication occurs in Chapter 6 of Part I, where the
authors distinguish singular from general or universal ideas.
Although everything that exists is singular, ideas can represent more
than one thing, such as the general idea of a triangle. They then
distinguish proper nouns which indicate single individuals, such as
‘Socrates’, ‘Rome’, ‘Bucephalus’,
from common or appellative nouns such as ‘man’,
‘city’, ‘horse’, which can indicate more than
one thing. Throughout the text, the authors call both universal ideas
and common nouns ‘general terms’. The question that arises
is the relation between these two ways of classifying ideas, the first
in terms of complete or incomplete objects, the second into singular
or general ideas. It is tempting to identify the two, but this is not
easy for Port-Royal. The best way to appreciate the complexity in the
theory is to use Frege's simpler theory as a point of reference.
For Frege, meaning takes place in a three-fold structure, comprised of
linguistic expressions, the entities they designate or refer to, and
the sense of the expression, which is a mode of presenting the entity.
In ‘The Thought’ (1918, for English version see Frege
1966) Frege carefully distinguishes the subjective nature of ideas
considered as mental states from the objective nature of thoughts
expressed in judgments (Frege 1966: 302). Despite the difference in
terminology, Fregean senses function very much like ideas in
Port-Royal: they are the objective contents of thoughts and
utterances. Frege maintains that connected to every linguistic sign
there is a reference and a sense. The sense is the mode of
presentation of that to which the sign refers. Frege divides
linguistic signs into three groups: proper names (singular terms),
function expressions (including concept-expressions), and
sentences. Proper names and sentences are complete names;
function-expressions are incomplete names. In ‘On Sense and
Reference’ Frege specifies that proper names such as
‘Socrates’ and ‘the teacher of Plato’ express
individual or complete senses, which refer to individual complete
entities. Declarative sentences also express senses—the thought
contained in the sentence—and designate or refer to complete
objects, namely the truth value of the sentence. In ‘Comments on
Sense and Meaning’ Frege makes clear that the reference of a
function-expression is a function, an incomplete
entity. Function-expressions contain one or more gaps corresponding to
the ‘unsaturated’ or incomplete nature of the sense they
express and the entities they designate.  For example, the expression
‘is a man’ names a concept under which all humans
fall. Here is a sketch of Frege's theory:
Frege
So far there is an overlap between this view and Port-Royal's theory
of ideas. For Arnauld and Nicole meaning has a three-fold structure,
with ideas taking the place of Fregean senses.  Linguistic signs
express ideas, which represent or refer to entities, either things or
their attributes. Names of entities are either proper or common,
depending on whether they express singular or general ideas. If the
distinction between ideas of things and ideas of attributes coincided
with the distinction between singular and general ideas, the parallel
with Frege would be complete. But Port-Royal actually says that
general ideas represent or refer to more than one individual. On this
view the reference of a general term is not an attribute, but the
collection of individuals possessing the attribute. This is one way
Port-Royal assimilates the relation of a name to its bearer with the
relation of a predicate or concept-expression to the objects falling
under it. Had the authors stopped here, the picture would be fairly
simple. But they develop the theory in two ways. First, they
contribute to the history of semantics by distinguishing the
comprehension (or intension) of a general term from its extension
(denotation). And second, they are led astray by grammatical
considerations into blurring their own distinction between expressions
for complete and incomplete entities.
Medieval philosophers explained the significance of general terms by a
complex theory of supposition (see Spade 1982). Port-Royal condenses
this framework so that the significance of general ideas has two
aspects: the comprehension and the extension. The
comprehension consists in the set of attributes essential to the
idea. For example, the comprehension of the idea
‘triangle’ includes the attributes extension, shape, three
lines, and three angles. The extension of the idea consists in the
inferiors or subjects to which the term applies, which for Port-Royal
includes “all the different species of triangles” (I.6:
39–40). Here the authors confuse the species with the
individual, or the relation of set inclusion with set
membership. Usually, however, they take the extension of a general
idea to be the individuals possessing the attributes in its
comprehension. There are three key features of this theory of
signification. First, the comprehension rather than the extension is
essential to the function of a general idea: one cannot remove an
attribute without destroying the idea, whereas one can restrict its
extension by applying it to only some of the subjects that fall under
it. Second, the comprehension governs the extension: the set of
attributes determines the individuals (and species) in its
extension. Finally, comprehensions and extensions are inversely
related. In adding attributes to the comprehension of an idea one
restricts its extension (assuming attributes are independent and
instantiated). For example, if the comprehension of the idea
‘mammal’ includes that of the idea ‘animal’,
the extension of ‘animal’ includes that of
‘mammal’. Port-Royal implicitly assumes this principle
throughout the text. In recognizing these two modes of
signification—the comprehension and the
extension—Port-Royal imports the distinction between incomplete
and complete entities into the signification of general terms. 
Completing the theory of signification of terms is the noun system,
taken largely from Part II of the Grammar. As explained in
Part II of the Logic, nouns are names of entities, that is,
substances and attributes. Substantive nouns such as
‘earth’ and ‘sun’ signify substances, and
adjectival nouns such as ‘good’ and ‘just’
signify attributes, “indicating at the same time the subject to
which they apply…”. Just as substances are ontologically
prior to their manners or modes, nouns preceded adjectives in the
genesis of language. From the adjective one then creates a secondary
substantive, an abstract noun:
 after having formed the adjective human from the substantive
word man, we form the
substantive humanity from the
adjective human. (Logic II.1: 74)
 Thus there are three kinds of nouns: concrete substantives,
adjectives, and abstract substantives. The Logic says that
adjectives have two significations: a distinct signification of the
mode or manner, and a confused signification of the subject. Although
the signification of the mode is more distinct, it is indirect; by
contrast the confused signification of the subject is direct (II.1:
74–75). So on their account every noun picks out
or distinctly signifies one thing, either an individual, a
collection of individuals, or an attribute.  Concrete substantives
distinctly signify complete objects, that is, individual substances:
‘man’ distinctly signifies human beings. The adjective
‘human’ distinctly signifies the incomplete object, the
attribute of being human.  And abstract substantives such as
‘humanity’ also pick out this attribute distinctly. But
the adjective ‘human’, unlike the concrete substantive
‘man’, is linguistically incomplete, since it means
‘a human [being]’.  Linguistically adjectives are gappy
and require completion by a substantive to refer. Port-Royal
identifies this incomplete signification as the connotation
or confused (but direct) signification of an adjective. So adjectives
signify substances directly and confusedly, and
attributes indirectly and distinctly. Because substantive
nouns of both kinds are linguistically complete, they lack connotation
altogether, and have only distinct and direct signification to the
individual substances or attributes they name. The following chart
represents these signification relations:
It looks as though Port-Royal is led to this notion of the double
signification of adjectives only because they transfer metaphysical
categories to language. Originally, concrete nouns were words naming
substances or complete entities, and adjectives were names of
attributes or incomplete entities. But Arnauld and Nicole blur this
distinction by taking signification to depend on whether
the word is capable of referring alone in discourse.
Incorporating this last analysis into the overall semantics yields
this final result:
Revised Port-Royal
In spite of the complexity a few observations are possible.  First,
both concrete nouns and adjectives directly signify the objects in the
extension of the term. This makes it look as if Arnauld and Nicole are
equating ‘direct signification’ with ‘being
predicable of’ (or denotation), except that this does not apply
in the case of the abstract noun. On the other hand, the distinct but
indirect signification of the adjective looks equivalent to Frege's
view of the reference of concept-expressions, except that Frege treats
the distinction between complete and incomplete reference as invariant
across grammatical form. On his view both common nouns and adjectives
are incomplete expressions. Their predicative nature is more easily
seen when they are correctly formulated, as in ‘is a man’
and ‘is human’.
It is not so clear whether Port Royal wants to apply the distinction
between the comprehension and extension of an idea to singular
terms. In fact, they treat singular terms, including definite
descriptions, as afterthoughts. One passage does, however, address the
nature of definite descriptions. In chapter 8 of Part I the authors
elaborate on the “error of equivocation” that can occur
when people interpret a complex singular term differently. For
example, adherents to different faiths can disagree over the referent
of the complex singular term ‘the true
religion’. Stoianovici argues that in their explanation Arnauld
and Nicole come close to recognizing Donnellan's distinction between
attributive and referential uses of definite descriptions. According
to the account of general terms, adjectives or ‘connotative
terms’ signify substances (the extension) confusedly and
directly, but attributes (the comprehension) distinctly but
indirectly. The authors treat definite descriptions such as ‘the
true religion’ as connotative (general) terms rather than
singular terms, claiming they refer confusedly to a distinct
individual. The error occurs when different thinkers substitute
different individuals for this reference. As Stoianovici notes, their
analysis explicitly recognizes only the referential use, although it
implies the possibility of the attributive use of definite
descriptions. 
Very little has been written on the Port Royal views of truth
conditions of propositions, and the rules of valid syllogisms,
including their account of the distribution of terms. Recently Parsons
addresses their views in his article on the history of the theory of
distribution. Parsons' main concern is to respond to criticisms of the
doctrine of distribution raised by Geach, who maintains both that the
doctrine originated in the medieval theory of the ‘distributed
supposition’ (reference) of terms and that it is
incoherent. Parsons argues to the contrary that it appeared much
earlier, in connection with the test for validity of syllogisms in the
theory of inference. Although Aristotle did not have a term for
distribution, he did express the concept of a term's being taken
universally in On Interpretation. In his defense of the
doctrine, Parsons argues that the Port Royal theory of truth
conditions of propositions, although incomplete and idiosyncratic, can
be extended to provide a coherent account of distribution. This
section will briefly treat the Port Royal theory of distribution and
some aspects of the related account of truth conditions of
judgments.
As explained in 3.1 above, the Logic classifies simple
categorical propositions into four forms: universal affirmatives
(All S is P), universal negatives (No S
is P), particular affirmatives (Some S is P) and
particular negatives (Some S is not P). Simple
categorical syllogisms are arguments with two premises and a
conclusion, each statement taking one of these four forms. Port Royal
gives this example of a categorical syllogism:
In this syllogism the term “good prince” is the middle
term, because it appears in both premises but not in the
conclusion. In chapter 3 of Part III, Port Royal gives six rules or
“axioms” for valid simple categorical syllogisms, rules
conforming to standard medieval logic. The first two concern the
distribution of terms, where a distributed term is expressed as one
‘taken universally’:
The remaining four rules express the standard views that at least one
premise must be affirmative, the conclusion must be affirmative if
both premises are affirmative, if one premise is negative the
conclusion must be negative, and nothing follows from two particular
premises (III.3: 141–42).
In general, a term is distributed if it is ‘taken
universally’ or refers to all the individuals it denotes;
otherwise it is undistributed. As Parsons explains, the denotation of
a term is its extension on its own, whereas its reference is its
extension in a proposition (Parsons 2006: 61). Thus the term
‘prince’ denotes (i.e., is predicable of) all princes, but
in the proposition ‘Some princes are just’, the quantifier
‘Some’ restricts its extension in the proposition (its
reference) to a subset of its extension on its own (denotation).
According to the rules for distribution stated by medieval logicians,
the subject terms of universal propositions and the predicates of
negative propositions are distributed or taken universally throughout
their extension; all other terms are undistributed. Port Royal accepts
these rules in chapters 17–20 of Part II, in explaining the
conversion of propositions, accounting for them in terms of the truth
conditions of propositions. The First Axiom of affirmative
propositions states that the subjects of universal affirmatives are
distributed (taken universally) and the subjects of particular
affirmatives are not (II.17: 130). According to the Fourth Axiom of
affirmative propositions,
The extension of the attribute is restricted by that of the
subject, such that it signifies no more than the part of its extension
which applies to the subject. For example, when we say that
humans are animals, the word ‘animal’ no longer signifies
all animals, but only those animals that are humans. (Logic
II.17: 130–31) 
 The rules for conversion of affirmative
propositions follow from these truth conditions, namely that universal
affirmatives can be converted “by adding a mark of particularity
to the attribute which becomes the subject”, and particular
affirmatives can be simply converted (II.18: 132). Chapters 19 and 20
of Part II similarly treat the truth conditions of negative
propositions and their respective rules of conversion. The nature of a
negative proposition “is to conceive that one thing is not
another”, that is, the subject is not the attribute. Thus the
Sixth Axiom states that “The attribute of a negative
proposition is always taken generally” or is
distributed. Parsons notes that as stated the theory of truth
conditions is in fact incomplete because the authors do not explicitly
discuss the extensions in the proposition of the subject terms of
particular negatives, but one can presume that the rules for
extensions of subject terms in affirmative propositions apply (Parsons
2006: 70). When completed to preserve the logical relations in
Aristotle's square of opposition (which Port Royal clearly intends),
the theory fits both with the traditional doctrine of distribution and
more modern views of the truth conditions of categorical
propositions. Thus Parsons takes the Port Royal account of truth
conditions to give a coherent basis for the traditional theory of
distribution.
More recently Martin offers a more detailed interpretation of the
Port-Royal theory of truth-conditions for categorical
propositions. Like Parsons, he discusses the relation between the
truth-conditions of propositions and the theory of distribution.
Martin disagrees with Parsons' view that the doctrine of distribution
developed independently of the medieval theory of distributive
supposition. According to his analysis, the Port Royal theory of
truth-conditions depends on the idea of a universal (distributive)
term, as well as the notion of a conservative quantifier and the
distinction between affirmative and negative propositions (see Martin
2013). 
As is clear, the Port-Royal Logic is full of confusions as
well as insights. This discussion has emphasized their confusions
between complex idea and proposition, proposition and judgment, and
especially name and predicate. Other topics that deserve more
attention include singular terms and definite descriptions, logical
operators and quantifiers, the theory of truth conditions, and the
theory of inference. It may be more profitable to regard the work as
incorporating several logics, and to view the confusions as the
inevitable results of the tensions among these different views.