Although ‘possible world’ has been part of the 
philosophical lexicon at least since Leibniz, the notion became 
firmly entrenched in contemporary philosophy with the development of 
possible world semantics for the languages of propositional and
first-order modal logic. In addition to the usual sentence operators
of
 classical logic such as
‘and’ (‘∧’), ‘or’
(‘∨’), ‘not’ (‘¬’),
‘if...then’ (‘→’), and, in the
first-order case, the quantifiers ‘all’
(‘∀’) and ‘some’
(‘∃’), these languages contain operators intended to
represent the modal adverbs ‘necessarily’
(‘□’) and ‘possibly’
(‘◇’). Although a prominent aspect of logic in both
Aristotle's work and the work of many medieval philosophers, modal
logic was largely ignored from the modern period to the mid-20th
century. And even though a variety of modal deductive systems had in
fact been rigorously developed in the early 20th century, notably by
Lewis and Langford (1932), there was for the languages of those
systems nothing comparable to the elegant semantics that Tarski had
provided for the languages of classical first-order
logic. Consequently, there was no rigorous account of what it means
for a sentence in those languages to be true and, hence, no
account of the critical semantic notions of validity and logical
consequence to underwrite the corresponding deductive notions of
theoremhood and provability. A concomitant philosophical consequence of
this void in modal logic was a deep skepticism, voiced most
prominently by Quine, toward any appeal to modal notions in
metaphysics generally, notably, the notion of an essential property.
(See Quine 1953 and 1956, and the appendix to Plantinga 1974.) The
purpose of the following two subsections is to provide a simple and
largely ahistorical overview of how possible world semantics fills
this void; the final subsection presents two important applications of
the semantics. (Readers familiar with basic possible world semantics
can skip to §2 with no significant loss of continuity.) 
Since the middle ages at least, philosophers have recognized a 
semantical distinction between extension and 
intension. The extension of a denoting expression, or 
term, such as a name or a definite description is its 
referent, the thing that it refers to; the extension of a predicate 
is the set of things it applies to; and the extension of a sentence 
is its truth value. By contrast, the intension of an expression is 
something rather less definite — its sense, or 
meaning, the semantical aspect of the expression that 
determines its extension. For purposes here, let us say that a 
logic is a formal language together with a semantic theory for
the language, that is, a theory that provides rigorous definitions of
truth, validity, and logical consequence for the 
 language.[2]
 A logic is extensional if the truth value of every sentence 
of the logic is determined entirely by its form and the extensions of
its component sentences, predicates, and terms. An extensional logic 
will thus typically feature a variety of valid substitutivity 
principles. A substitutivity principle says that, if two 
expressions are coextensional, that is, if they have the same 
extension, then (subject perhaps to some reasonable conditions) 
either can be substituted for the other in any sentence salva 
veritate, that is, without altering the original sentence's truth
value. In an 
 intensional logic,
 the truth values of some sentences are determined by something over 
and above their forms and the extensions of their components and, as 
a consequence, at least one classical substitutivity principle is 
typically rendered invalid. 
Extensionality is a well known and generally cherished feature of 
classical propositional and predicate logic. Modal logic, by 
contrast, is intensional. To illustrate: the substitutivity principle
for sentences tells us that sentences with the same truth value can 
be substituted for one another salva veritate. So suppose that
John's only pets are two dogs, Algol and BASIC, say, and consider two
simple sentences and their formalizations (the predicates in question
indicating the obvious English counterparts): 
As both sentences are true, they have the same extension. Hence, in 
accordance with the classical substitutivity principle for sentences,
we can replace the occurrence of (1) with (2) in the false sentence 
and the result is the equally false sentence 
However, when we make the same substitution in the true sentence 
the result is the sentence 
which is intuitively false, as John surely could have had a 
non-mammalian pet. In a modal logic that accurately represents the 
logic of the necessity operator, therefore, the substitutivity 
principle for sentences will have to fail. 
The same example illustrates that the substitutivity principle for 
predicates will have to fail in modal logic as well. For, according 
to our example, the predicates ‘D’ and 
‘P’ that are true of John's dogs and of John's 
pets, respectively, are coextensional, i.e., 
∀x(Dx ↔ Px). However, while 
substituting the latter predicate for the former in (3) results in a 
sentence with the same truth value, the same substitution in (5) does
not. 
Modal logic, therefore, is intensional: in general, the truth 
value of a sentence is determined by something over and above its 
form and the extensions of its components. Absent a rigorous semantic
theory to identify the source of its intensionality and to 
systematize intuitions about modal truth, validity, and logical 
consequence, there was little hope for the widespread acceptance of 
modal logic. 
The idea of possible worlds raised the prospect of extensional 
respectability for modal logic, not by rendering modal logic itself 
extensional, but by endowing it with an extensional semantic theory 
— one whose own logical foundation is that of classical 
predicate logic and, hence, one on which possibility and necessity 
can ultimately be understood along classical Tarskian lines. 
Specifically, in possible world semantics, the modal operators
are interpreted as quantifiers over possible worlds, as 
expressed informally in the following two general principles: 
Given this, the failures of the classical substitutivity principles 
can be traced to the fact that modal operators, so interpreted, 
introduce contexts that require subtler notions of meaning for
sentences and their component parts than are 
provided in classical logic; in particular, a subtler notion (to be 
clarified shortly) is required for predicates than that of the set of
things they happen to apply to. 
Tarskian Semantics. Standard model theoretic semantics for the
languages of predicate logic deriving from the work of Tarski (1933, 
1944) is the paradigmatic semantic theory for extensional logics. 
Given a standard first-order language ℒ, a Tarskian 
interpretation I for ℒ specifies a set D for the quantifiers of ℒ to range over (typically, some set of things that ℒ has been designed to describe) and
assigns, to each 
term (constant or variable) τ of ℒ, a referent 
aτ ∈ D and, to each n-place 
predicate π of ℒ, an appropriate extension 
Eπ — a truth value (TRUE or FALSE) if 
n = 0, a subset of D if n = 1, and a set of 
n-tuples of members of D if n > 1. Given these 
assignments, sentences are evaluated as true under the interpretation I — trueI, for short — according to a more or less familiar set of clauses. To facilitate the definition, let I[ν/a] be the interpretation that assigns the individual
a to the variable ν and is otherwise exactly like I.
Then we have: 
Clauses for the other standard Boolean operators and the existential 
quantifier under their usual definitions follow straightaway from 
these clauses. In particular, where 
it follows that: 
It is easy to verify that, in each of the above cases, replacing one 
coextensional term, predicate, or sentence for another has no effect 
on the truth values rendered by the above clauses, thus guaranteeing 
the validity of the classical substitutivity principles and, hence, 
the extensionality of first-order logic with a Tarskian semantics. 
From Tarskian to Possible World Semantics. The truth 
conditional clauses for the three logical operators directly reflect 
the meanings of the natural language expressions they symbolize: 
‘¬’ means not; ‘→’ means 
if...then; ‘∀’ means all. It is 
easy to see, however, that we cannot expect to add an equally simple 
clause for sentences containing an operator that symbolizes 
necessity. For a Tarskian interpretation fixes the domain of
quantification and the extensions of all the predicates. Pretty 
clearly, however, to capture necessity and possibility, one must be 
able to consider alternative “possible” domains of 
quantification and alternative “possible” extensions for 
predicates as well. For, intuitively, under different circumstances, 
fewer, more, or other things might have existed and things that 
actually exist might, in those circumstances, have had very different
properties. (6), for example, is false because John could have had 
non-mammalian pets: a canary, say, or a turtle, or, under 
very different circumstances, a dragon. A bit more formally 
put: Both the domain of quantification and the extension of the 
predicate ‘P’ could, in some sense or other, have 
been different. 
Possible world semantics, of course, uses the concept of a possible
world to give substance to the idea of alternative extensions and
alternative domains of quantification. (Possible world semantics can
be traced most clearly back to the work of Carnap (1947), its basic
development culminating in the work of Hintikka (1957, 1961), Bayart
(1958, 1959), and Kripke (1959, 1963a, 1963b).[5]) Similar to Tarskian semantics, a possible world interpretation M of a modal language ℒ
specifies a nonempty set D, although thought of now as the set
of “possible individuals” of M. Also as in Tarskian
semantics, M assigns each term τ of ℒ a referent
aτ in D.[6] Additionally however, M specifies a
set W, the set of “possible worlds” of M,
one of which is designated its “actual world”, and each
world w in W is assigned its own domain of
quantification, d(w) ⊆ D, intuitively, the
set of individuals that exist in w.[7] To capture the idea of both the actual and
possible extensions of a predicate, M assigns to each
n-place predicate π a function Mπ
— the intension of π — that, for each possible
world w, returns the extension
Mπ(w) of π at w: a
truth value, if n = 0; a set of individuals, if n = 1;
and a set of n-tuples of individuals, if n > 1.[8] We can thus rigorously
define a “possible extension” of a predicate π to be
any of its w-extensions
Mπ(w), for any world w. 
The Tarskian truth conditions above are now generalized by 
relativizing them to worlds as follows: for any possible world 
w (the world of evaluation): 
And to these, of course, is added the critical modal case that 
explicitly interprets the modal operator to be a quantifier over 
worlds, as we'd initially anticipated informally in our principle 
 Nec:
 
      A sentence φ is falseM at w
      just in case it is not trueM at w, and
      φ is said to be trueM just in case
      φ is trueM at the actual world of
      M.
      On the assumption that there is a (nonempty) set of all possible
      worlds and a set of all possible individuals, we can define
      “objective” notions of truth at a world and of truth
      simpliciter, that is, notions that are not simply
      relative to formal, mathematical interpretations but, rather,
      correspond to objective reality in all its modal glory. Let
      ℒ be a modal language whose names and predicates represent
      those in some fragment of ordinary language (as in our examples
      (5) and (6) above). Say that M is the 
      “intended” interpretation of ℒ if (i) its set
      W of “possible worlds” is in fact the set of
      all possible worlds, (ii) its designated “actual
      world” is in fact the actual world, (iii) its set D
      of “possible individuals” is in fact the set of all
      possible individuals, and (iv) the referents assigned to the
      names of ℒ and the intensions assigned to the predicates
      of ℒ are the ones they in fact have. Then, where M 
      is the intended interpretation of ℒ, we can say that
      a sentence φ of ℒ is 
      true at a possible world w just in case φ 
      is trueM at w, and
      that φ is true just in case it is
      trueM at the actual world. (Falsity at
      w and falsity, simpliciter, are defined accordingly.) Under the
      assumption in question, then, the modal clause above takes on pretty much the
      exact form of our informal principle Nec.
    Call the above basic possible world semantics.  Spelling
    out the truth conditions for (6) (relative to the
    intended interpretation of its language), basic
    possible world semantics tells us that (6) is
    true if and only if 
And by unpacking (8) in terms of the quantificational, material conditional, 
and atomic clauses above we have that (6) is true if and only if 
Since we are evaluating (6) with regard to the intended interpretation of its
language, the w-extension of ‘P’ that is returned by its intension, for any world w, is the (perhaps empty) set of John's pets
in w and that of ‘M’ is the set of mammals in w. Hence, if w is a world where John has a pet
canary — COBOL, say — COBOL is in the w-extension
of ‘P’ but not that of ‘M’ ,
i.e., ‘∀x(Px → Mx)’ is
false at w and, hence, by the truth condition (9), (6) is false at the actual world — that is, (6) is false simpliciter, as it should be. 
Note that interpreting modal operators as quantifiers over possible 
worlds provides a nice theoretical justification for the usual 
definition of the possibility operator in terms of necessity, 
specifically: 
That is, a sentence is possible just in case its negation isn't 
necessary. Since, semantically speaking, the necessity 
operator is literally a universal quantifier, the definition
corresponds exactly to the definition 
 (7)
 of the existential quantifier. For, unpacking the right side of 
definition (10) according to the negation and necessitation clauses
above (and invoking the definitions of truth and truth at a world
simpliciter), we have: 
Clearly, however, if it is not the case that φ fails to be true 
at all possible worlds, then it must be true at some world; hence: 
And that corresponds exactly to our intuitive truth condition 
 Poss
 above. Thus, spelling out the negation 
‘¬□∀x(Px → 
Mx)’ of our false sentence 
 (6)
 above in accordance with definition (10) (and the standard definition
of conjunction ∧), we have: 
for which (12) and the possible world truth conditions for 
quantified, Boolean, and atomic sentences yield the correct truth condition: 
that is, less stuffily, there is a possible world in which, among 
John's pets, at least one is not a mammal. 
Summary: Intensionality and Possible Worlds. Analyzed in terms
of possible world semantics, then, the general failure of classical 
substitutivity principles in modal logic is due, not to an 
irreducibly intensional element in the meanings of the modal 
operators, but rather to a sort of mismatch between the surface 
syntax of those operators and their semantics: syntactically, they 
are unary sentence operators like negation; but semantically, they 
are, quite literally, quantifiers. Their syntactic similarity to 
negation suggests that, like negation, the truth values of 
⌈□φ⌉ and 
⌈◇φ⌉, insofar as they are
determinable at all, must be determined by the truth value of φ. 
That they are not (in general) so determined leads to the distinctive
substitutivity failures noted above. The possible worlds analysis of 
the modal operators as quantifiers over worlds reveals that the unary
syntactic form of the modal operators obscures a semantically 
relevant parameter. When the modal operators are interpreted as 
quantifiers, this parameter becomes explicit and the reason 
underlying the failure of extensionality in modal logic becomes 
clear: That the truth values of 
⌈□φ⌉ and 
⌈◇φ⌉ are not in general 
determined by the truth value of φ at the world of evaluation is,
semantically speaking, nothing more than the fact that the truth 
values of ‘∀xFx’ and 
‘∃xFx’ are not in general determined by the 
truth value of ‘Fx’, for any particular value of 
‘x’. Possible world semantics, therefore, 
explains the intensionality of modal logic by revealing that
the syntax of the modal operators prevents an adequate expression of 
the meanings of the sentences in which they occur. Spelled out as 
possible world truth conditions, those meanings can be expressed in a
wholly extensional fashion. 
 (For
 a more formal exposition of this point, see the supplemental article 
 The Extensionality of Possible World Semantics.)
 
As noted, the focus of the present article is on the metaphysics of 
possible worlds rather than applications. Of course, the semantics of
modal languages is itself an application, but one that is of singular
importance, both for historical reasons and because most applications
are in fact themselves applications of (often extended or modified 
versions of) the semantical apparatus. Two particularly important 
examples are the analysis of intensions and a concomitant explication
of the de re/de dicto 
 distinction.[10]
The Analysis of Intensions. As much a barrier to the 
acceptance of modal logic as intensionality itself was the need to 
appeal to intensions per se — properties, relations, 
propositions, and the like — in semantical explanations. 
Intensional entities have of course featured prominently in the 
history of philosophy since Plato and, in particular, have played 
natural explanatory roles in the analysis of 
 intentional attitudes
 like 
 belief
 and 
 mental content.
 For all their prominence and importance, however, the nature of these
entities has often been obscure and controversial and, indeed, as a 
consequence, they were easily dismissed as ill-understood and 
metaphysically suspect “creatures of darkness” (Quine 
1956, 180) by the naturalistically oriented philosophers of the 
early- to mid-20th century. It is a virtue of possible world 
semantics that it yields rigorous definitions for 
intensional entities. More specifically, as described above, possible
world semantics assigns to each n-place predicate π a 
certain function Iπ — π's intension 
— that, for each possible world w, returns the extension
Iπ(w) of π at w. We can define 
an intension per se, independent of any language, to be any 
such function on worlds. More specifically: 
The adequacy of this analysis is a matter of lively debate that 
focuses chiefly upon whether or not intensions, so defined, are too 
“coarse-grained” to serve their intended purposes. (See, 
e.g., Stalnaker 1987 and 2012 for a strong defense of the analysis.) 
However, Lewis (1986, §1.5) argues that, even if the above 
analysis fails for certain purposes, it does not follow that 
intensions cannot be analyzed in terms of possible worlds, but only 
that more subtle constructions might be required. This reply appears 
to side-step the objections from granularity while preserving the 
great advantage of the possible worlds analysis of intensions, viz., 
the rigorous definability of these philosophically significant 
notions. 
The De Re / De Dicto Distinction. A particularly
rich application of the possible world analysis of intensions 
concerns the analysis of the venerable distinction between de 
re and de dicto 
 modality.[11]
 Among the strongest modal intuitions is that the possession of a 
property has a modal character — that things exemplify, or fail
to exemplify, some properties necessarily, or 
essentially, and others only accidentally. Thus, for
example, intuitively, John's dog Algol is a pet accidentally; under
less fortunate circumstances, she might have been, say, a stray that
no one ever adopted. But she is a dog essentially; she couldn't have
been a flower, a musical performance, a crocodile or any other kind of
thing. 
Spelling out this understanding in terms of worlds and the preceding 
analysis of intensions, we can say that an individual a has a 
property F essentially if a has F in every world
in which it exists, that is, if, for all worlds w in which 
a exists, a ∈ F(w). Likewise, 
a has F accidentally if a has F in the 
actual world @ but lacks it in some other world, that is, if a
∈ F(@) but, for some world w in which a 
exists, a ∉ F(w). Thus, let 
‘G’ and ‘T’ symbolize ‘is
a dog’ and ‘is someone's pet’, respectively; then, 
where ‘E!x’ is short for 
‘∃y(x=y)’ (and, hence, 
expresses that x exists), we have: 
More generally, sentences like (15) and (16) in which properties are 
ascribed to a specific individual in a modal context — signaled
formally by the occurrence of a name or the free occurrence of a 
variable in the scope of a modal operator — are said to exhibit
modality de 
 re[12]
 (modality of the thing). Modal sentences that do not, like 
are said to exhibit modality de dicto (roughly, modality 
of the proposition). 
Possible world semantics provides an illuminating analysis of the key
difference between the two: The truth conditions for both modalities 
involve a commitment to possible worlds; however, the truth 
conditions for sentences exhibiting modality de re involve in 
addition a commitment to the meaningfulness of 
 transworld identity,
 the thesis that, necessarily, every individual (typically, at any 
rate) exists and exemplifies (often very different) properties in 
many different possible worlds. More specifically, basic possible 
world semantics yields intuitively correct truth values for sentences
of the latter sort by (i) permitting world domains to overlap and 
(ii) assigning intensions to predicates, thereby, in effect, 
relativizing predicate extensions to worlds. In this way, one and the
same individual can be in the extension of a given predicate at all 
worlds in which they exist, at some such worlds only, or at none at 
all. (For further discussion, see the entry on
 essential vs. accidental properties.)
 
The power and appeal of basic possible world semantics is undeniable.
In addition to providing a clear, extensional formal semantics for a 
formerly somewhat opaque, intensional notion, cashing possibility as 
truth in some possible world and necessity as truth in every such 
world seems to tap into very deep intuitions about the nature of 
modality and the meaning of our modal discourse. Unfortunately, the 
semantics leaves the most interesting — and difficult — 
philosophical questions largely unanswered. Two arise with particular
force: 
And, given QW: 
In this section we will concern ourselves with, broadly speaking, the
three most prominent philosophical approaches to these 
 questions.[13]
Recall the informal picture that we began with: a world is, so to 
say, the “limit” of a series of increasingly more 
inclusive situations. Fleshed out philosophical accounts of this 
informal idea generally spring from rather different intuitions about
what one takes the “situations” in the informal picture 
to be. A particularly powerful intuition is that situations are 
simply structured collections of physical objects: the 
immediate situation of our initial example above, for instance, consists 
of, among other things, the objects in Anne's office 
— notably Anne herself, her desk and her computer, with her 
seated at the former and typing on the latter — and at least 
some of the things in the next room — notably, her husband and 
the phone he is talking on. On this view, for one situation s 
to include another r is simply for r to be a (perhaps 
rather complex and distributed) physical part of s. The actual
world, then, as the limit of a series of increasingly more inclusive 
situations in this sense, is simply the entire physical universe: all
the things that are some spatiotemporal distance from the objects in 
some arbitrary initial situation, structured as they in fact are; and
other possible worlds are things of exactly the same sort. Call this 
the concretist intuition, as possible worlds are understood to
be concrete physical situations of a special sort. 
The originator and, by far, the best known proponent of concretism is

 David Lewis.
 For Lewis and, as noted, concretists generally, the actual world is 
the concrete physical universe as it is, stretched out in space-time.
As he rather poetically expresses it (1986, 1): 
The actual world provides us with our most salient example of what a 
possible world is. But, for the concretist, other possible worlds are
no different in kind from the actual world (ibid., 2): 
It is clear that spatiotemporal relations play a critical role in
Lewis's conception. However, it is important to note that Lewis
understands such relations in a very broad and flexible way so as to
allow, in particular, for the possibility of spirits and other
entities that are typically thought of as non-spatial; so long as they
are located in time, Lewis writes, “that is good enough”
(ibid., 73). So with this caveat, let us say that that an
object a is connected if any two of its parts bear
some spatiotemporal relation to each other,[14] and that a is
maximal if none of its parts is spatiotemporally related to
anything that is not also one of its parts. Then we have the following
concretist answers to our questions: 
And, hence, to exist in a world is simply to be a part of it: 
It follows from AW1 (and reasonable assumptions) that distinct
worlds do not overlap, spatiotemporally; that no spatiotemporal part 
of one world is part of 
 another.[16]
 Moreover, given 
 Lewis's counterfactual analysis of causation,
 it follows from this that objects in distinct worlds bear no causal 
relations to one another; nothing that occurs in one world has any 
causal impact on anything that occurs in any other world. 
Critically, for Lewis, worlds and their denizens do not differ in the
manner in which they exist. The actual world does not enjoy a
kind of privileged existence that sets it apart from other worlds.
Rather, what makes the actual world actual is simply that it is
our world, the world that we happen to inhabit. Other worlds
and their inhabitants exist just as robustly as we do, and in
precisely the same sense; all worlds and all of their denizens are
equally real.[17] A significant semantic corollary of this
thesis for Lewis is that the word ‘actual’ in the phrase
‘the actual world’ does not indicate any special
property of the actual world that distinguishes it from all
other worlds; likewise, an assertion of the form ‘a is
actual’ does not indicate any special property of the individual
a that distinguishes it from the objects existing in other
worlds. Rather, ‘actual’ is simply an indexical
whose extension is determined by the context of utterance. Thus, the
referent of ‘the actual world’ in a given utterance is
simply the world of the speaker, just as the referent of an utterance
of ‘the present moment’ is the moment of the utterance;
likewise, an utterance of the form ‘a is actual’
indicates only that a shares the same world as the speaker.
The speaker thereby ascribes no special property to a but,
essentially, expresses no more than when she utters ‘a is
here’, understood in the broadest possible sense. By
the same token, when we speak of non-actual possibilia —
Lewis's preferred label for the denizens of possible worlds — we
simply pick out those objects that are not here in the
broadest sense. In the mouth of an other-worldly metaphysician, we
here are all among the non-actual possibilia of which she
speaks in her lectures on de re modality. 
Modal Reductionism and Counterparts. Lewis parted ways dramatically
 with his mentor
 W. V. O. Quine
 on modality. Quine (1960, §41) stands in a long line
 of philosophers dating back at least to
 David Hume
 who are skeptical, at best, of the idea that modality is an objective
feature of reality and, consequently, who question whether modal
assertions in general can be objectively true or false, or even
coherent. Lewis, by contrast, wholly embraces the objectivity of
modality and the coherence of our modal discourse. What he denies,
however, is that modality is a fundamentally irreducible
feature of the world. Lewis, that is, is a modal
reductionist. For Lewis, modal notions are not primitive. Rather,
truth conditions for modal sentences can be given in terms of worlds
and their parts; and worlds themselves, Lewis claims, are defined
entirely in non-modal terms. The earliest presentation of Lewis's
theory of modality (Lewis 1968) — reflecting Quine's

 method of regimentation
 — offers, rather than a possible world semantics, a scheme for 
translating sentences in the language of modal predicate logic
into sentences of ordinary first-order logic in which the modal 
operators are replaced by explicit quantifiers over 
 worlds.[18]
 The mature account of Lewis 1986 is much more semantic in orientation: it 
avoids any talk of translation and offers instead a (somewhat 
informal) account of concretist possible world truth conditions for a
variety of modal assertions. Nonetheless, it is useful to 
express the logical forms of these truth conditions explicitly in 
terms of worlds, existence in a world (in the sense of AE1, of
course), and the counterpart relation, which will be 
discussed shortly: 
For sentences like 
 (17)
 involving only de dicto modalities, Lewis's truth conditions 
are similar in form to the truth conditions generated by the modal 
clauses of basic possible world semantics; specifically, for (17):
 
As in possible world semantics, the modal operators
‘□’ and ‘◇’ “turn
into” quantifiers over worlds in concretist truth
conditions (1986, 5). Also as in possible world semantics,
a quantifier (in effect) ranging over individuals that occurs 
in the scope of a quantifier (in effect) ranging over worlds
— ‘∀x’ and
‘∀w’, respectively, in (18) — is, for
each value w of the bound world variable, restricted to the
objects existing in w. However, unlike possible world
semantics, predicates are not to be thought of as having different
extensions at different worlds. Rather, for Lewis, each
(n-place) predicate has a single extension that can contain
(n-tuples of) objects across many different worlds —
intuitively, all of the objects that have the property (or
n-tuples of objects that stand in the relation) expressed by
the predicate across all possible worlds. Thus, in particular, the
predicate ‘G’ picks out, not just this-worldly dogs
but other-worldly canines as well. Likewise, the pet predicate
‘T’ picks out both actual and other-worldly
pets. Such a move is not feasible in basic possible world semantics,
which is designed for a metaphysics in which one and the same
individual can exemplify a given property in some worlds in which they
exist but not others. Hence, a typical predicate will be true of an
individual with respect to some worlds and false of it with respect to
others. But, for Lewis, as we've seen, distinct possible worlds do not
overlap and, hence, objects are worldbound, thereby eliminating the
need to relativize predicate extensions to worlds. 
However, this very feature of Lewis's account — 
worldboundedness — might appear to threaten its coherence. For 
example, since Algol is in fact a pet, given worldboundedness and the
definition 
 AE1
 of existence in a world w, we have: 
But, according to Lewis's analysis, the modal operators
‘□’ and ‘◇’, semantically, are
quantifiers over worlds. Hence, (19) might appear to be exactly the
concretist truth condition for the denial of (the right conjunct of)
(16), i.e., it might appear that, on Lewis's
analysis, Algol is not a pet accidentally but essentially; likewise,
more generally, any individual and any intuitively accidental property
of that individual. 
In fact, Lewis whole-heartedly accepts that things have accidental 
properties and, indeed, would accept that 
 (16)
 is robustly true. His explanation involves one of the most 
interesting and provocative elements of his theory: the doctrine of 
counterparts. Roughly, an object y in a world 
w2 is a counterpart of an object x in 
w1 if y resembles x and nothing else 
in w2 resembles x more than 
 y.[19] 
 Each object is thus
its own (not necessarily unique) counterpart in the world it inhabits
but will typically differ in important ways from its other-wordly 
counterparts. A typical other-worldly counterpart of Algol, for 
example, might resemble her very closely up to some point in her 
history — a point, say, after which she continued to live out 
her life as a stray instead of being brought home by our kindly 
dog-lover John. Hence, sentences making de re assertions about
what Algol might have done or what she could or could 
not have been are unpacked, semantically, as sentences about her 
counterparts in other possible worlds. Thus, when we analyze 
(16) accordingly, we have the entirely unproblematic concretist truth
condition: 
Ascriptions of essential properties, as in 
 (15),
 are likewise unpacked in terms of counterparts: to say that Algol is 
a dog essentially is to say that 
The Analysis of Intensions. Lewis's possible world truth
conditions are expressed in classical non-modal logic and, hence, they
are to be interpreted by means of standard Tarskian semantics.  Thus,
n-place predicates π are assigned extensions
Eπ — in particular, for 1-place predicates,
sets of individuals — as their semantic values, as described in
the exposition in §1.2 above. However,
given worldboundedness and the fact that predicate extensions are
drawn not simply from the actual world but from all possible worlds,
these extensions are able to serve as intensions in Lewis's
theory. As in basic possible world semantics, intensional entities in
general can be defined in terms of the basic ontology of the theory
independent of the linguistic roles they can play as the intensions of
predicates. And because individuals are worldbound, Lewis is able to
simplify the definitions given in §1.3 by defining intensions as sets
rather than functions: 
Thus, on this analysis, a proposition p is true in a
world w just in case w ∈ p and an individual
a has a property P just in case a ∈
P. (Note that propositions are thus simply properties of worlds
on these definitions.)  a has P accidentally
just in case a ∈ P but b ∉ P
for some other-worldly counterpart of b of a; and
a has P essentially if b ∈ P
for every counterpart b of a. 
In Lewis's theory of modality, then, modal operators are understood 
semantically to be quantifiers over concrete worlds, predicates 
denote intensions understood as sets of (n-tuples of) parts of
those worlds, and sentences involving de re modalities are 
understood in terms of counterparts. To the extent that these notions
are free of modality, Lewis has arguably reduced modal notions to 
non-modal. 
That Lewis's truth conditions for modal statements are themselves free
of modality and, hence, that his theory counts as a genuine reduction
of modal notions to non-modal is not terribly controversial (albeit
not undisputed — see Lycan 1991, 224–27; Divers and Melia
2002, 22–24). Significantly more controversial, and perhaps far
more critical to the project, is whether or not his account is
complete, that is, whether or not, for all modal statements
φ, (i) if φ is intuitively true, then its Lewisian truth
condition holds (ii) if φ is intuitively false, then its Lewisian
truth condition fails.[21] 
The challenge to Lewis, then, is that his
account can be considered successful only if it is complete
in this sense. 
The chief question Lewis faces in this regard is whether there are 
enough worlds to do the job. The truth condition 
 (20)
 for the intuitively true 
 (16)
 says that there exists a possible world in which a counterpart of 
Algol is no one's pet. By virtue of what in Lewis's theory does such 
a world exist? The ideal answer for Lewis would be that some 
principle in his theory guarantees a plenitude of worlds, a 
maximally abundant array of worlds that leaves “no gaps in 
logical space; no vacancies where a world might have been, but 
isn't” (Lewis 1986, 86). From this it would follow that the 
worlds required by the concretist truth condition for any intuitive 
modal truth exist. Toward this end, Lewis initially considers the 
evocative principle: 
Since, in particular, a world satisfying (20)
seems quite obviously to be a way a world could be, by Ways
such a world exists. But there is a fatal flaw here: Lewis himself
(1973, 84) identifies ways that a world could be with worlds
themselves. So understood, Ways collapses into the triviality
that every world is identical to some
 world.[22]
Lewis finds a replacement for Ways in a principle of 
recombination whereby “patching together parts of 
different possible worlds yields another possible world” (1986,
87–88). The principle has two aspects. The first is the principle 
that “anything can coexist with anything”. For “if 
there could be a dragon, and there could be a unicorn,” Lewis 
writes, “but there couldn't be a dragon and a unicorn side by 
side, that would be ... a failure of plenitude” (ibid., 
88). Given that individuals are worldbound, however, the principle is
expressed more rigorously (and more generally) in terms of 
other-worldly duplicates: 
The second aspect of the principle expresses “the Humean denial
of necessary connections” (ibid., 87), that is, the idea
that anything can fail to coexist with anything else. For 
“if there could be a talking head contiguous to the rest of a 
living human body, but there couldn't be a talking head separate from
the rest of a human body, that too would be a failure of 
plenitude” (ibid). To express this a bit more 
rigorously, say that objects a1, 
a2, ..., are independent of objects 
b1, b2, ..., if no sum of any 
parts of the former are parts or duplicates of any sum of any parts 
of the latter and vice versa; then we have: 
Worlds that satisfy the concretist truth conditions for workaday 
possibilities like 
 (16)
 are easily conceived as consisting of duplicates of relevant parts of
the actual world — suitably organized to retain their actual 
properties, or not, as needed. Hence, the existence of such worlds 
does indeed appear to follow from the existence of the actual world 
by recombination. Worlds containing talking donkeys, exotic species 
resulting from a wholly different evolutionary history, worlds with 
silicon-based life forms, and so on present a bigger challenge to the
view. Nonetheless, it is not entirely implausible to think such 
worlds exist given suitable duplication and reorganization of 
microphysical 
 objects.[23]
Whether recombination completely captures our modal intuitions
regarding plenitude is still a matter of some dispute.[24] However, even if it
doesn't, it is less than clear whether this counts against the success
of Lewis's reductionist project. For, as a realist about worlds, Lewis
does not seem to be under any obligation to “derive”
plenitude from more fundamental principles.  Hence, there is no
obvious reason why he cannot respond to charges of incompleteness by
saying that it is simply a presupposition of his theory that logical
space has no gaps, that there are always enough worlds to satisfy the
concretist truth condition for any intuitive modal truth.[25] So understood, the
role of recombination for a realist about worlds like Lewis is
something like the role of such axioms as powerset and replacement for
a realist about sets: given some sets, these principles provide us
with a detailed — but always less than complete —
characterization of what further sets there are. Their role,
therefore, is to give us insight into the richness and diversity of
set theoretic space, not a complete mechanism for proving which
particular sets do or do not exist. Likewise recombination
vis-à-vis worlds and logical space.
 
Lewis's theory is particularly commendable for its striking 
originality and ingenuity and for the simple and straightforward 
answers AW1 and AE1 that it provides to our two 
questions QW and QE above. Furthermore, because worlds 
are (plausibly) defined entirely in nonmodal terms, the truth 
conditions provided by Lewis's translation scheme themselves appear 
to be free of any implicit modality. Hence, unlike many other popular
accounts of possible worlds (notably, the abstractionist accounts 
discussed in the following section), Lewis's promises to provide a 
genuine analysis of the modal operators. 
Perhaps the biggest — if not the most philosophically 
sophisticated — challenge to Lewis's theory is “the 
incredulous stare”, i.e., less colorfully put, the fact that 
its ontology is wildly at variance with common sense. Lewis faces 
this objection head on: His theory of worlds, he acknowledges, 
“does disagree, to an extreme extent, with firm common 
sense opinion about what there is” (1986, 133). However, Lewis 
argues that no other theory explains so much so economically. With 
worlds in one's philosophical toolkit, one is able to provide elegant
explanations of a wide variety of metaphysical, semantical, and 
intentional phenomena. As high as the intuitive cost is, Lewis (135) 
concludes, the existence of worlds “ought to be accepted as 
true. The theoretical benefits are worth it.” 
Additional discussion of, and objections to, concretism can be found 
in the supplemental document 
 Further Problems for Concretism.
 
A rather different set of intuitions about situations is that they 
are abstract entities of a certain sort: They are 
states or conditions, of varying detail and 
complexity, that a concrete world could be in — they are 
ways that things, as a whole, could 
 be.[26]
 Thus, returning to our original example, one very simple way things 
could be is for our philosopher Anne to be in her office. We can now 
imagine, as in our example, further detail being successively added 
to that description to yield more complex ways things could be: Anne 
working at her desk in her office; music being in the background; her
husband being on the phone in the next room; her neighbor mowing the 
lawn next door; and so on. Roughly speaking, then, a possible world 
for an abstractionist is the limit of such a 
“process” of consistently extending and adding detail to 
some initial state of the world; it is a total way things 
could be, a consistent state of the world that settles every 
possibility; a consistent state to which no further detail could be 
added without rendering it inconsistent. 
To give the notion of a state, or condition, of the world a little 
more metaphysical substance, abstractionists typically appeal to more
traditional ontological categories. Thus, for example, that things 
could be in the simple state described above might be spelled out in 
one of the following ways: 
Possible worlds are then defined as special cases of the type of
entity in question that are in some relevant sense total.
Adams (1974), for example, defines possible worlds to be consistent
sets of propositions that are total in the sense of containing, for
every proposition p, either p or its negation; Fine
(1977), fleshing out ideas of Prior, defines a possible world to be a
consistent proposition w that is total in the sense that, for
every proposition p, w entails either p or its
negation. For purposes here, however, we will sketch the fundamentals
of the abstractionist view in terms of states of affairs,
following the basic features of the account developed by Plantinga
(1974, 1976), an account that, in the literature, frequently serves as
a particularly trenchant abstractionist counterpoint to Lewis's
concretism.[27]
States of affairs (SOAs) are abstract, intensional entities typically
signified by sentential gerundives like “Algol's being John's 
pet” and “There being more than ten solar planets”.
Importantly, SOAs constitute a primitive ontological category for the
abstractionist; they are not defined in terms of possible worlds in 
the manner that propositions are in 
 §1.3.
 Just as some propositions are true and others are not, some SOAs are 
actual and others are 
 not.[28] 
 Note, then, that to
say an SOA is non-actual is not to say that it does not 
actually exist. It is simply to say that it is not, in fact,
a condition, or state, that the concrete world is actually in. 
However, because ‘____ is actual’ is often used simply to
mean ‘____ exists’, there is considerable potential for 
confusion here. So, henceforth, to express that an SOA is actual we 
will usually say that it obtains. 
An SOA is said to be possible (necessary, 
impossible) insofar as it is possible (necessary, impossible) 
that it obtain. One SOA s is said to include another 
t if, necessarily, s obtains only if t does; 
s precludes t if, necessarily, s obtains 
only if t doesn't. So, for example, Algol's being John's 
pet includes Algol's being someone's pet and precludes 
there being no pets. Thus, on the abstractionist's 
understanding of a situation as a state or condition of the physical 
world rather than a concrete, structured piece of it, the inclusion 
of one situation in another is a purely logical relation, not 
a 
 mereological
 one. Finally, say that an SOA s is total if, for every 
SOA t, s either includes or precludes t. 
(Abstractionists often use ‘maximal’ instead of 
‘total’, but we have already introduced this term in the 
context of concretism.) Abstractionist possible worlds are now 
definable straightaway: 
It is easy to see that this definition covers the more intuitive 
characterizations of abstract possible worlds above: they are 
consistent — i.e., possible — states of the world that 
settle every possibility, consistent states to which no further 
detail could be added without rendering them inconsistent. Note also 
that, for the abstractionist, as for the concretist, the actual 
world is no different in kind from any other possible world; all 
possible worlds exist, and in precisely the same sense as the actual 
world. The actual world is simply the total possible SOA that, in 
fact, obtains. And non-actual worlds are simply those total possible 
SOAs that do not. 
What of existence in such worlds? As we've seen, on Lewis's account, 
to exist in a concrete world w is literally to exist in 
w, that is, within the spatiotemporal boundaries of 
w. Clearly, because SOAs are abstract, individuals cannot 
exist in abstractionist worlds in anything like the same literal, 
mereological sense. Accordingly, the abstractionist defines existence
in a world simply to be a special case of the inclusion relation: 
Unlike concretism, then, abstractionism does not entail that 
individuals are worldbound; there is no inconsistency whatever in the
idea that many distinct worlds can include the existence of one and 
the same individual. Indeed, typically, abstractionists are staunchly
committed to transworld identity and hold that most any given 
individual exists in many possible worlds and, moreover, that 
contingent individuals, at least, can exemplify very different 
properties from world to world. Abstractionists, therefore, have no
need to appeal to counterparts to understand de re modalities 
and can therefore accept the truth conditions for such modalities 
given by basic possible world semantics (spelled out, of course, in 
terms of their definitions AW2 and AE2). In particular, 
they can take the standard possible world truth condition for, e.g., 
the right conjunct of 
 (16)
 at face value: ‘◇(E!a ∧ ¬Ta)’
is true on the abstractionist's approach if and only if there is is a
world in which Algol herself, rather than some counterpart of hers, 
exists but fails to be anyone's pet. 
It is important to note that the possible worlds of abstractionism do
not yield a reductive analysis of modality. The reason for this is
clear: abstract possible worlds are defined in irreducibly modal terms
— a possible world is an SOA that (among other things)
possibly obtains; or a set of propositions such that it is
possible that all of its members are true; or a property that
is possibly exemplified; and so on. Hence, unpacked in terms
of the abstractionist's definitions, the possible world truth
conditions for modal propositions are themselves irreducibly modal.
For example, when we unpack Plantinga's definition of a possible world
in the semantic clause for sentences of the form
⌈◻ψ⌉ in order to derive
the truth condition for (17),
‘□∀x(Gx → Mx)’, we
end up with this: 
If we now unpack the modal operators in (22) using the corresponding
truth conditional clauses of standard possible world semantics, the
result will contain further world quantifiers. And spelling out those
world quantifiers in turn using Plantinga’s definition will
re-introduce those same modal operators yet again.
More generally, and a bit more exactly, put: As noted above, the 
logical framework of basic possible world semantics is classical 
predicate logic. The logical framework of abstractionism is modal 
predicate logic. Hence, if possible world semantics is supplemented 
with abstractionist definitions of possible worlds, then the logical 
framework of possible world semantics becomes modal predicate logic 
as well and, as a consequence, the extensionality of the semantics is
lost once again. (This point is expressed somewhat more formally in 
the supplemental document 
 The Intensionality of Abstractionist Possible World Semantics.)
 Since, as noted above, the central motivation for possible world 
semantics was to deliver an extensional semantics for modal 
languages, any motivation for abstractionism as a semantic theory is 
arguably undermined.[30]
However, it is not entirely clear that this observation constitutes an
objection to abstractionism. For abstractionists can argue that the
goal of their analysis is the converse of the reductionist's goal: The
reductionist wants to understand modality in terms of worlds; the
abstractionist, by contrast, wants to understand worlds in terms of
modality. That is, abstractionists can argue that we begin with a
primitive notion of modality and, typically upon a certain amount of
philosophical reflection, we subsequently discover an intimate
connection to the notion of a possible world, as revealed in the
principles Nec
and Poss. The analysis that
abstractionists provide is designed to make this connection explicit,
ideally, in such a way that Nec and Poss fall out as
theorems of their theory (see, e.g., Plantinga 1985 and Menzel and Zalta
2014). 
Hand in glove with the irreducible nature of modality is the nature 
of intensional entities. Concretists define intensional entities in 
terms of worlds, as described in 
 §2.1.3.
 Abstractionists, by contrast, define worlds in terms of intensional 
entities. This divergence in their choice of ontological primitives 
reflects, not only their differing stances toward modality, but also 
an important methodological difference with regard to metaphysical 
inquiry. The concretist is far more pragmatic; notions of 
property, relation, proposition, and the 
like play certain roles in our theorizing and are subject to a 
“jumble of conflicting desiderata” (Lewis 1986, 
54). Within a given theory, any entities that can play those roles 
fruitfully for the purposes at hand are justifiably identified with 
those notions — regardless of how well they comport with 
pre-theoretic intuitions. Thus, Lewis finds it to be a strength of 
his position that he is able to adopt the set theoretic definitions 
in §2.1.3. By contrast, at least some abstractionists — 
Plantinga (1987) perhaps most notably — believe that we have 
intuitive, pre-theoretic knowledge of intensional entities that 
precludes their being identified with set theoretic constructions of 
any 
 sort.[31]
 (See Stalnaker 1976 for a particularly illuminating discussion of the
contrast between concretism and abstractionism with respect to the 
treatment intensional entities.) 
As was noted in 
 §2.1.2,
 for the concretist, there is no special property of the actual world 
— actuality — that distinguishes it, in any 
absolute sense, from all of the others; it is simply the world that 
we inhabit. For abstractionists, however, actuality 
is a special property that distinguishes exactly one 
possible world from all others — the actual world is the only 
world that happens to obtain; it is the one and only way 
things could be that is the way things as a whole, in fact, 
are. However, for most abstractionists, the distinctiveness 
of the actual world does not lie simply in its actuality but in its 
ontological comprehensiveness: the actual world encompasses all that 
there is. In a word: most abstractionists are actualists. 
Actualism
 is the thesis that everything that there is, everything that has 
being in any sense, is actual. In terms of possible worlds: 
Everything that exists in any world exists in the actual 
 world.[32]
 Possibilism, by contrast, is the denial of actualism; it is the 
thesis that there are mere possibilia, i.e., things that are 
not actual, things that exist in other possible worlds but fail to 
exist in the actual world. Concretists are obviously not actualists 
(on their understanding of ‘actual’, at any 
 rate).[33]
 Indeed, for the concretist, since individuals are worldbound, 
everything that exists in any nonactual possible world is distinct 
from everything in the actual world. However, although possibilism 
and abstractionism are entirely compatible — Zalta (1983), for 
example, embraces both positions — abstractionists 
tend to be actualists. The reason for this is clear: Basic 
possible world semantics appears to be committed to possibilism and 
abstractionism promises a way of avoiding that commitment. 
The specter of possibilism first arises with regard to
non-actual possible worlds, which would seem by definition to
be prime examples of mere possibilia. However, we have just
seen that the abstractionist can avoid this apparent commitment to
possibilism by defining possible worlds to be SOAs of a certain sort.
So defined, non-actual worlds, i.e., worlds that fail to obtain, can
still actually exist. Hence, the commitment of basic possible world
semantics to non-actual worlds does not in itself threaten the
actualist's ontological scruples. 
However, the specter of possibilism is not so easily exorcised. For 
non-actual worlds are not the only, or even the most compelling, 
examples of mere possibilia that seem to emerge out of basic 
possible world semantics. For instance, it is quite reasonable to 
think that evolution could have taken a very different course (or, if
you like, that God could have made very different creative choices) 
and that there could have been individuals — call them 
Exotics — that are biologically very different from 
all actually existing individuals; so different, in fact, that no 
actually existing thing could possibly have been an Exotic. According
to basic possible world semantics, the sentence ‘There could 
have been Exotics’ or, more formally, 
is true just in case there is a world in which 
‘∃xEx’ is true, i.e., when all is said and 
done, just in case: 
which, a bit less formally, is simply to say that 
However, since no actually existing thing could have been an Exotic, 
anything that is an Exotic in some possible world cannot be among the
things that exist in the actual world. Thus, the truth conditions 
that basic possible world semantics assigns to some of our intuitive 
modal beliefs appear to entail that there are non-actual individuals 
as well as non-actual possible worlds. Defining possible worlds as 
SOAs provided a way for the actualist to embrace non-actual worlds 
without compromising her actualism. But how is the actualist to 
understand the apparent commitment to non-actual individuals
in such truth conditions as (25)? 
Answers that have been given to this question represent a rather deep
divide between actualist abstractionists. On the one hand, 
“trace” actualists introduce actually existing entities 
into their ontologies that can play the role of mere 
possibilia in (25) and its like. Trace actualists come in two 
varieties: new actualists and haecceitists. New 
actualists like Linsky and Zalta (1996) and Williamson (1998, 2000, 
2013) argue that, in fact, all individuals are actually existing, 
necessary beings but not all of them are necessarily 
concrete. Some concrete individuals — those 
traditionally (mis-)categorized as 
contingent beings — are only contingently concrete. Likewise, 
some non-concrete individuals — those, like possible Exotics, 
traditionally (mis-)categorized as 
contingently non-actual mere possibilia — are only 
contingently 
 non-concrete.[34]
This novel take on modal metaphysics allows the new actualist to 
reinterpret possible world semantics so as to avoid possibilism. 
Notably, the domain d(w) of a world w is 
understood not as the set of things that exist in w — 
for all individuals exist in all worlds — but the set of things
that are concrete in 
 w.[35]
 Hence, for the new actualist, the correct truth condition for 
 (23)
 is: 
On the other hand, haecceitists like Plantinga introduce special 
properties — haecceities — to similar ends. The haecceity
of an individual a is the property of being that very 
individual, the property being a. A property is a 
haecceity, then, just in case it is possible that it is the 
haecceity of some 
 individual.[36]
 It is a necessary truth that everything has a haecceity. More 
importantly, for haecceitists, haecceities are necessary beings. 
Thus, not only is it the case that, had any particular individual 
a failed to exist, its haecceity ha would 
still have existed, it is also the case that, for any “merely 
possible” individual a, there is an actually existing 
haecceity that would have been a's haecceity had a 
existed. More generally (and more carefully) put: Necessarily, for 
any individual a, (i) a has a haecceity h and 
(ii) necessarily, h exists. 
Like the new actualists, then, the metaphysics of the haecceitists enables 
them to systematically reinterpret possible world semantics in such a 
way that the truth conditions of modal discourse are expressed solely
in term of actually existing entities of some sort rather than actual
and non-actual individuals. More specifically, for the haecceitist, 
the domain d(w) of a world w is taken to be the 
set of haecceities that are exemplified in w, that 
is, the set of haecceities h such that w includes 
h's being exemplified. Likewise, the w-extension
of a (1-place) predicate π is taken to be a set of 
haecceities — intuitively, those haecceities that are 
coexemplified in w with the property expressed by π. So 
reinterpreted, the truth condition for 
 (23)
 is: 
By contrast, “no-trace”, or strict, actualists 
like Prior (1957), Adams (1981), and Fitch (1996) hew closely to the 
intuition that, had a contingent individual a failed to exist,
there would have been absolutely no trace, no metaphysical vestige, 
of a — neither a itself in some non-concrete 
state nor any abstract proxy for a. Hence, unlike trace 
actualism, there are no such vestiges in the actual world of objects 
that are not actual but only could have been.
The logical consequences for no-trace actualists, however, appear to 
be severe; at the least they cannot provide a standard 
 compositional
 semantics for modal languages, according to which (roughly) the 
meaning of a sentence is determined by its logical form and the 
meanings of its semantically significant constituents. In particular,
if there is nothing to play the role of a “possible 
Exotic”, nothing that is, or represents, an Exotic in some 
other possible world — a mere possibile, a contingently 
non-concrete individual, an unexemplified haecceity — then the 
strict actualist cannot provide standard, compositional truth 
conditions for quantified propositions like 
 (23)
 that yield the intuitively correct truth value. For, understood 
compositionally, 
 (23)
 is true if and only if ‘∃xEx’ is true at 
some world w. And that, in turn, is true at w if and 
only if ‘Ex’ is true at w for some value of
‘x’. But, as just noted, for the strict actualist,
there is no such value of ‘x’. Hence, for the 
strict actualist, ‘Ex’ is false at w for 
all values of ‘x’ and, hence, 
 (23)
 is false as well. (These issues are explored in much greater detail 
in 
 §4
 of the entry 
 Actualism.)
 
Like concretism, abstractionism provides a reasonably clear and 
intuitive account of what worlds are and what it is to exist in them,
albeit from a decidedly different perspective. Although, as noted in 
 §2.2.2,
 the fact that modality is a primitive in abstractionist definitions 
of possible worlds arguably compromises its ability to provide semantically 
illuminating truth conditions for the modal operators, those definitions
can be taken to illuminate the connection between our basic modality concepts
and the evocative notion of a possible world that serves as such a
powerful conceptual tool for 
constructing philosophical arguments and for analyzing and developing
solutions to philosophical problems. In this regard, particularly 
noteworthy are: Plantinga's (1974) influential work on 
 the ontological argument
 and the free will defense against 
 the problem of evil;
 Adams' (1974, 1981) work on 
 actualism
 and actuality; and Stalnaker's (1968, 1987) work on 
 counterfactual conditionals
 and 
 mental content.
 
A number of important objections have been voiced in regard to 
abstractionism. Some of these are addressed in the document 
 Problems with Abstractionism.
 
As its name might suggest, our third approach —
combinatorialism — takes possible worlds to be
recombinations, or rearrangements, of certain metaphysical
simples. Both the nature of simples and the nature of recombination
vary from theory to theory. Quine (1968) and Cresswell (1972), for
example, suggest taking simples to be space-time points (modeled,
perhaps, as triples of real numbers) and worlds themselves to be
arbitrary sets of such points, each set thought of intuitively as a
way that matter could be distributed throughout space-time. (A world
w, so construed, then, is actual just in case a
space-time point p is a member of w if and only if
p is occupied by matter.) Alternatively, some philosophers
define states a world could be in, and possible worlds themselves,
simply to be maximally consistent sets of
 sentences[37] 
in an expressively
rich language — “recombinations”, certainly, of the
sentences of the language. (Lewis refers to this view as
linguistic
 ersatzism.[38]) 
However, the predominant version of
combinatorialism finds its origins in Russell's (1918/1919) theory of
logical atomism and Wittgenstein's
(1921, 1922, 1974) short but enormously influential
 Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus.
A suggestive paper by Skyrms (1981) spelling out some of the ideas in
the Tractatus, in turn, inspired a rich and sophisticated
account that is developed and defended in great detail in an important
series of books and articles by D. M. Armstrong (1978a, 1978b, 1986a,
1989, 1997, 2004b, 2004c). In this section, we present a somewhat
simplified version of combinatorialism that draws primarily upon
Armstrong's work. Unless otherwise noted, this is what we shall mean
by ‘combinatorialism’ for the remainder. 
Wittgenstein famously asserted that the world is the totality of 
facts, not of things (ibid., §1.1). The 
combinatorialist spells out Wittgenstein's aphorism explicitly in 
terms of an ontology of objects (a.k.a., particulars), universals 
(a.k.a., properties and relations), and facts. Facts are either 
atomic or molecular. Every atomic fact — Sachverhalt, in
the language of the Tractatus — is 
“constituted” by an n-place relation (= property, 
for n=1) and n objects that stand in, or 
exemplify, that relation. Thus, for example, suppose that 
John is 1.8 meters tall. Then, in addition to John and the property 
being 1.8 meters tall, there is for the combinatorialist the 
atomic fact of John's exemplifying that property. More generally, 
atomic facts exist according to the following principle: 
Say that the ai are the constituent 
objects of the fact in question and R its constituent 
universal, and that R and the ai 
all exist in 
[R,a1,...,an]. 
A fact is monadic if its constituent universal is a 
property. A molecular fact f is a conjunction of 
atomic facts. Its constituent objects and universals are exactly 
those of its conjuncts and an entity exists in f just in case 
it exists in one of its conjuncts. (For simplicity, we stipulate that
an atomic fact has (only) itself as a conjunct and, hence, is 
“trivially” molecular.) One fact f includes
another g if every conjunct of g is a conjunct of 
f. (Note, importantly, that inclusion, so defined, is quite 
different from the homonymous notion defined in the discussion of 
abstractionism above — most notably, combinatorial inclusion is
not a modal notion.) For purposes below, say that an object 
a is a bare particular in a molecular fact f 
if there is no monadic conjunct of f of which a is the 
constituent object, no conjunct of the form a exemplifies F, 
for some property F. a is a bare particular if
it is bare in every molecular fact. Intuitively, of course, a bare 
particular is an unpropertied object. 
There is no upper bound on the “size” of a molecular fact
and no restriction on which atomic facts can form a conjunction; for 
any atomic facts at all, there is a molecular fact whose conjuncts 
are exactly those facts. As a first cut, then, we can spell out 
Wittgenstein's characterization of the (actual) world as the totality
of facts by defining the world to be the largest molecular fact, the 
molecular fact that includes all of the atomic 
 facts.[39]
Although objects and universals are typically included along with 
facts in the basic ontology of combinatorialism, facts are typically 
considered more fundamental. Indeed, taking his queue from the 
Tractarian thesis that the world consists of facts, not things, 
Armstrong (1986a, 577) argues that facts alone are ontologically 
basic and that objects and universals are simply “aspects of, 
abstractions from” facts. Accordingly, he calls the object 
constituent of a fact of the form [P,a] a 
“thin” particular, an object “considered in 
abstraction from all its [intrinsic] properties” (1993, 433); 
and where N is the conjunction of “all the non-relational 
properties of that particular (which would presumably include 
P), the atomic fact a's exemplifying N itself is the 
corresponding “thick” particular ” (ibid., 
434 — we will occasionally use italics to distinguish a thin 
particular a from the corresponding thick particular 
a). Though not all combinatorialists of every stripe buy into 
Armstrong's “factualist” metaphysics (Bricker 2006), they
do generally agree that facts are more fundamental, at least to the 
extent that both the notion of a bare particular, i.e., an object 
exemplifying no properties, and that of an unexemplified property are
considered incoherent; insofar as they exist at all, the existence of
both particulars and universals depends on their 
“occurring” in some fact or other. Whatever their exact 
ontological status, it is an important combinatorialist thesis that 
exactly what objects and universals exist is ultimately a 
matter for natural science, not metaphysics, to decide. 
Objects can be either simple or complex. An object is simple 
if it has no proper parts, and complex otherwise. Like 
objects, universals too divide into simple and complex. A universal 
is simple if it has no other universal as a constituent, and complex 
otherwise. Complex universals accordingly come in two varieties: 
conjunctive — the constituents of which are simply its 
conjuncts — and structural. A structural universal U is 
one that is exemplified by a complex object O, and its 
constituents are universals (distinct from U) exemplified by 
simple parts of O that are relevant to O's being an 
instance of 
 U.[40]
 It is important to note that, for Armstrong, the constituency 
relation is not the mereological parthood relation. Rather, complex 
universals (hence also complex facts of which they are constituents) 
enjoy a “non-mereological mode of composition” (1997, 
119–123) that, in particular, allows for a richer conception of
their 
 structure.[41]
 (An assumption of our simplified account here will be that both the 
proper part of relation and the constituency relation are 
well-founded. It follows that (i) there is no 
 gunk,
 i.e., that every complex object is composed, ultimately, entirely of 
simples and (ii) complex universals — hence the complex facts 
in which they are exemplified — are ultimately 
“grounded” in simple facts, i.e., that they cannot be 
infinitely decomposed into further complex 
 universals/facts.[42])
 
To illustrate the basic idea: in Figure 1, the left-hand diagram 
depicts a water molecule W comprising an oxygen atom o 
and two hydrogen atoms h1 and h2.
For the combinatorialist, “thick” particulars like the 
molecule itself as well as its constituent atoms are themselves 
facts: o is the fact [O,o] in which the 
universal oxygen (O) is exemplified by a thin 
particular 
 o;[43]
 likewise h1 and h2. W in 
turn comprises those monadic facts and the relational facts 
[B,o,h1], 
[B,o,h2] wherein the covalent bonding
relation B holds between the oxygen atom and the two hydrogen 
atoms. The structural universal Water itself, then, shares 
this structure — it is, so to say, an isomorph 
consisting of the monadic universals O and H and the 
binary relation B, structured as indicated in the right-hand 
diagram of Figure 
 1.[44]

Figure 1: A Water Molecule W and the Structural Universal 
Water 
It should be clear from 
 principle AF
 that all atomic facts hold; that is, all of them reflect 
actual exemplification relations. Obviously, however, possibility 
encompasses more than what is actual, that is, there are 
possible facts as well as actual facts; the world's 
universals might have been exemplified by its objects very 
differently. If they had — if the world's objects and 
universals had combined in a very different way — there would 
have been a very different set of atomic facts and, hence, a very 
different world. 
To spell out the idea of a possible fact, the combinatorialist 
introduces the more general notion of an atomic (combinatorial) 
state of affairs, that is, an entity that simply has the 
form of an atomic fact — n objects exemplifying
an n-place relation — but without any requirement that 
the exemplification relation in question actually holds between them.
More exactly: 
Thus, even if the two hydrogen atoms h1 and 
h2 in a water molecule do not in fact stand in the 
covalent bonding relation B, there is nonetheless the 
(non-factual) state of affairs 
[B,h1,h2]. 
Combinatorialism takes facts to be literal, structured parts of the 
physical world. This suggests that a non-factual state of affairs 
— a merely possible fact — must be part of a 
merely possible physical world. This idea is at odds with the strong,
scientifically-grounded form of actualism that typically motivates 
combinatorialism. Two options are available: The combinatorialist can
follow the (actualist) abstractionists and define states of affairs 
to be philosophical or mathematical constructs consisting only of 
actual objects, properties, relations, and facts. For example, the 
state of affairs 
[R,a1,...,an] can 
simply be identified with the ordered n-tuple 
⟨R,a1,...,an⟩.
So long as the combinatorialist is willing to adopt the additional 
metaphysical or set theoretic machinery, this sort of approach offers
a way of introducing non-factual states of affairs that does not 
involve any untoward ontological commitments to merely possible 
entities. Alternatively, following Armstrong (1989, 46–51; 
1997, 172–4), the combinatorialist can refuse to grant 
non-factual states of affairs any genuine ontological status and 
adopt a form of 
  modal fictionalism
 that nonetheless permits one to speak as if such states of 
affairs exist. The exposition to follow will remain largely neutral 
between these options. 
Constituency for states of affairs is understood as for facts. 
Additionally, analogous to molecular facts, there are molecular 
states of affairs — conjunctions of atomic states of affairs. 
Inclusion between states of affairs is understood exactly as it is 
between facts and being a bare particular in a molecular 
state of affairs s is understood as for facts: a is a 
bare particular in s if there is no monadic conjunct of 
s of the form a exemplifies F. The notion of 
recombination is now definable straightaway: 
Very roughly then, a possible world will be a certain sort of 
recombination of (some portion of) the actual world, the 
molecular fact that includes all of the atomic facts. This idea will 
be refined in the following sections. 
Say that a state of affairs is structural if it is atomic and 
its constituent universal is structural or it is molecular and 
includes a structural state of affairs; and say that it is 
simple otherwise. The difference between structural and simple
universals and states of affairs is particularly significant with 
regard to the important concept of supervenience (Armstrong 
1989, Ch 
 8).[45]
 Entity or entities S supervene on entity or entities R 
if and only if the existence of R necessitates that of 
S (ibid., 103). (Necessitation here is, of course, 
ultimately to be spelled out in terms of combinatorial possible 
worlds.) Non-structural states of affairs supervene directly on their
atomic 
 conjuncts.[46]
 However, things are not in general quite so straightforward for 
structural states of affairs. For, although structural states of 
affairs are ultimately constituted entirely by simple states of 
affairs, unlike non-structural states of affairs, structural states 
of affairs typically supervene on more than the totality of their 
constituents. For, in many cases, whether or not a structural fact 
exists depends not only on the existence of its constituent facts but
also on the absence of certain others (Armstrong 1997, 
34ff). For example, as noted in our example above, our water molecule
W comprises two further facts in which two hydrogen atoms 
h1 and h2 both stand in the 
covalent binding relation with an oxygen atom o. However, if 
o were to bind with a further hydrogen atom 
h3, then, despite the fact that the constituent 
facts of W would still hold, W would not be water; 
there would be no such fact as W's being 
 water.[47]
 Rather, W would exist only as a complex part of a hydronium 
ion; the new binding [B,o,h3] would, 
so to say, “spoil” the instantiation of Water. 
Thus, more generally, whether or not a structural state of affairs 
S exists in a possible world typically requires something over
and above its constituent states of affairs being “welded 
together” in the right sort of way (Armstrong, 1997, 36); it 
requires also that there be no relevant “spoilers” for 
 S.[48]
 Armstrong draws directly on the initial passages of the 
 Tractatus[49]
 for the necessary apparatus: a structural state of affairs S 
in any possible world w, supervenes, not simply on its 
constituent atomic states of affairs but on a certain 
higher-order state of affairs Tw, 
namely, the state of affairs that the (first-order) atomic states of 
affairs of w are all the (first-order) atomic states of 
affairs and, hence, that w includes no spoilers for 
S. Armstrong (ibid., 35, 134–5, 196–201) calls 
Tw the totality state of affairs for the 
atomic states of affairs of 
 w.[50]
The idea of possibility being rooted in arbitrary recombinations of 
the actual world, rearrangements of its objects and universals, is 
intuitively appealing. Clearly, however, not just any such 
recombination can count as a possible world. Some states of affairs 
are intuitively impossible — [being an elephant, 
e], where e is an individual electron, say — and 
some pairs of states of affairs, while individually possible, are not
compossible — the states of affairs [having 1kg 
mass, a] and [having 2kg mass, a] for a 
given object a, or, for a given mereological sum m of 
simples, the states of affairs [being a baboon, m] and 
[being a hoolock, m]. But nothing that has been said 
rules out the existence of recombinations of the actual world —
rearrangements of its objects and universals — that include 
such states of affairs. Obviously, however, such recombinations 
cannot be thought to represent genuinely possible worlds. Of course, 
like the abstractionist, the combinatorialist could simply stipulate 
as part of the definition that all legitimate recombinations must be 
genuinely possible states of affairs of a certain sort, 
genuinely possible recombinations. But this will not do. 
For, like concretism, combinatorialism purports to be a 
reductive account of modality, an account of possible worlds
that does not depend ultimately on modal notions (see Armstrong 1989,

 33).[51]
Here the distinction between simple and structural states of affairs 
together with the combinatorialist's strong notion of supervenience 
come to the fore. For, given that structural facts supervene on 
simple facts and the actual totality fact T@, the 
actual world can be defined more parsimoniously as the molecular fact
that includes all the simple atomic facts and the totality 
fact T@. And at the level of simples, there are no 
limitations whatever on recombination (Wittgenstein 1921, 
2.062-2.063); hence, any recombination of simple objects and 
universals is by definition considered possible. Thus Armstrong 
(1986a, 579): 
Worlds, in particular, can be defined as special cases of such 
recombinations, together with appropriate totality facts. To state 
this, we need a condition that ensures the existence of a unique 
actual world: 
Given this, we have: 
Armstrong's ontological commitments are 
notoriously rather slippery but, given AW3, a reasonably 
complete notion of existence in a world is forthcoming. First, let us
note that, for Armstrong, the “combinatorial idea” yields
a substantial metaphysical thesis, as well, viz., the ontological
free lunch (1986, 12ff), i.e., the thesis that “[w]hat 
supervenes is no addition of being”; that “whatever 
supervenes ... is not something ontologically additional to the 
subvenient entity or entities.” Hence, for Armstrong, it 
appears that simple states of affairs and their constituents
exist most fundamentally and that the existence of more complex 
entities is in a certain sense derivative. Thus: 
Given this, existence in a world 
generally — both fundamental and derivative — both for 
simples and 
 (first-order[53])
 non-simples alike, is definable as follows: 
Semantics 
receives rather short shrift in Armstrong's version of 
combinatorialism — at least, semantics in the model theoretic 
sense of 
 §1.2
 — but, as it has played an important role in our discussion of 
concretism and abstractionism, we note briefly how the ontology of 
combinatorialism might be taken to populate a possible world 
interpretation of the language of modal predicate logic. 
Specifically, we can take the range of the modal operators — 
understood, semantically, as quantifiers — to be all of the 
combinatorial possible worlds in the sense of AW3. The domain 
d(w) of each world w is the set of all simple 
and complex objects that exist in w according to AE3 
and the w-extension Iπ(w) of a 
predicate π expressing a simple or complex universal R is 
the set of all n-tuples, ⟨a1, ..., 
an⟩ such that the atomic fact 
[R,a1,...,an] 
exists in w. 
 There are, then, for the combinatorialist no intrinsically modal 
phenomena; there are just all of the various worlds that exist on 
unrestricted combinatorial grounds alone. Ultimately, all genuine 
possibilities, simple or not, are just states of affairs that exist 
in these combinatorial worlds in the sense of AE3. However, it
is not immediately as clear how to understand many intuitive 
necessities/impossibilities involving complex 
structural universals, for example, the impossibilities noted in the 
previous section, viz., that something simultaneously have a mass of 
both 1kg and 2kg or simultaneously be both a baboon and a hoolock. 
Likewise, it is not entirely clear how combinatorialism accounts for 
intuitive facts about essential properties, such as that our water 
molecule W is essentially water or that Algol is essentially a
dog. Combinatorialists argue that such modal facts can nevertheless 
be explained in terms that require no appeal to primitive modal 
features of the world (Armstrong 2004b, 15). 
Analytic Modalities.  Armstrong argues that many 
intuitive modal facts — notably, the impossibility of an object
exemplifying more than one determinate of the same determinable 
— can be understood ultimately as logical, or analytic, 
modalities that are grounded in meaning rather than any primitive 
modal features of reality. For example, intuitively it is impossible 
that an object simultaneously exemplify the structural properties 
having 2kg mass and having 1kg mass. The combinatorial 
reason for this (cf. Armstrong 1989, 79) is that, for an object 
a to exemplify the former property is simply for there to be a
division of a into two wholly distinct parts, both of which 
exemplify the latter property. Moreover, this division into parts is 
entirely arbitrary, that is, for any part a1
of a exemplifying having 1kg mass, there is a (unique) 
part a2 of a wholly distinct from 
a1 that also exemplifies that property. It follows 
that, if our 2kg object a itself also exemplifies 
having 1kg mass, then, as a is a part of itself, there 
must be a 1kg part of a that is wholly distinct from a.
And that is analytically false, false “solely by virtue of the 
meaning we attach to” the word ‘part’ 
(ibid., 
 80).[54]
Emergent Modalities.   Combinatorialism purports to 
explain a further class of intuitive modal facts as features that 
simply “emerge” from facts about structural 
 properties.[55]
 The discussion of structural states of affairs and supervenience 
above provides an example. Let us suppose the actual world 
w1 includes our water molecule W from Figure
1 plus a further hydrogen atom h3. In this world, 
only h1 and h2 bind to o. 
Hence, this world includes the state of affairs W's being 
water but not the state of affairs I's being hydronium in 
which o, h1, h2, and 
h3 are so bonded as to constitute a hydronium ion 
I. Conversely, however, given the unrestricted nature of 
recombination, there is a world w2 that includes 
W structured as it actually is in w1 but 
which also includes the spoiler 
[B,o,h3] — where o and 
h3 bond — and, hence, the structural state of
affairs I's being hydronium. Thus, the absence of 
[B,o,h3] in w1 
enables the emergence of W's being water and precludes I's 
being hydronium whilst its presence in w2 
enables the emergence of the latter but precludes the former. As a 
consequence, it is impossible that the states of affairs W's 
being water and I's being hydronium 
 coexist.[56]
Figure 2: W's being water and (given a bond between o 
and h3) I's being hydronium 
Although more dramatic, large-scale examples of 
incompatible states of affairs — such as a thing's being 
simultaneously both a baboon and a hoolock — might be vastly 
more complex, there is no obvious reason why their impossibility 
could not have the same sort of combinatorial explanation. 
Essential Properties.   It follows from the 
unrestricted nature of recombination that, for any simple object 
a and simple universal P, a recombines with 
P in some worlds and fails to recombine with P in 
others. Generalizing from this fact, it follows that no simple or sum
of simples has any simple universal or conjunction of simple 
universals essentially. It also follows that no such object has any 
structural property essentially. For assume o is such an 
object and that it exemplifies a structural property P. Since 
P is structural, it supervenes on some set of simple states of
affairs. But by the nature of recombination, there are combinatorial 
worlds in which those states of affairs do not exist and, hence, in 
which P doesn't but o — being a simple or a sum 
of simples — does. 
 Thick particulars like our water molecule W don't fare much 
better because of the possibility of spoilers. For Armstrong (1997, 
35), W is simply the conjunction of its constituent states of 
affairs. As we've just seen, however, in the presence of spoilers, 
that conjunction would exist — hence, W would exist 
— without being Water. Hence, it would seem that at 
least some properties that, intuitively, are essential to their 
bearers turn out not to be for the combinatorialist. The problem is 
compounded by the fact that some intuitively non-essential properties
of some thick particulars are arguably essential for the 
combinatorialist. The shape properties of a thick particular 
A, for example, would seem to be a function of its constituent
states of affairs. Moreover, the exemplification of such properties 
are not obviously subject to spoilers the way that natural kind 
properties like Water are. Hence, as A is identical to 
the conjunction of its constituent states of affairs, it would seem 
that it will have the same shape in any world in which it exists, 
i.e., it will have that shape essentially. 
That said, combinatorialism can arguably provide a reasonably robust 
analysis of intuitions about the essential properties of ordinary 
thick particulars like dogs or persons. Such objects can be taken to 
be temporal successions of sums of simples and each sum in the 
succession as its temporal parts. Sums in the same rough temporal
neighborhood are composed of roughly the same simples and are 
structured in roughly the same way. Similarities between such objects
across worlds in turn determine counterpart relations. Following 
Lewis, the essential properties of such objects can then be 
identified with those properties exemplified by (all of the temporal 
parts of) all of its counterparts in every world in which it exists 
(Armstrong 1997, 99–103, 
 169).[57]
 Since a possible world is a recombination of the actual world and 
every recombination includes states of affairs involving every simple
individual and every simple universal, by AE3, every simple 
entity exists in every world. Hence, there could not have been fewer 
of them; nor could there have been simples other than the ones there 
actually are. In this section, we address this issue and the issue of
contingent existence generally in combinatorialism. 
Fewer things.  Combinatorialism as it stands has no 
problem accounting for the general intuition that there could have 
been fewer things. We have already noted in 
 §2.3.3
 and again in 
 §2.3.5
 how our water molecule W, as such, might not have existed. 
More generally, given the unrestricted nature of recombination, for 
any a involving a structural fact S, there are 
recombinations of the actual world wherein either (a) some of the 
relations among a's constituents that are critical to 
S's structure fail to be exemplified by those constituents, or
(b) there are further states of affairs included by those 
recombinations that act as spoilers for S. Consequently, the 
combinatorialist seems to have no difficulty explaining how there 
might have been fewer water molecules, humans, etc. 
Intuitively, however, there isn't anything in the idea of a simple 
that suggests that simples are necessary beings — especially 
if, as combinatorialists generally agree, simples are physical things
of some sort and simple universals are properties of, and relations 
among, those things. For there is nothing in the nature of a simple 
object to suggest that any given simple had to have existed. 
Likewise, there is nothing in the nature of a simple universal to 
suggest it had to have been exemplified and, hence, on the 
combinatorialist's own conception of universals, that it had to 
exist. Otherwise put, as simples exist only insofar as they are 
constituents of facts, there seems no reason why there couldn't have 
been a very small number of facts, indeed, just a single simple, 
atomic, monadic fact and, hence, a lone simple object and a lone 
simple universal. 
In fact, however, AW3 can be easily modified to accommodate 
these intuitions without doing any serious violence to 
combinatorialist intuitions. Specifically, the combinatorialist can 
admit “contracted” worlds in which fewer simples exist by
allowing any recombination of any simple fact — that 
is, equivalently, by allowing any state of affairs — to count 
as a possible world: 
AE3 requires no modification, as it was defined with 
sufficient generality above. Under AW3′, however, 
AE3 entails that all entities alike — objects and 
universals, simple and structural — are contingent and, indeed,
that every simple object is the sole constituent of some 
combinatorial possible world. 
Other things.  Intuitively, not only could there 
have been fewer things, there could have been more things or, more 
generally, things other than those that actually exist. As 
above, combinatorialism as it stands seems able to account for many 
instances of this intuition: Figure 2 illustrates how a non-actual 
hydronium ion I might exist in another world. Likewise, there 
seems no reason to deny, e.g., that there are rearrangements w
of the actual world's simples wherein exist all of the human beings 
that actually exist (at, say, 0000GMT 1 January 2013) and more 
besides that are composed of simples that, in fact, constitute things
other than human beings (Armstrong 1997, 
 165).[58]
 Combinatorialism also seems able to account for the possibility of 
conjunctive and structural universals that are simply rearrangements 
of actual simples. It is not implausible to think that such 
recombinations can give rise to, say, exotic biological kinds that 
have no actual instances (Armstrong 1989, 55–56). Thus, in 
particular, combinatorialism seems quite able to provide the truth 
condition 
 (24)
 for 
 (23)
 and, hence, can account for some possibilities involving 
“missing” universals that, intuitively, ought to be 
possible. 
However, it is far from clear that such possibilities exhaust the 
modal intuition that other things could have existed. Notably, 
intuitively, there could have been different simple 
universals distinct from any that actually exist — different 
fundamental properties of simples, for example. Likewise for simple 
objects. Either way, there seems to be nothing in the idea of a 
simple object or simple universal that suggests there couldn't have 
been simples other than, or in addition to, the simples there are in 
fact. But AW3′ does not allow for this; the simples of 
every possible world are a subset of the actual simples and there is 
no obvious way of modifying the principle to accommodate the 
intuition. Nor is there any obvious way of modifying the principle to
accommodate the intuition in 
 question.[59]
The combinatorialist could of course abandon actualism and include 
merely possible simples into her ontology. Again, she could follow 
the new actualists and draw a division between actually concrete and 
non-actual, possibly concrete simples; or she could introduce 
Plantinga-style haecceities to go proxy for merely possible simples. 
But all of these options would be badly out of step with the strong, 
naturalist motivations for combinatorialism: There is but the one 
physical world comprising all of the facts; recombinations of (at 
least some of) those facts — arbitrary rearrangements of 
their simple objects and universals — determine the possible 
worlds. Mere possibilia, merely possible non-concretia,
and non-qualitative haecceities have no real place in that picture. 
The “purest” option for the combinatorialist is simply to
brazen it out and argue that the actual simples are, in fact, all the
simples there could be (Armstrong 1989, 54ff; Driggers 2011, 56–61). 
A more robust option suggested by Skyrms (1981) makes some headway 
against the problem by introducing an “outer”, or 
“second-grade” realm of possibility, but at the cost of 
moving beyond the basic intuitions of combinatorialism (Armstrong 
1989, 60; 1997, 165–167). Finally, Sider (2005, 681) suggests that 
combinatorialists who (like Armstrong) are modal fictionalists can 
deal with the problem of missing entities simply by appealing to yet 
more fictionalism: As the combinatorialist fiction already 
includes non-actual states of affairs with actually existing 
constituents, there seems no reason not to extend the fiction to 
include non-actual states of affairs whose constituents include 
non-actual particulars and universals. Fictionalism itself, however, 
leaves the combinatorialist with the deep problems detailed by Kim 
(1986), Lycan (1993), and Rosen 
 (1993).[60]
 As with concretism and abstractionism, combinatorialism provides 
reasonably clear definitions of possible worlds and existence in a 
world and is noteworthy for its attempt to avoid what might be 
thought of as the metaphysical excesses of the two competing views. 
In contrast to concretism, combinatorialism is staunchly actualist: 
instead of an infinity of alternative physical universes, each with 
its own unique inhabitants existing as robustly as the inhabitants of
the actual world, the worlds of combinatorialism are simply 
rearrangements of the universals and particulars of the actual world;
and commitment even to them might be avoided if some version 
of fictionalism is tenable. Likewise, in contrast to abstractionism's 
rather rich and unrestrained ontology of SOAs, combinatorialism's 
states of affairs are comparatively modest. Moreover, in contrast to 
nearly all versions of abstractionism, combinatorialism shares with 
concretism the virtue of a reductive theory of modality: Modal 
statements, ultimately, are true or false in virtue of how things 
stand with respect to worlds that are themselves defined in non-modal
terms. 
Combinatorialism's ontological modesty, however, is also a weakness. 
For, unlike, the two competing approaches, there are modal intuitions
that the combinatorialist is not easily able to account for, notably,
the intuition that there could have been other things. Additional 
difficulties are discussed in the supplemental document 
 Further Problems for Combinatorialism.
 