As a bare ontological thesis, presentism can be understood as
P:
P is a claim about what there is, absolutely and
unrestrictedly. As a description of presentism, it’s both
orthodox and minimal. To flesh it out, the view is often contrasted
with two other ontological theses: an opposing view of time,
eternalism (“past, present, and future things exist”), and
an analogical view in modality, actualism (“only actual things
exist”) (see, e.g., Adams 1986: 321; Hinchliff 1996:
123–4; Sider 1999: 326, 2001: 11–12; Noonan 2013:
219–20). Theodore Sider, for instance, neatly articulates this
apparent orthodoxy:
Presentism is the doctrine that only the present is real. … A
presentist thinks that everything is present; more generally, that,
necessarily, it is always true that everything is (then) present.
Presentism is the temporal analogue of the modal doctrine of
actualism, according to which everything is actual. The
opposite view in the philosophy of modality is possibilism,
according to which nonactual things exist; its temporal analogue is
eternalism, according to which there are such things as
merely past and merely future entities. (1999: 325–6)
Presentists and eternalists make competing claims about temporal
ontology. According to presentism, only present things exist.
According to eternalism, past and future things, such as dinosaurs and
human outposts on Mars, exist as well. These are theories about what
there is, just like actualism, possibilism, Platonism, nominalism,
Meinongianism, idealism, materialism, theism, atheism… (2006:
75)
Presentists and the rest thus disagree about what exists. When
confronted with W.V. Quine’s (1948) three Anglo-Saxon
monosyllables—“What is there?”—presentists
have a simple and distinctive reply: “Only what’s
present”. Non-presentists demur. Eternalists say that there are
past and future things too. Growing block theorists
(“no-futurists”) say that there are past and present
things, but no future things. On the orthodox picture, what’s
distinctive about presentism is determined primarily by the distinct
set of claims made about temporal ontology.
The ontological doctrine, P, requires
supplementation. Consider, for example, a possible world, w, at
which the growing block theory of time is true. At the first moment of
w, P is true. There exists only the first
moment and that moment is present; there are no other moments, and so
the past hasn’t yet come to exist. Later on, it will become
clear that w isn’t a presentist world, even though it
seems initially to satisfy P: at the first moment,
only present things exist. For this reason, when being more
forthcoming with a definition of their view, moving beyond mere
slogan, presentism might more perspicuously be rendered as a view that
is always true, if true at all (Crisp 2003: 215, 2004: 19,
fn.6, 2007: 107, n.1). So, presentism amounts to the claim that:
Along the modal dimension, presentism might be thought of as a view
that is necessarily true, if true at all (e.g., Hestevold
& Carter 2002: 499; Markosian 2004: 47, fn.1; Ingram 2016: 2868).
Thus:
However, although presentists sometimes make this move, there’s
very little discussion in the literature as to whether
PAN is preferable to PA and, if so,
what would justify that preference. In what follows, reflecting that
lack of discussion, we remain neutral on which of PA
or PAN is preferred. We follow the wider literature
in typically stating presentism as P, rather than
PA, though we take it that something at least as
strong as PA is intended.
More modifications may be required. First, strictly speaking, on this
characterization, presentism is a thesis that denies the existence of
atemporal or timeless entities, that is, entities that
aren’t present (but aren’t past or future either). This
appears to rule out the existence of abstract entities. [See the entry
on
 abstract objects.]
 And this may be a step too far for some presentists. Hence, we might
be pressed to modify PA and restrict it to concrete
objects. We’re not forced to make that move, however, since
PA only rules out abstracta qua timeless
entities. Presentism is compatible with the existence of abstracta, so
long as such entities exist now (exist within time). In any case,
timeless abstracta are inconsistent with PA,
but (as is clear) this needn’t be of too much concern. It is
unclear how much would be lost from the core of presentism if we
coupled PA to timeless abstracta.
Second, presentism isn’t merely the thesis that only present
things exist. This isn’t the full extent of the position.
Without qualification, P is consistent with the view
that reality is “static” (or “frozen”) and
that time doesn’t really pass. But reality isn’t that way;
our reality is “dynamic”. Hence, a full and proper account
of presentism requires more detail. Typically, presentism is thought
to include the additional claim that various things have existed and
that others will exist: Julius Caesar, Marie Curie, and Amelia Earhart
all existed, but exist no longer; and, though we exist, alongside
Taylor Swift, Donald Trump, and you (dear reader), all of us will
cease to exist at some future time(s), to be replaced by other things,
each of which will go out of existence in their turn. Thus, presentism
commits us to there being a change in what exists over time, a change
in what’s present. And, frequently (although not exclusively),
presentists describe this change in terms of temporal
passage—the passing of time—or, at least, as closely
related to it. So, presentism can be understood as the following
conjunction:
For those who state presentism explicitly in this way, see Price (2011: 277), Miller (2013: 346), and Leininger (2015: 726), amongst others.
Further, since presentism marks a difference between the present, on
one hand, and the past and future, on the other, it’s typical
(although, again, not universal) to see presentism described as a
version of the “A theory” of time (e.g., Craig 2000;
Zimmerman 2008; Deasy 2017). Here we understand the “A
theory” as something like the union of the following two theses:
there are genuine, fundamental or “irreducible” properties
of at least some of past, present and future (i.e., so-called “A
qualities” or “A properties”); and, time passes (see
the entry on
 time,
 esp. §5). For recent explorations of presentism without the A
theory (or, without A qualities), see Rasmussen (2012) and Tallant (2012).
Thus far, our focus has been on saying what presentism is. And, as we
see it, we’ve reported faithfully what’s said typically
about the view in the contemporary literature. But the recent history
of the view, presentism in the earlier parts of the
20th century, is a little less clear. As far as we know,
Robert Adams is the first to use the name “presentism” in
print (in 1986), though he implies that he isn’t the first to
name it—he writes: 
[a] reduction is offered by a view that is sometimes called
“presentism” by analogy with “actualism”.
(1986: 321) 
Before 1986, matters are unclear. Many (rightly) point to Arthur Prior
as an important and historically significant adherent of presentism.
We agree that Prior endorses the presentist’s ontological
thesis, P—he writes: 
the present simply is the real considered in relation to two
species of unreality, namely the past and the future. (1970: 245) 
But we think that it’s less obvious that Prior’s complete
view on time is presentism, as above (see e.g., Fine 1977,
Butterfield 1983 and Le Poidevin 1991: 36–40). [For detail on
Prior’s life and work, see the entry on
 Arthur Prior.]
 There are others after Prior, but before Adams (1986) or Hinchliff
(1988), who also appear to endorse P, such
as Richard Routley (1980). Similarly, we take no stand here on whether
such philosophers are presentists.
This concludes our opening sketch. Presentism is the view that only
present things exist and what’s present changes (i.e., things
change, time passes); and, it’s an A theory of time. Now, why
believe it?
The most frequently cited reason given for endorsing
presentism—or, at least, treating it as worthy of serious
critical consideration—trades upon some variant of the claim
that it’s the “intuitive” or “common
sense” view of time (e.g., Bigelow 1996: 36; Sider 2001: 11;
Markosian 2004: 48; De Clercq 2006: 386; Tallant 2009b: 407). Many
friends agree, and more than a few foes concede, that there’s
something compelling about the idea that present things really exist,
whilst past and future things don’t exist. Some who look to
defend presentism will rest there with the bare claim that presentism
is intuitive (etc.) and that this gives us reason to think that
it’s true.
One way to proceed is to extend this idea. Begin with the intuition
that there’s something special about the
present—something distinctive. This seems attractive enough. But
how might we capture it in our metaphysical model of time? One way to
do it is to assert that present things are the only things that exist, that is,
to endorse the presentist’s ontic thesis. Certainly, this
marks the present as distinctive. And, to the extent that we wish to
capture and preserve the idea that the present is
“special” (in some sense), so presentism fares well
against this measure. But, of course, any model that
privileges the present in some way will fare well against the same
measure. So, for this argument to fully motivate presentism, further
argument must be given for thinking that these other rival views
don’t come up to scratch.
Another way to motivate presentism is via appeal to experience. To
borrow a famous example, consider a headache (e.g., Zimmerman 1998:
212). If a headache exists, it hurts. It can’t exist and fail to
hurt. Now, suppose that we endorse the existence of the past (and deny
presentism). Past headaches exist. But they don’t hurt (at
least, so goes the claim). If headaches from hangovers last year hurt
us, neither author would be in a position to write this, so severe
would be the pain. Since headaches must hurt, if they
exist—it’s part of their essence to do so—past
headaches cannot exist. This goes for the future headaches as well.
Thus, presentism is true. (For the classic statement of the
“thank goodness that’s over” argument, in favor of A
theories of time, see A.N. Prior 1959. The wider literature is
voluminous. Representative recent works include: Suhler &
Callender 2012, Hoerl 2015, and Pearson forthcoming.)
There are different examples that draw on our experience of pain and
our attitude towards it. Consider again a past headache and compare it
to a (possible) future headache, something that may result from over
enthusiastic behavior in the bar this evening. A future headache is
something that worries us. It influences our behavior. We seek to
avoid it. We may even fear it. By contrast, we feel differently about
a past headache (and past pains, generally). We don’t fear past
pains. They don’t worry us in quite the same way. One
explanation for this is that a past pain doesn’t exist. And
whilst a future pain doesn’t exist either, we know that it will
do so if we behave in such-and-such a way. It’s the potential
for that headache to exist (to come into being) that causes us to
modify our behavior. We wish to avoid that state. But if we think that
past and future things exist, we cannot appeal to the explanation just
given, for if the past headache exists, presumably we should fear it
or worry about it, just as we should if a future headache exists.
Last, but not least, we might motivate presentism by appealing to
ontological parsimony (e.g., Bourne 2006: 68–69). Suppose that we endorse something like “Ockham’s
razor”, viz. the principle that one shouldn’t
multiply entities beyond necessity (see the entry on
 simplicity,
 esp. §2). By asserting that only present things exist, by not
positing the existence of any non-present things, the
presentist’s ontology is more parsimonious than the ontology of
their opponents (growing block theorists posit the existence of past
and present things, eternalists posit the existence of past, present,
and future things, etc.). All things being equal, we have at least a
defeasible preference for presentism over its rivals, if we have a
taste for ontological desert landscapes.
There are a number of complications with this way of motivating
presentism. For one thing, although it’s typical (in
metaphysics) to see appeals to parsimony in cases where one view is
more “qualitatively” parsimonious than its
rivals, that is, cases where a view posits fewer kinds of thing
than opposing views, it’s far less typical to see appeals in
cases where one view is merely more
“quantitatively” parsimonious than rivals, that is,
cases where a view posits fewer things than another. The fact that
appeals to quantitative parsimony are less typical reflects a general
attitude that the only ontological parsimony that one ought to respect
is qualitative parsimony. As David Lewis famously puts it:
I subscribe to the general view that qualitative parsimony is good in
a philosophical or empirical hypothesis; but I recognize no
presumption whatever in favor of quantitative parsimony (1973: 87)
Now, it seems that if presentism is to be motivated by appeal to
parsimony, then it must be motivated by appeal to considerations of
quantitative parsimony. Presentism and eternalism don’t
disagree about the kinds of things that exist. Both
presentists and non-presentists tend to agree on the metaphysical
kinds (or “ontological categories”) that exist. What they
disagree about is the temporal location of the things that exist.
Presentism states that everything exists at the present time;
eternalism states that there are things that exist at other times. If
presentism is to be motivated in this way then we must justify a
preference for quantitative parsimony in this case in the face of the
orthodoxy that Lewis expresses. (See Tallant 2013b for an attempt to
deliver this sort of argument for presentism.)
At the outset, we noted that presentism has been formulated,
developed, and modified in response to a range of objections. In what
remains of this entry, we consider what we take to be the most
prominent and well-developed of these objections and explain how
presentists have tried to respond (§§3–8).
Consider the following minimal statement of presentism, viz.
the ontological thesis, P:
There is a concern with P, understood as a statement
of presentism, arguing that the use of the verb “exist” is
ambiguous in a problematic way. The idea is that, once
P is disambiguated properly, presentism is either
trivially true (but consistent with some non-presentist views) or else
false. P admits of three apparently distinct
readings:
The highlighted portions indicate a putative disambiguation of
“exist”. Opponents insist that these are the only
available readings of P and press the following
argument:
For statements of this argument, see Crisp (2004: 17) and
Ludlow (2004: 22). For discussion of the (so-called)
“sceptical” challenge, in a variety of forms, see Merricks (1995: 523, 1999: 421–2), Zimmerman (1998:
209–10), Lombard (1999: 254–5, 2010), Sider (1999:
325–7, 2006), Callender (2000: S588–90), Rea (2003), Meyer
(2005, 2013), Savitt (2006), Stoneham (2009), Mozersky (2011:
122–5), Torrengo (2012, 2016), Miller (2013: 348–51),
Tallant (2014) and Deng (forthcoming).
The argument (1)–(5) is valid. But why think that it’s
sound? Well, premise (2) is clearly true. The claim that “only
present things exist now” amounts to the claim that “only
presently existing things presently exist”. Whilst we
shouldn’t disagree with this claim, it’s a mere triviality
and cannot be used to advance a distinctive position in the philosophy
of time. Moreover, P1 is consistent with
the existence of non-present things, contrary to the spirit of
presentism. For example, Marie Curie isn’t a present
entity—she doesn’t exist now—but she can exist (in
the past) without contradicting P1. Hence,
P1 isn’t an adequate statement of
presentism, regardless of its status as a truism.
What about premises (3) and (4)? The standard justification for (3) is
that P2 is false because it’s open
to counterexamples. The standard justification for (4) is that
P3 collapses into
P2. Both are controversial. We take each
in turn.
The claim that we explore here is that: “only present things
have existed, exist now, or will exist”
(P2) is false because some non-present
things have existed. For example, Marie Curie isn’t a present
thing, but she has existed. This appears to be a counterexample to
P2.
One might reply here that P2 isn’t
false (for the reason just given) because there are no
non-present entities—presentists don’t think that there
is something, Curie, that exists and isn’t present. To
work through the details here, it’s important to start talking
about what presentists accept in the domain of their most unrestricted
quantifiers. That is, P2 isn’t false
because there are no non-present entities in the relevant domain of
quantification. Suppose that we read P2 in
the following way: “for any x, if x has existed,
exists now, or will exist, then x is present”. And,
following Thomas Crisp (2004), presentists may read the quantifier
“for any…” as “for any… within
time” (depending on views about the existence of timeless
entities). If we shift to this reading, it’s no longer obvious
that P2 is false. It’s true that
there once was an entity, Marie Curie, who doesn’t exist at all
anymore. But it’s not clear that Curie must be within the
relevant domain of quantification simply in virtue of having once
existed. So, if we read P2 as “for
any x (within time), if x has existed, exists now, or
will exist, then x is present”—and we deny that
there are any non-present entities—then
P2 isn’t false (cf. Crisp 2004:
18–20). And, if P2 isn’t
false, then premise (3) is false and the argument is
unsound.
Of course, whether one thinks that this kind of strategy is successful
will likely depend upon how one understands the locution “for
any x”. Not everyone is likely to be persuaded. For
instance, Ulrich Meyer (2005: 214, 2013: 68–69), when advancing
his own “sceptical” challenge to presentism, considers a
statement of presentism that’s very similar to the reading of
P2 offered by Crisp (2004), in which the
statement of presentism is equivalent to the claim that “only
present entities exist temporally”. (On the assumption that
“x exists within time” and “x exists
temporally” are the very same notion, the two statements are
equivalent.) However, Meyer argues that it’s clear enough that
Curie exists temporally. After all, she has existed! And what can
“x exists temporally” (or “x
exists”) mean if not, simply, “x has existed,
exists now, or will exist”?
Assuming that the likes of Meyer are correct (and that the likes of
Crisp are not), what should we make of premise (4)? What should we
make of the claim that: “only present entities exist
simpliciter” (P3) is false
because P3 collapses into
P2 (and P2 is
false)? Perhaps we can argue that P3
doesn’t collapse into P2, and that
P3 represents a distinct way to state the
presentist’s ontic thesis. A defender of
P3 might argue that there’s a notion
of “existence simpliciter” that’s
intelligible, substantive and, importantly, distinct from the
“tensed” (“temporal”) notion of existence
that’s captured in P2 (i.e.,
“has existed, exists now, or will exist”).
Once again, there’s clear and sustained disagreement about the
effectiveness of this strategy. Suppose that we can insist sensibly
that there’s a notion of “existence
simpliciter” that helps presentism to avoid the
challenge that P3 collapses into
P2. (If this is so, then our opponent
can’t tell us, simply, that P3 is
false if P2 is false.) Nevertheless, this
raises the question as to what, precisely, is meant by “x
exists simpliciter” and whether the new notion can be
used to characterize presentism.
What does “x exists simpliciter” mean? In
this context, Meyer (2005: 214–5) tells us that if x
exists simpliciter, then x exists either in the actual
world @, or else in some merely possible world. And, if x
exists in @, then it exists in time, it exists
temporally; x either has existed, exists now, or will
exist. Thus, it seems that if we specify the meaning of
“x exists simpliciter”, we must take it to
mean either that x exists “outside time”, but
somehow still in @, or else at some other world. But, perhaps
controversially, Meyer (2005: 215) argues that neither of these ways
of specifying the notion of “existence
simpliciter” will give us a characterization of
presentism, qua model of time. Presentism is a view about
what exists in time; it’s not a thesis about what exists outside
of time, nor is it a thesis about what exists at other possible
worlds. (Recall, from the discussion of the implications of
PA, above, that nothing exists outside time, for
presentists; nothing exists that isn’t present. Hence,
presentism concerns what exists within time since it implies
that nothing exists without.)
It’s only fair to conclude this part of the discussion by noting
that it’s unclear how far we should be moved by these
considerations. For instance, Daniel Deasy (2017) is clear that he
thinks very little of this objection. Deasy discusses the objection
(to presentism, defined as “always, everything is
present”), somewhat witheringly, as follows:
[Some argue along the following lines:] the quantifier in the
traditional definition is either tensed or tenseless. If it is tensed
then presentism is the obviously false thesis that always, everything
is now present. If it is tenseless then presentism is the trivially
true thesis that always, everything is, was, or will be present.
… The problem with this argument is that the key
premise—that the quantifier in the traditional definition is
either tensed or tenseless—is false. The universal quantifier in
the traditional definition (“everything”) should be read
as expressing exactly the universal quantifier of classical
first-order predicate logic … [The] traditional definition is
intended to express a metaphysical thesis, and metaphysical theses
ought to be expressed in the most metaphysically
perspicuous—i.e., most “joint carving”—terms
possible. Classical first-order predicate logic is a much better
candidate for a language whose terms so cut than a natural language
like English. Moreover, the standard quantifiers of classical
first-order predicate logic are neither “tensed” nor
“tenseless” (or at least, not in the sense of the above
argument). … [Quantifiers] are not verbs, they are quantifiers
… Therefore there is no good reason to think the quantifiers
have either reading. (2017: 380–1)
However, presentists shouldn’t celebrate too early. They should
remain cautious. Deasy goes on to raise an independent concern with
how to define presentism. Echoing Timothy Williamson (2013:
24–25), Deasy objects that there’s no satisfactory way to
spell out what’s meant by “is present” in the
definition of presentism.
As we’ve seen, standard ways of characterizing presentism face
an array of definitional worries. So let’s change tack for a
moment. Presentism is the view that only present things exist. But it
might seem natural to suppose there’s more to presentism than a
claim about the extent of our ontological commitments. That is,
presentism shouldn’t just be seen as a list of which objects
exist (the present ones), but a claim about existence itself. Dean
Zimmerman (1996), for example,
characterizes presentism as the view that “to be present
just is to be real or to exist” (1996: 117). When presentism is
characterized in this way, we can label it “Existence
Presentism”, following Jonathan Tallant (2014).
Trenton Merricks gives a more thorough expression of this picture, as
follows:
[Standard] definitions, even though they get at something important,
fail to get at what separates presentism most fundamentally from
eternalism. … [Presentism] and eternalism differ most
fundamentally with respect to the nature of time and, relatedly, with
respect to what it is to exist at a time (and to have properties at a
time). (2007: 119–20)
Presentists and eternalists alike say that those things that exist at
the present time really do exist and, moreover, that properties had at
the present time really are had. Thus one might think that, while
presentism and eternalism part ways with respect to other times, they
agree about the nature of the present time and, relatedly, agree about
what it is to exist (and have properties) at the present time. But
they do not agree about these things. Indeed, their differences with
respect to the nature of, and existence at, the present time are as
important as their differences with respect to the past and the
future. (2007: 123)
[Presentists] insist that there are objects that exist at the
present time (or, equivalently, that presently exist).
Since they do not believe in a region called the “present
time”, presentists cannot reduce existing at the present
time to being located at that region. I think presentists should,
instead, say that existing at the present time just is
existing. Thus, given presentism, if something exists, then,
obviously enough, it exists at the present time. So, given presentism,
since everything exists, everything exists at the present time. This
is what is right about the standard definitions of presentism. (2007:
125)
This way of characterizing presentism challenges the orthodoxy,
sketched above (in
 §1),
 which takes the main difference between presentism and rival models
(eternalism, etc.) to be their distinct ontological commitments. On
this revised way of thinking, such ontological disagreements are a
consequence of the view, rather than what’s truly distinctive
about it. Instead, what’s crucial to presentism is a claim about
the nature of what it is to exist. To exist is to be
present.
How, if at all, does this way of thinking about presentism help with
the definitional worries? Supposedly, this move helps us to identify a
new kind of disagreement between presentists and non-presentists.
Presentists can endorse an identity claim of the form “existing
at the present time is identical to existing” and thus draw new
battle lines. This identity claim is present tensed and it’s
true now; it doesn’t face the same worries as the other
statements of presentism (P1,
P2, or P3).
Nonetheless, the claim is distinctive; it’s not something to
which eternalists can assent. Eternalists don’t agree that
existing now is existing.
Prima facie, there are myriad “cross-temporal”
relations. We admire Marie Curie; admiration is a relation.
Yesterday’s rain caused today’s flood; causation is a
relation. There are other kinds of relation, which we discuss below,
such as directly referring and truth-making, which seem like they
cross times (and as if they might cause special trouble for
presentism). For now though we want to consider the point very
generally. Presentism is not compatible with the existence of Marie
Curie or yesterday’s rainfall; we presentism denies the
existence of all past entities. Nonetheless, what we have here with
admiration and causation seems to be a relation. It’s very
natural and very reasonable to suppose that a relation can only be
instantiated if all of its relata exist: x cannot stand in a
relation R to y unless both x and y exist. If that’s
right, then there’s an obvious worry. Presentism seems flat out
incompatible with the existence of any and all cross-temporal
relations. Something must give.
A famous statement of this “argument from relations” is
due to John Bigelow (1996). It goes as follows:
…in order for a relation to hold between two things, both of
those two things will have to exist. Call this the principle that all
relations are existence entailing. Add as a further premise the
supposition that relations sometimes hold between a present thing and
something else which is not present. The conclusion follows
ineluctably, that some things exist which are not present. (1996:
37)
Bigelow suggests that this argument goes as far back as the Stoics and
the Epicureans. Here we focus on contemporary iterations of the
problem. For recent discussion of the problem, in a variety of forms,
see Adams (1986: 321–8), Quine (1987: 197–8),
Chisholm (1990a,b), Bigelow (1996), Sider (1999, 2001: 25–35),
Craig (2000: 211–2), Davidson (2003), Markosian (2004), Crisp
(2005), Brogaard (2006, 2013), De Clercq (2006), Torrengo (2006,
2010), Inman (2012), and Ciuni & Torrengo (2013). For a
substantial, book-length treatment of the issue, see Torrengo
(2008).
Quite generally, presentism can be defended via one of a few
strategies to address this worry about “cross-time”
relations. One option: to use presently existing entities to make
sense of the relational claims. With our admiration of Marie Curie,
for example, this amounts to saying that: when she existed, Curie
instantiated various features and properties, those properties still
exist, and it’s those present properties that we’re
related to in admiration. Thus, it’s not Curie herself that we
admire, but her perseverance, insight and brilliance. Of course, one
important issue with this strategy is that it fails to respect the
idea that it’s Curie herself that we admire, rather than mere
properties that she exemplified. Alternatively, then, alongside
defending presentism we might deny that some or all relations are
“existence-entailing”. Thus, we can stand in the relation
of admiration to Marie Curie herself, even though there’s no
such entity as Curie. But here we would face the difficult task of
denying the natural and reasonable supposition that a relation can
only be instantiated if all of its relata exist. Presentists who go
this route deny “serious presentism” and start down the
road towards Meinongianism, a position which many find quite
undesirable (see the entry on
 nonexistent objects,
 esp. §4). Serious presentism is the temporal analogue of
“serious actualism”, the view that “necessarily, if
x has F or bears R, then x
exists” (see the entry on
 actualism,
 esp. §2.2). (We remain neutral on the question of whether
presentism implies serious presentism, pace Bergmann 1999,
Davidson 2000, and leave the
“non-serious” option open to presentists.) There’s
at least one more option open: to say that such seeming cases of
relations aren’t, in fact, relational at all. Thus, rather than
our admiration of Curie being a state that consists in Curie existing,
our existing, and our bearing a relation to Curie, all that there is
to such a state is our existing and instantiating a monadic property, admiring Marie Curie. Since the property is monadic,
its instantiation requires only our existence.
Unsurprisingly, there are questions about the advisability of each
strategy, in general, as well as about whether each can be pursued or
applied sensibly in defense of presentism. Nonetheless, with the above
general overview in hand, we now turn our attention to two
philosophical problems that confront presentism: the problem of
reference to non-present entities (§5) and the
“truth-maker” problem
 (§6).
 Both are specific instances of our main objection, introduced above,
and both present special problems for presentists. (The well-informed
reader will note that we haven’t yet mentioned explicitly
problems concerning quantification across times or metric tensed
statements. We consider both as part of
 §6.)
Let’s begin by noting that Socrates was a wise, snub-nosed
philosopher, who happened to be Plato’s finest teacher. From
this story, we can infer that “Socrates was wise” is true
and, we might reasonably suppose, it expresses a (true) proposition,
<Socrates was wise>. Similarly, we can take it that
“Plato’s finest teacher was wise” is also true and
it expresses a (true) proposition, <Plato’s finest
teacher was wise>. [See the entry on
 propositions.]
Some preliminary observations. Both propositions exist; they are true
and so they must exist in order to be true. (Assuming something like
“serious actualism”, see above.) Equally, both
propositions are about the very same individual, Socrates, though
there’s a sense in which <Socrates was wise> is about
Socrates more thoroughly (more intimately) than <Plato’s
finest teacher was wise> is about him. Indeed, it seems that
<Socrates was wise> is “directly” about Socrates,
whereas <Plato’s finest teacher was wise> is only
“indirectly” about him. <Socrates was wise> cannot
fail to be about Socrates; it determines Socrates, the same
individual, in all possible contexts. But, by contrast,
<Plato’s finest teacher was wise> is about Socrates only
accidentally, only in virtue of the contingent fact that
Socrates was Plato’s finest teacher.
Further, note that the sentence “Socrates was wise”, which
expresses <Socrates was wise>, contains a proper name
(“Socrates”). And, suppose that this directly refers to
Socrates. By contrast, “Plato’s finest teacher was
wise”, which expresses <Plato’s finest teacher was
wise>, contains a description (“Plato’s finest
teacher”). We might suppose that this doesn’t directly
refer to Socrates, nor does it determine him in all possible contexts.
Consider, for example, the possible scenario in which Socrates never
encountered Plato. In this context, Plato’s finest teacher would
have been a distinct individual and the corresponding description
“Plato’s finest teacher” would pick out that
individual. As such, <Plato’s finest teacher was wise>
would not be about Socrates and the truth of the proposition
wouldn’t depend upon any facts about him. What unites both cases
is reference; what divides them is the direct or indirect character of
how the expressions refer. Typically, reference is construed as a
relation that obtains between language and reality (between linguistic
items and things in the world). [See the entry on
 reference.]
 And, again: for two things to be so related, both things (both
relata) must exist.
In defending presentism we thus face a problem of direct reference
with respect to merely past entities. (Although, on one reading,
it’s merely an instance of the general problem of
“cross-time relations”, introduced above, in
 §4.)
 It seems that we can and do refer successfully to entities that have
existed and exist no longer, entities that don’t exist at all,
given presentism. But, if this is so, then the past entities that we
refer to (and which are related to our linguistic items) must exist,
contrary to presentism. Presentists face a difficult choice. That is,
they must reject one of the following four claims, which form an
apparently inconsistent set: (i) we successfully refer to merely past
entities, (ii) reference is a relation, (iii) for a relation to
obtain, the relata must exist, and (iv) there are no merely past
entities (i.e., past entities don’t exist). Presentists
can’t deny (iv), since that amounts to a rejection of
presentism. But it proves almost equally difficult to reject any of
the other claims, given their independent plausibility.
Let’s move away from the issue of reference, specifically, and
turn to the metaphysics of propositions. First, note that <Socrates
was wise> is a “singular” proposition: a proposition
that’s directly about some individual, Socrates, whereas
<Plato’s finest teacher was wise> is a
“particularised” proposition: a proposition that’s
about Socrates, but not directly about them. [See the entry on
 singular propositions.]
 Frequently, propositions are taken to be complex metaphysical
entities, entities with constituents and structure. [See the entry on
 structured propositions.]
 On this way of thinking, singular propositions are understood
typically as constituted by individuals, specifically the individuals
that they are (directly) about. Hence, a singular proposition about
some, x, is constituted by x itself. By contrast,
particularised propositions aren’t constituted by individuals,
although they are structured entities with constituents. A
particularised proposition about x isn’t constituted by
x, but may be constituted by a property of x. On this
view, <Socrates was wise>, for example, is constituted by Socrates
himself, whereas <Plato’s finest teacher was wise>
isn’t constituted by Socrates—but, perhaps, the
proposition is constituted by some actual accidental property of
Socrates, being the finest teacher of Plato or, indeed,
having been the finest teacher of Plato. This way of thinking
about (singular) propositions isn’t universal, but it’s
part of a standard theory with many adherents (see Adams 1986;
Williamson 2002; King 2007).
If propositions are complex (structured) entities with constituents,
then they depend for their existence upon the existence of their
propositional constituents. The way that such entities ontologically
depend upon constituents is analogous to the way that sets depend upon
their members. Consider, for example, {x}, x’s singleton
set. {x} depends upon x for its existence. Typically,
this is cashed out as follows: necessarily, {x} exists only if
x exists; and, it’s not the case that x exists
only if {x} exists. Similarly, we say: necessarily, some
proposition P exists only if its (propositional) constituent
c exist; and, it’s not the case that c exists only
if P exists. [See the entry on
 ontological dependence.]
Presentism faces a problem about how to account for the existence of
singular propositions about past entities. It seems that there are
such propositions; recall that “Socrates was wise”
expresses a true singular proposition, <Socrates was wise>,
which must exist in order to be true. The problem arises given a
standard treatment of singular propositions; that is, a proposition
that’s directly about an individual x is constituted by
x itself, and propositions depend for their existence upon the
existence of their constituents. So, for example, <Socrates was wise>
is constituted by Socrates himself and this proposition ontologically
depends upon Socrates.
Here’s a deductively valid argument against presentism, based on
the above considerations:
The argument is clearly valid. To defend presentism, we must deny one
of the premises. But each premise appears independently plausible. (1)
takes truth to be a monadic property, e.g., being true, and
reflects a commitment to serious actualism: if P instantiates
being true, then P exists. (2) takes propositions as
truth-bearers (or “truth-value bearers”) and follows from
the simple claim that there are truths about the past (more on this
below, in
 §6).
 (4) takes propositions as complex entities and reflects a commitment
to the principle that a complex depends for its existence upon things
that constitute it. The remaining premises, (5) and (7), follow
straightforwardly from the two metaphysical theses at issue, the
standard view of propositions and presentism, respectively.
The most obvious line of response (if we wish to avoid rejecting too
many plausible premises) is to deny some aspect of the standard view
of propositions. Here we see a moderate and an extreme reply: a
moderate suggests a modification of the standard view (e.g., Ingram
2016), an extremist suggests a total rejection of it
(e.g., Merricks 2012). Moderates accept that propositions are
structured entities with constituents, but urge that the propositional
constituents are presently existing entities, and not any non-existent
past entities. Extremists deny that propositions are structured
entities and, instead, suggest a distinct treatment of
propositions.
For another line of response, presentism might be modified à
la Williamson (1998, 2002), who defends a view according to which
past objects still exist, but are no longer concrete. We don’t
take a stand on whether such a position deserves the epithet
“presentism” and, further, we note that Williamson (2013:
20) explicitly states that he would prefer to see the debate between
presentists and others recast in other terms, using a different
methodology. Nonetheless, it is clear enough that if the existence of
abstract-Socrates (who once was concrete but now is abstract) is
compatible with presentism, then this would give the presentist a
means to deny (7) and reject the argument given above.
For discussion of the above problem, in a variety of forms (i.e.,
concerning direct reference or singular propositions), see Adams
(1986: 315–22), Fitch (1994), Markosian (2004), Merricks (2012:
64–67, 2015: 170–3), and Ingram (2016).
There’s a modal analogue of this problem, facing actualism
(roughly, the view that “only actual things exist”), and a
rich literature accompanying it. For discussion of this problem, see
Adams (1981), Plantinga (1983), Barcan Marcus (1985), Fine (1985),
Davidson (2000), Merricks (2012: 64–71, 2015: 173–80), and
Speaks (2012).
A good deal of work on presentism in the philosophy of time concerns
itself with truth. In the current context, the work in question
focuses on whether (and, if so, how) presentism can account for the
different kinds of true proposition that we endorse. Our primary focus
will be on how to defend presentism whilst giving appropriate
ontological explanations for the truth of true claims about merely
past things (with the “truth-making” literature as the
background). We also briefly address a related problem of truths about
spans of time (sometimes treated as a separate issue concerning
quantification over times).
Now we turn to one of the most discussed challenges to presentism in
the contemporary debate: the (so-called) “truth-maker”
objection to presentism. At first pass, this objection is another
instance of the general problem of cross-temporal relations
 (§4),
 but there are reasons for thinking that concerns about truth-makers
underwrite a special problem for presentists. This objection is
treated as a significant problem for presentism by many, including but
not limited to: Sider (2001: 35–42), Armstrong (2004:
145–50), Keller (2004), Crisp (2007), Cameron
(2011), Sanson & Caplan (2010), Markosian (2013), and Tallant &
Ingram (2015). For one
general discussion of the problem, see Caplan & Sanson (2011). [See the entry on
 truthmakers
 for background.]
The truth-maker objection is presented as a tension between three
independently plausible principles: (i) presentism, (ii) that there
are (evidence-transcendent and objective) truths about the past, and
(iii) truth-maker theory, the view that truths about the past are
“made true” by some existent (see, e.g., Keller
2004: 85–87; Cameron 2011: 55–57; Tallant & Ingram
2015: 355, for this mode of presentation). Obviously, we cannot defend
presentism and also abandon (i), and giving up on (ii) seems a steep
price to pay. If there are no truths about the past, then it’s
hard to make sense of the idea that things change from one moment to
the next (or that time passes; see below,
 §7).
 That leaves us with (iii). Here, three options present themselves:
locate the required “truth-makers”; deny that truths about
the past require truth-makers; or, argue that truth-making isn’t
the kind of relation that requires the existence of both relata. We
consider these options in turn.
It’s worth noting, at the outset, that a version of the problem
can be stated with the principle that “truth supervenes upon
being” in place of truth-maker theory, (iii), as in Kierland
& Monton (2007). But it’s far more common to raise this
specific objection as a problem about a lack of truth-makers (rather
than the lack of an appropriate “subvenient base”). And so
it’s the “truth-maker” objection, in particular,
upon which we focus our attention.
Truth-makers for truths about the past aren’t easy to find. We
are searching for entities “in virtue of” which
propositions about the past are true. For example, <Curie
existed> is true in virtue of some entity, its
“truth-maker”. But what plays the truth-making role?
Schematically, two kinds of solution can be given here: (i) posit
presently existing truth-makers, or (ii) posit truth-makers that exist
“outside time”. This second option is open to presentists
willing to countenance the existence of some atemporal
entities (e.g., propositions, numbers, and so on). (Such a version of presentism
would require a defense the idea that entities that exist
outside of time do no violence to the claim that “only
present things exist”.)
Presentism can be amended via the addition of atemporal
truth-makers—truth-making entities that are, in a sense,
“outside” time—see Bourne (2006) and Crisp (2007).
This is “ersatz presentism”. Ersatz presentism is the
claim that, for example, <Curie existed> is “made true” by
an abstract time that represents how things were when Curie existed.
(This is an “ersatz” abstract time, rather than a
“genuine” concrete time.) One way to understand Ersatz
presentism is as the view that there’s an abstract
four-dimensional manifold of times that represents how things were,
are now, and will be. This manifold is ordered by an ersatz
B-theoretic “earlier than” relation and forms an ersatz
B-series of times. Here, the truth-makers for truths about the past
are abstract entities: the ersatz times. An ersatz time, T,
represents how things were (at some past time) by some other
ersatz time, T*, accurately representing how the concrete
world is now, and by T bearing the “earlier
than” relation (the “ersatz B-relation”) to
T*.
Ersatz presentism is popular but the other position—the view
that we should posit presently existing
truth-makers—includes more variation. The most well-known
version of this view is “Lucretianism” espoused by John
Bigelow (1996). Lucretianism claims that <Curie existed> is made
true by the world now instantiating a primitive past-tensed property
(a “Lucretian” property) of having contained Marie Curie.
Here the presently existing truth-maker is the present instantiation
of the Lucretian property (having contained Curie) by the
world. There are a range of other “property solutions”,
alongside Lucretianism, which differ in important respects but which
share a common core. For instance, see Keller (2004: 94–101) on a range
of solutions, including one with indestructible atoms and their
properties, Cameron (2011, 2013) on temporal distributional
properties, McKinnon & Bigelow (2012) on tensing the instantiation
tie, and Ingram (forthcoming) on uninstantiated thisnesses and their
properties, amongst others.
Responses to the positions that posit presently existing truth-makers,
such as Bigelow’s Lucretianism, along with the
“Bigelow-style” property solutions (mentioned briefly),
each seem to suffer from three distinct problems, perhaps only one of
which afflicts the “ersatz presentist” proposal. We
rehearse the problems facing presentism so-supplemented via these
additional truth-makers.
First, note that any solution must ensure that the truth-makers
deliver the “right results” with respect to what’s
true about the past. To illustrate, consider the following natural
progression of an object through time. Our story begins with a green
banana. Time passes and the banana ripens. The banana is now yellow,
but it was green. The world now instantiates the property having
contained a green banana (or so says the Lucretian). So far, so
good. But now consider the following progression, where the banana
ripens and yet the world comes to instantiate a different Lucretian
property. Here the world instantiates the property having
contained a red banana, rather than having contained a green
banana. This progression is problematic. Witness: in the scenario
imagined, though it was the case that the world contained a green
banana, <There was a green banana> is false; and, despite the
world never having contained a red banana, <There was a red
banana> is true. And, although the problematic progression
doesn’t appear at all likely, the worry with these
“property” responses to the truth-maker objection is that
these kinds of progression appear possible, given the
advertised metaphysic. If such progressions are possible, they present
an objection to these presently existing entities in fact being the
right kind of truth-makers for truths about the past (see, e.g.,
Tallant & Ingram 2012; Cameron 2013; and Leininger 2015, for
discussion of this sort of challenge).
A second concern with “property solutions” stems from the
worry that the kind of properties involved, for example, primitive tensed
“Lucretian” properties, are wholly objectionable.
Properties such as having contained dinosaurs seem, to many,
to be “suspicious” or “dubious”
entities—they are objectionable entities that shouldn’t be
countenanced in a respectable metaphysic. They are dubious and
objectionable because, in a sense that’s quite difficult to pin
down, they point beyond their instances (their bearers).
Thus, having contained dinosaurs is a property that
“points beyond” how the world is now; it points
beyond the intrinsic nature of its bearer, and “points” to
how the world was; namely, containing dinosaurs. And, say the
objectors, acceptable properties aren’t like that; respectable
properties don’t point beyond (see, e.g., Sider 2001:
39–42; Crisp 2007: 93–98; Merricks 2007: 134–6; and
Cameron 2011: 58–62, who each endorse versions of this
challenge, but see Tallant 2013a who argues that all such challenges
miss the mark in some way or other).
Another significant objection facing presentist attempts to solve the
truth-maker objection is based on “aboutness” intuitions
and their role in determining which entity (or entities) is an
adequate truth-maker for a particular truth. The idea goes as follows.
A truth (any truth) is about something. If a proposition is made
true—if a proposition “owes its truth” to something
in the world—then the thing in the world that makes the
proposition true should be what the truth is about (Merricks 2007:
28–34). After all, <Taylor loves to sing>, for instance, is about
Taylor and her love of singing. It would be altogether wrong for that
proposition to be made true by the existence of anything other than
Taylor and her love of singing. At least, so goes the thought.
However, all these “solutions” to the truth-maker
objection share a common feature: the past entities that propositions
about the past seem to be about don’t exist, given
presentism. Marie Curie doesn’t exist, yet <Curie existed>
is about Curie. There are no dinosaurs, yet <there were
dinosaurs> is about them. Our “aboutness”
intuitions tell us that propositions about the past should be
made true by past entities, but they simply cannot be, given
presentism. Whether the truth-makers we posit exist now, or
exist outside time, the kind of entities that we posit won’t be
up to the task. If we respect the aboutness constraint (on truth-maker
theory), and cannot shake off this objection, we will likely be
inclined to give up on solving the objection by attempting to locate
the required truth-makers. (There are some exceptions. For example, Ingram
forthcoming develops a Bigelow-style response and argues that the
putative truth-makers, uninstantiated thisnesses, do satisfy aboutness
intuitions.)
There’s time enough to mention briefly one additional
complication. So far, we’ve focused on truths such as <Marie
Curie existed> and <The banana was green>. But what about
<Curie existed 100 years ago> or <The banana was green 3 days
ago>? Both include a “metric”, a term that
specifies a temporal interval or indicates some temporal distance. Now
note that since <Curie existed> is true now, it will always be
true hereafter. Interestingly, however, the same isn’t true for
<Curie existed 100 years ago>. (Curie ceased to exist in 1934.)
Hence, <Curie existed 100 years ago> will fail to be true in
2035.) The same rules for tensed truths don’t apply to metric
tensed truths, so we must find some way of accommodating them. Even
so, it seems that presentists can say similar things in the case of
metric tensed truths as they do in the case of tensed truths. For example, take Bigelow’s Lucretianism and its putative truth-maker for
<Curie existed>, viz. the present instantiation of a
tensed (Lucretian) property of having contained Marie Curie by the
world. With a fairly simple modification, this view can deal with
<Curie existed 100 years ago>. All that’s required is
metric tensed properties, such as the property of having contained Curie
100 years ago. This is the sort of property that’s now
instantiated by the world (in 2017) but won’t be instantiated at
some point in the future (such as in 2035). So, the challenge from
metric tenses complicates matters but, at least on the surface, is far
from insurmountable.
Recall, the claims that generate the truth-maker objection: (i)
presentism, (ii) there are truths about the past, and (iii)
truth-maker theory. The strategy just discussed, viz.
locating truth-makers for truths about the past, attempts to reconcile
all three claims. But another strategy is to simply deny (iii), to
assert that truths about the past don’t require
truth-makers.
This way of approaching matters has been mooted (e.g., Tallant 2009b),
but it hasn’t received a huge amount of support. This is due, at
least in part, to the fact that it’s only a partial response.
It’s all very well to deny that all truths require truth-makers,
for instance, and so deny that truths about the past require
truth-makers. It’s another thing altogether to explain what we
should say instead about truths about the past. And
surely something must be said, if we hope to account for
their truth. We can’t say, simply, that truths about the past
require no truth-makers and then say nothing more about what they
require. And while we might look to replace a truth-maker theory with
something less ontologically committing, presentists haven’t
been forthcoming with an account of how truths get to be true, if not
by some kind of truth-making account.
All of this leads us to the final option that we will consider here.
Namely, that the truth-maker relation isn’t existence-entailing.
This kind of approach, described elsewhere as “nefarious”
(contrasted with the “upstanding” project of locating
truth-makers), uses the language of truth-making without positing any
truth-makers for truths about the past. In presenting the nefarious
strategy, we can treat it as something like the union of two theses:
(1) truths about the past are expressed using primitive (and
unanalysable) tense operators; and, (2) the tense operators
don’t pick out a distinctive ontological category or aspect of
reality. This sort of nefarious approach has been pursued recently by
Tallant (2009a), Sanson & Caplan (2010), and Baia (2012), amongst others. The labels
(“nefarious” and “upstanding”) are due to a
recent discussion by Tallant & Ingram (2015).
To clarify: nefarious “cheats” (like Tallant) will say
“<It was the case that p> is true, because it was the case
that p”. Here, the “was” is primitive and
unanalysable. Notice, also, that those adopting this position will
agree that this “was” doesn’t pick out any ontology;
it doesn’t help us to speak of any distinctive metaphysical
category. To that extent, those in this “nefarious” camp,
will agree that there are truths about the past, and will agree that
how the world was makes true how things are, but they deny
that the ensuing truth-maker “relation” (such as it is)
between the past and the present (i.e., the true propositions) is
existence-entailing. For some, that might simply be considered
treacherous. How might presentists motivate the nefarious
position?
One key motivation involves a comparison with the
“upstanding” approaches and the first problem we raised
for them, viz. getting the “right results”
(discussed above). To be clear, if we think that there are
truth-makers, then we must ensure that the truth-making entities get
things right. That is, if the world contained a green banana, then it
had always better be true, any time after the fact, that a truth-maker
exists for <There was a green banana> (rather than, say, a
truth-maker for <There was a red banana>, in the case where the
world never contained a red banana). But notice, then, that this seems
to imply some kind of “fixing” relation; how the world
was (containing a green banana, not containing a red banana)
serves to “fix” what truth-makers exist now.
Fixing is, plausibly, a relation. And, if x fixes y
then, intuitively, both x and y must exist; both relata
of the fixing relation should exist. But, clearly, on the presentist
picture, that’s not acceptable. Past things don’t exist
and, in that case, the required “fixing” is a relation
that isn’t existence-entailing; it doesn’t require the
existence of both relata. And, if that’s right, then presentists
may as well “cut out the middleman” (so to speak) and
simply treat the truth-making relation as
“non-existence-entailing” and so avoid any ontological
inflation. Presentists don’t require ontological commitment to
ersatz times, Lucretian properties, etc., to serve as truth-makers for
truths about the past. They can do without.
Is presentism out of the woods when it comes to the truth-maker
objection? It’s far from clear. We may, for instance, retain the
worry that a relation (any relation) must be existence-entailing and
that what this shows is that we should give up on presentism (see,
e.g., Baron 2013). And, even if we can solve the truth-maker
objection, there’s a closely related concern that looks like it
will raise further problems. (We discuss the related concern in what
remains of this section.)
It’s true that there have been seven English Kings called
“Edward”. Is presentism compatible with that claim? How
should we interpret the semantics? At no point in history were there
all seven Kings; the Edwards weren’t contemporaneous. But, if
the Edwards didn’t all exist together, then how can <There
have been 7 English Kings called “Edward”> be true?
Presentism faces a novel problem regarding truths about the past when
such truths concern “spans” of time (see, e.g., Lewis
2004). After all, the natural reading is false: it was the case that
“there are 7 English Kings called
‘Edward’”.
Two routes suggest themselves as plausible avenues to explore. The
first is to try to make sense of talk of spans by using talk of
individual times. Following the literature, call these “slice
operators”. The idea, then, is that we say that 
It WAS the case that [“<There is a King called
Edward>, and it WAS the case that [<There is a King
called Edward>, and….]]” 
Somewhat loosely, we can describe this as analyzing the span in terms
of the individual “slices” that would make it up, were
such a thing as a “span” to exist.
There are many difficulties with this kind of approach. The most
obvious challenge is that, in the above, the second iteration of our
tense operator, “WAS” appears within the scope of the
first. Thus, the attempted paraphrase of <There have been 7 English
Kings called “Edward”> is a sentence of the form
“there has been a king called ‘Edward’, and there
had been a king called ‘Edward’…”. For one
thing, however, suppose that there have been infinitely many entities
in the past. Kings will not be a useful candidate here, so imagine
instead that there have been infinitely many electrons. Hence,
<There have been infinitely many electrons> is true. But this
requires a construction with an infinite number of nested quantifiers
and tense operators. This won’t do, for no such construction can
be generated, despite the fact that we clearly can utter a
sentence that expresses the relevant proposition, “there have
been infinitely many electrons”.
Another important problem for the translation approach is that there
seem to be cases in which the paraphrase is false and yet the
paraphrased sentence is true. Consider a merely possible case in which
some of the past Kings were instantaneous and simultaneous. (If this
is too implausible in the case of Kings, given facts about royal
succession, then swap the case for one involving fundamental physical
particles which can be instantaneous and simultaneous.)
The second route sees us endorsing a primitive “span”
operator, an operator that picks out temporal intervals rather
than individual moments (cf. Lewis 2004: 12). Rather than try to
analyze the span in terms of slices, this approach sees us just
endorsing a span operator as a primitive piece of terminology. Berit
Brogaard (2007) introduces this strategy very neatly, as follows:
Where the usual slice operators mean (as the eternalist would put it)
“at some past (or future) moment”, a span operator means
“at some past (or future) interval” ([Lewis] 2004: 12).
Thus, where “it HAS been that” is the past-tense span
operator, Lewis suggests that we translate “there have been two
kings named Charles” as “it HAS been that (there are two
kings named Charles)”. By eternalist lights, this means that
“it is true of some interval in the past that there are two
kings named Charles” ([Lewis] 2004: 12). The presentist, of
course, cannot accept this translation, but must presumably treat span
operators as primitives. (2007: 73)
There are also problems with this route. First, it seems that such
span operators introduce ambiguities. Let’s introduce the span
operator “HAS” as the operator “it has been the case
that…” and consider a target sentence, “first it
was raining and then the sun shone”. Then, suppose that we
paraphrase this as: “HAS (it is raining and the sun is
shining)”. This is problematically ambiguous. The paraphrase
might mean that there has been an interval of time throughout which it
has both been the case that the sun has shone and it has rained. Or,
it might mean that there is an interval of time, throughout a
sub-interval of which the sun shone and throughout another
sub-interval of which it rained. Clearly, we want the latter; but with
HAS, at least as stated, we have no means of differentiating the two.
If the semantics of the span operator are ambiguous, then it
doesn’t give us a sensible semantics for span-talk.
As should be clear, merely solving the truth-maker objection
doesn’t automatically address this problem of spans. The
truth-maker objection rests upon the fact that presentists apparently
lack the ontological resources required to accommodate truth-making.
The span objection rests upon the fact that, given presentism, it is
far from clear how to provide an adequate regimentation of the
semantics of ordinary language. Bringing together an adequate
semantics as well as an adequate ontology is no easy task.
Next, we turn to an objection to presentism that concerns the idea
that time really passes. The challenge, put simply, is presentism
isn’t compatible with this feature of reality. This is a problem
since presentism is a view that requires that reality is dynamic
(i.e., not static) and that a change in what exists over time
that’s usually described in terms of the passage of time. (For
the purpose of this entry, we ignore general arguments to the
conclusion that time doesn’t really pass and, instead, focus on
specific challenges to presentism concerning passage.)
Why think that presentism isn’t compatible with temporal
passage? Well, begin with the fact that, typically, the passage of
time is expressed in the following terms: what’s future
approaches the present, becoming less future, and what’s past
recedes from the present, becoming more past. Prima facie,
there’s a problem. What’s apparently required for the
truth of this passage metaphor is inconsistent with presentism; the
view that only present things exist. There’s nothing that is
future and so nothing to approach the present. Nor is there anything
that is past and so nothing to recede from the present. Hence, if we
are to defend presentism then we have to suggest another way to
interpret the claim that time really passes.
One way to reinterpret the claim is as follows: there’s change
in what exists over time. Put another way: what’s present
changes. But it’s unclear whether this solves the problem or
shifts it down the road. What’s required in order to account for
the claim that “what”s present changes’? One might
reasonably suppose that in order to assert that what’s present
changes, from one moment to the next, we require a difference in the
character of successive moments. But there are no such successive
moments, given presentism. There’s only the present moment and
its contents.
In defense of presentism, we might insist that what exists
now is sufficient to account for the difference in character
of successive present moments. Some of the strategies used in reply to
objections concerning cross-time relations and, in particular, the
“truth-maker objection” (§§4–6) are useful
here. Consider, for example, ersatz presentists who posit abstract times, that is,
maximal consistent sets of tensed propositions that represent
how things are, but also how things were and will be, when the time is
present (when it’s “true”) (e.g., Markosian 2004; Bourne 2006; Crisp 2007). Ersatz presentism has the resources
to assert that things really change (and so time really passes);
there’s a difference between the character of successive
moments, given the manifold of ersatz times. How things are, at the
(concrete) present time, is different from how things were, as
represented by an abstract time. Indeed, it seems that any version of
presentism that posits presently existing entities to address worries
about cross-time relations, for instance, as putative “ontological
grounds” for truths about the past, can use such entities to
establish that there’s a difference between successive moments
without reifying any non-present things.
At this point, however, a new question arises. So understood,
presentism is giving us the resources to ground time’s passing,
at, and only at, the present time. That is, everything required to
establish that things change from one moment to the next must be
contained within a single moment, the present. But within such a
version of presentism, what guarantees that things
really change? Or, to approach the same point in a different
way, what in the metaphysics guarantees that the present resources
accurately reflect how things were—for example, why think that
the ersatz manifold accurately represents the past—when
there’s no connection to the past? Why can’t reality
consist of a single “frozen” slice of concrete time, along
with the various ersatz-times? If reality really is that way
(what’s concrete never changes and we have nothing more than a
frozen concrete instant against the backdrop of many ersatz times),
then we still have no temporal passage. What the presentist must do is
find some way of insisting that reality cannot be such; reality cannot
include but a single concrete slice coupled to truth-makers for talk
about the past and future, where those truthmakers cannot be said to
guarantee that things really change (compare with
the discussion of how truthmakers get the “right results”
from §6).
In preceding sections, we examined problems facing presentism that
come from metaphysical quarters. In particular, we looked at a problem
of “cross-temporal relations”
 (§4),
 and discussed two instances of that general problem, which pose
special problems for presentism (§§5–6), before
examining a related challenge concerning temporal passage. Now, though
there are many worries for presentism that come from metaphysics,
perhaps the most serious objection to presentism comes from physics.
In particular, the special theory of relativity (“STR”)
has been presented as in direct tension with presentism. [See the
entry on
 being and becoming in modern physics.]
Simon Saunders (2002) gives us a clear picture of how things
supposedly stand with respect to presentism and STR, as follows:
According to presentism, all that is physically real is the
present—a system of physical events all of which are
simultaneous with each other. No other events are real. Precisely what
this system of events may be, now, as I snap my fingers, may not be
known to me; but there is a fact of the matter as to what it is, and
it is a universal fact which embraces us all. It is an intersubjective
reality—now, as a snap my fingers—and it is a reality
which contains us only as an incidental part. But even if one knew all
that there is to know, consistent with special relativity, one would
not be able to say what this system of events might be. According to
presentism, therefore, special relativity is radically deficient as a
description of reality. It is blind to the sequencing of what is
physically real. (2002: 279–80)
A quick and dirty reply on behalf of presentism is to suggest that
metaphysics and science are, in some sense, demarcated disciplines.
That is, the findings of physics are of no relevance to our best
metaphysics (and vice versa). But this doesn’t seem to be a move
that we should make. Both metaphysician and physicist are, surely,
trying to uncover the structure of the world and to theorize about the
nature of reality (fundamental or otherwise). To ignore one another is
no way for protagonists to carry on, when both aim at the same basic
goal. Of course, this means that we must say something in reply to
Saunders and others, who raise the same sort of objection, for example,
Putnam (1967), Stein (1968, 1970), Savitt (1994, 2000), Sider (2001:
42–52), and Wüthrich (2013). But what can
be said?
Katherine Hawley (2006) suggests two routes: “Undermining”
or “Counterargument” (we introduce each in turn). Suppose
that, as seems to be the case in the debate concerning STR, we want to
argue that some metaphysics, posited by science, is false. That is,
the science, as it’s traditionally interpreted, delivers the
“wrong” metaphysics. There are options (though, as Hawley
notes, it seems likely that any genuine attempt to respond to the
objection from relativity may require a little of each). First,
“Undermining”:
This is the attempt to show that the scientific metaphysics is not
involved in generating novel prediction, and thus that its appearance
in a scientific theory does not give us reason to think it true.
(2006: 463)
As Hawley notes, there’s a second step to Undermining, since
merely establishing that the metaphysics implied by the traditional
interpretation of a scientific hypothesis isn’t essential to the
scientific theory, doesn’t establish that the metaphysics with
which we would seek to replace the scientific metaphysics is
preferable. We need to do more than show that the metaphysics implied
by traditional interpretation and the metaphysics that we prefer are
on a par. We need to show that the
“metaphysically-supported” metaphysics is on a stronger
footing than the “scientifically-supported”
metaphysics.
Undermining is a strategy that a number of metaphysicians have
plausibly looked to deploy, arguing that there are empirically
equivalent theories that differ with respect to metaphysical
commitments, but yield the same predictions. For instance, see Craig
(2001) and Markosian (2004); Zimmerman (2011) explores a range of
options.
Consider a case: if a rod, R, is traveling in direction d and
is observed by an observer, O, who is stationary with respect
to R, then R will appear to be length l. If,
however, O is in motion with respect to R, moving toward
it, then the length of R will appear, to O, to be less
than l. There are two competing explanations we might give, a
standard “space-time” interpretation, as well as a
“neo-Lorentzian” interpretation. As Balashov & Janssen
(2003) have it:
…the space-time interpretation and the neo-Lorentzian
interpretation provide constructive theory explanations. In the
space-time interpretation, the model is Minkowski space-time and
length contraction is explained by showing that two observers who are
in relative motion to one another and therefore use different sets of
space-time axes disagree about which cross section of the
“world-tube” of a physical system give the length of the
system. In the neo-Lorentzian interpretation, length contraction is
explained by a combination of dynamical effects of measurement. (2003:
331)
Now, to endorse this “Undermining” approach, we would have
to say that the neo-Lorentzian account is preferable to the space-time
account. And, problematically, that looks to be false. The problem is
as follows. There’s an explanatory advantage to treating length
contraction as explained by geometric features of space-time, rather
than by a dynamically occurring process. This, as we see below, will
require us to postulate an unexplained brute fact as to why length
contraction and time dilation appear in laws governing all matter.
Since unexplained coincidences, or treating certain facts as
“brute”, is suboptimal (particularly when, as Balashov
& Janssen argue (2003: 341–2), the space-time interpretation
offers a better explanation—one that does not treat Lorentz
invariance as brute or mysterious), so we ought to deny the
neo-Lorentzian interpretation of relativity.
Let’s try to get a better sense of this. What’s the brute
fact required of us? And why should we worry about it? Why should we
think that the neo-Lorentzian theory, which is acknowledged to be
empirically equivalent to STR (Balashov & Janssen 2003: 23;
Callender 2008: 52–53), offers an inferior explanation of both
length contraction and time dilation than does STR? Janssen (2002)
puts the point as follows:
For Einstein, the Lorentz-transformed quantities are the correctly
measured real quantities. In the final version of Lorentz’s
theory, measurements never reveal the real quantities because all
measurements are made with devices that are systematically distorted
and improperly synchronized as a result of their and the
observer’s motion through the ether. (2002: 429)
Thus, where for Lorentz, “Lorentz-invariance” is a product
of a law governing the dynamical behavior of entities in motion, for
Einstein, Lorentz-invariance is simply a product of the geometry of
space-time. As Balashov & Janssen go on to argue:
Compare the status of Lorentz invariance in the two interpretations.
In the former, Lorentz invariance reflects the structure of space-time
posited by the theory. In the latter, Lorentz invariance is a property
accidentally shared by all laws effectively governing systems in
Newtonian space and time…In the neo-Lorentzian interpretation
it is, in the final analysis, an unexplained coincidence that the laws
effectively governing different sorts of matter all share the property
of Lorentz invariance. (2003: 341)
So, here’s the detail of the objection. Lorentz’s theory
was born of Newtonian mechanics and Maxwellian electrodynamics
(Janssen 2002: 423): the latter incorporated electric and magnetic
fields, but made no pronouncements at all concerning other forms of
matter. Thus, although we can extend the Lorentzian theory to
all laws governing matter, we have no reason to do so. It just happens
to turn out that the laws governing matter all instantiate this
property. Craig Callender (2008) makes the point clearly, as
follows:
The matter fields are Lorentz invariant but the space-time is not. For
this reason, all else being equal, one ought to prefer the Einstein
Minkowski interpretation to the Lorentz interpretation. Positing
otherwise unnecessary unobservable structure—absolute
simultaneity—does violence to Ockham’s razor. (2008:
53)
Callender goes on to point out that once we grant that the Lorentz
interpretation is logically consistent and empirically adequate, the
question becomes, “[w]hat are a few lost explanatory virtues in
contrast to _______ (fill in the blank with whatever tenses
explain)?” (2008: 53). After all, we have to posit an
unobservable frame of reference and we don’t, typically, posit
unobservables without good reason. At the moment, we lack good reason,
unless we think that the motivations for presentism (e.g., those
described in
 §2)
 serve to persuade us that a neo-Lorentzian interpretation of the
physics of space-time is preferable to the space-time interpretation.
Undermining thus looks to be a difficult road to plough.
The second option that Hawley (2006) describes,
“Counterargument”, is as follows:
This alternative to Undermining accepts that the scientific
metaphysics is genuinely confirmed by the role it plays in generating
empirical success, but claims that independent reasons to believe the
traditional metaphysics outweigh this scientific support. (2006:
464)
Counterargument is bold in the extreme. It seems to require that we
simply overturn the best physics on the basis of metaphysical
arguments. Perhaps we could take this line (but it seems a very
challenging route. The arguments for presentism (those stated in
 §2,
 for instance) look somewhat underpowered when it comes to delivering
that result. The way in which counterarguers have typically tried to
proceed, then, is by giving independent motivations for rejecting the
special theory of relativity (both Crisp 2008 and Monton 2006 may be
read as doing this). Nonetheless, the orthodoxy remains strongly
opposed to this kind of approach.