Suppose you enter a farmers’ market, pick out a few cucumbers
and ask the merchant for the price. “Five dollars a
pound”. A bit expensive, you may think, but you pay. Before you
leave the stand two other people approach the seller with the very
same question (“How much are the cucumbers?”). “A
dollar a pound”, she says to the one; “Ten dollars a
pound”, she tells the other. At least two of you are likely to
attack the merchant with a simple question: Why the price discrepancy?
Of course, you may simply leave the place if you have a simple
explanation for the discrepancy (for example, that both you and the
person who was asked to pay ten dollars a pound belong to commonly
discriminated minorities). You may also conclude that the seller is
just out of her mind (or that she is just conducting a psychological
experiment). In all of these cases you will be entertaining an
explanation or reason for a fact that appears odd.
But what kinds of facts demand an explanation? Do all
facts—including the most ordinary ones—demand an
explanation? If you accept an unrestricted form of the Principle of
Sufficient Reason (= PSR), you will require an explanation for
any fact, or in other words, you will reject the possibility
of any brute, or unexplainable, facts.
A simple formulation of the principle is as follows:
The term “fact” in the above formulation is not intended
to express any commitment to an ontology of facts. Still, if one
wishes to avoid such connotations, the principle can be formulated
more schematically:
The PSR is, in fact, a family of principles which are
generated by various restrictions of (2), and by ascriptions of
different degrees of modal strength to (2). To begin with, variants of
the PSR may differ according to how they restrict the kinds of
things that require a reason (the explananda). Thus, one might
restrict the PSR to only actual entities, or include possibilia as
well. Alternatively, one might formulate the PSR as requiring a
sufficient reason for every (true) proposition or as pertaining to
entities and their properties. A variant of the PSR restricted to
entities might require an explanation for the existence and
non-existence of entities, or it might be further restricted by
requiring a reason only for the existence (or only for the
non-existence) of entities. A version of the PSR that is restricted to
propositions might range over both contingent and necessary
propositions, or it might be further restricted to only one of these
sub-domains.
Similarly, different versions of the PSR issue from various ways of
restricting the kinds of things that count as providing a
reason (the explanantia). It is likely (though not necessary)
that one’s decision about the kinds of explananda that fall
under the range of the PSR will determine the kinds of things counted
as explanantia.
Variants of the PSR may be generated not only by placing restrictions
on the relata at stake (both the explananda and the explanantia), but
also on the notion of the relation at stake. Frequently, the relation
of providing a reason is conceived as irreflexive, antisymmetric and
transitive, though each of these characteristics may be, and indeed
have been, challenged. The relation of providing a reason can be
conceived as an ontological relation (as in contemporary discussions
of ground), or as a purely epistemological relation.
A modally strong version of the PSR will take the Principle as
necessary and obtaining in all possible worlds, while a weak modal
version will present the Principle as merely contingently true.
Another distinction can be drawn between a factive, as
opposed to merely regulative, version of the Principle. A
regulative version of the PSR would consider it as a condition for
intelligibility (on a par with the Law of Non-Contradiction) and
thus as guiding our studying of nature. The factive version simply
states that the Principle is true in actuality (or even in all
possible worlds). The regulative and the factive versions differ in
terms of allowing for the falsification of the principle. The factive
version could be easily refuted by a single counter-example. A
proponent of the regulative variant of the PSR would argue that an
empirical falsification of the PSR makes as little sense as an
empirical falsification of the Law of Non-Contradiction.  Encountering
a fact which seems to have no explanation, the proponent of
the regulative variant would respond by insisting that we must keep
searching for an explanation.
A proponent of the unrestricted version of the PSR could argue
that one’s choice of a specific variant of the PSR cannot be
arbitrary, on pain of inconsistency (i.e., one must provide a reason
why to prefer one variant over others). Relying on this last point,
she may further contend that in the absence of compelling reasons to
the contrary, the unrestricted version of the Principle should be
considered as default.
One of the most interesting questions regarding the PSR is why accept
it at all. Insofar as the PSR stipulates that all things must be
explainable, it seems that the PSR itself demands an explanation.
Several modern philosophers attempted to provide a proof for the PSR,
though so far these attempts have been mostly unsuccessful. Another
important question related to the PSR is the possibility of
self-explanatory facts and self-caused entities; particularly, one
might wonder how these are distinguished from unexplainable, brute
facts and uncaused entities. One might also wonder whether the PSR
allows for any primitive concepts that cannot be further
explained.
A third crucial problem for proponents of the PSR is how to address
the Agrippan Trilemma between the apparently exhaustive three horns
of: (i) acceptance of brute facts, (ii) acceptance of an infinite
regress of explanation (or grounding), or (iii) acceptance of
self-explanatory facts. Prima facie, each horn in the
trilemma undermines the position of the proponent of the PSR.
Finally, the proponent of the PSR faces intriguing problems in
addressing perfectly symmetrical states. We have seen that some
variants of the PSR require an explanation for the existence of
things (thus, assuming nonexistence as a “default”
state requiring no explanation), while other variants require an
explanation for both the existence and nonexistence of
things. Let us look quickly at the latter
(“default”-free) variant. Specifically, we might wonder
how a proponent of the “default”-free variant of the PSR
would respond to a situation in which we have neither a reason for the
existence of x, nor have a reason for the non-existence of
x? A proponent of the PSR might indeed respond by denying the
possibility of such a scenario (given the PSR and bivalence). A similar dilemma might be
raised with regard to issues of identity: given the absence of a
reason for the identity of x and y, as well as for
their non-identity, should we assume either identity or non-identity
as a default
 position?[1]
With these general considerations in place, let us examine the
historical role that the Principle has played. The term
“Principle of Sufficient Reason [principe de raison
suffisante/principium reddendae rationis]” was coined by
Leibniz, though Spinoza is thought by many scholars to have preceded
Leibniz in appreciating the importance of the Principle and placing it
at the center of his philosophical
 system.[2]
 The Principle seems at first sight to have a strong intuitive
appeal—we always ask for explanations—yet it is taken by
many to be too bold and expensive due to the radical implications it
seems to yield. Among the alleged consequences of the Principle are:
the Identity of Indiscernibles, necessitarianism, the relativity of
space and time, the existence of a self-necessitated Being (i.e.,
God), and the Principle of Plenitude.
Though there are several important precursors who, as we will see,
seem to advocate variants of the PSR before the modern period, we will
begin our discussion with the two main expositors of the Principle:
Spinoza and Leibniz.
Spinoza’s earliest statement of the PSR appears in his first
published work, the 1663 geometrical exposition of Descartes’
Principles of Philosophy. The eleventh axiom of Part I of the
book states:
Nothing exists of which it cannot be asked, what is the cause (or
reason) [causa (sive ratio)], why it exists.
In a brief explanatory note to this axiom, Spinoza adds:
Since existing is something positive, we cannot say that it has
nothing as its cause (by Axiom 7). Therefore, we must assign some
positive cause, or reason, why [a thing] exists—either an
external one, i.e., one outside the thing itself, or an internal one,
one comprehended in the nature and definition of the existing thing
itself. (Geb.
 I/158/4–9)[3]
Axiom 7, to which Spinoza appeals in the explanation, is a variant of
the “ex nihilo, nihil fit” (“from nothing,
nothing comes”) principle, and stipulates that an existing thing
and its perfections (or qualities) cannot have nothing or a
non-existing thing as their cause. Interestingly, however, in another
work from this early period of his philosophical writing, the
Treatise on the Emendation of the Intellect, Spinoza allows
for one unique item to be without a cause. In §70 of this
treatise, Spinoza argues:
[T]hat Thought is also called true which involves objectively the
essence of some principle that does not have a cause, and is
known through itself and in itself. (II/26/33–4. Our
emphasis)
It is not completely clear what “the principle
[principium]” at stake is, but given its qualification
as “known through itself and in itself”, it may refer to
God and indicate Spinoza’s understanding of Descartes’
rather nuanced view—in his Second Set of Replies—according
to which God does not need a cause in order to exist, but
there is a reason why God does not need a cause (AT VII:
164–65; cf. Carraud 2002: Ch.
 2).[4]
Spinoza does not mention the PSR in his 1670 Theological Political
Treatise (TTP), though the spirit of the Principle can be easily
discerned throughout the book. For example, in the conclusion of the
Fifteenth Chapter of the TTP Spinoza makes the following extraordinary
announcement:
[W]hat altar of refuge can a man find for himself when he commits
treason against the majesty of reason. (III/188)
There is much to be said about this image of reason, which ascribes to
reason the same exhaustiveness, dominance, and omnipresence that
traditional theologies ascribe to God. This passage leaves no room for
anything that is beyond, or against, reason.
The closest that Spinoza comes in the TTP to endorsing the PSR is in
his discussion of miracles. Let us have a close look at the following
passage:
But since miracles have occurred according to the power of
understanding of the common people, who were, in fact, completely
ignorant of the principles of natural things, it is certain that the
ancients took for a miracle what they could not explain in the way the
common people are accustomed to explain natural things, viz. by
falling back on memory to recall some other similar thing they are
accustomed to imagine without wonder. For the common people think
they understand a thing well enough when they do not wonder at
it. (III/84/5–11. Our emphasis)
What precisely went wrong in the vulgus’ attempt (and
failure) to explain miracles? Obviously they erred, according to
Spinoza, because they were “completely ignorant of the
principles of natural things”; but why did they stay ignorant in
spite of their genuine attempt to trace the causes of miracles? Why
did they not look for the natural explanations of miracles? The
vulgus were definitely not wrong in trying to find a causal
explanation for miracles; Spinoza openly argues that we ought to try
to explain things through their proximate causes. What went wrong in
the method of the “common people” was that they did not go
far enough in their attempt to explain the nature of things.
Instead of stubbornly seeking the complete causal chain for each fact,
they felt content once an extraordinary fact was shown to be the
result of a familiar phenomenon—that does not entice
wonder—while paying no attention to the need to explain the
familiar. In a way, they were rudimentary common-sense philosophers
who asked for an explanation for what appears to be against common
sense, and were completely reassured once the unfamiliar turned out to
be a result of the common. For Spinoza, our familiarity with a
phenomenon does not render it intelligible, and the familiar, just
like the extraordinary, demands a clear causal explanation. Indeed, it
is precisely at this point that the thoroughness of one’s
commitment to the Principle of Sufficient Reason is tested. Few people
would deny the need to explain unusual phenomena (e.g., flying
hippos), but fewer would demand an explanation for what is common and
ordinary (e.g., time), and it is precisely here where the task of the
philosopher begins, first in making us de-familiarize ourselves with,
and question the nature of, the ordinary, and then in attempting to
explain it.
In Spinoza’s major work, the Ethics, the PSR is stated
implicitly already by the second axiom of Part I:
E1a2: What cannot be conceived [concipi] through another,
must be conceived through itself.
The immediate implication of E1a2 is that everything is
 conceived.[5]
 Since, for Spinoza, to conceive something is to explain it (see
E1p10s, E1p14d and Della Rocca 2008: 5) it seems that E1a2 amounts to
the claim that everything is explainable. Some commentators have also
seen the PSR encoded in E1a3:
From a given determinate cause the effect follows necessarily; and
conversely, if there is no determinate cause, it is impossible for an
effect to follow.
If we interpret “effect” narrowly as something with a
cause, then the second clause is trivial. If we interpret it more
broadly as anything that exists, obtains, happens (or whatever the
relata of causation are taken to be) has a cause, then the second
clause contains a statement of a version of the PSR: everything has a
cause (Lin forthcoming).
In E1p11d2, Spinoza states explicitly a variant of the PSR: “For
each thing there must be assigned a cause, or reason, both
for its existence and for its nonexistence”. Similarly, in
E1p8s2, Spinoza argues, “if a certain number of individuals
exists, there must be a cause why those individuals, and why neither
more nor fewer, exist”. Spinoza’s insistence that even the
non-existence of things must be explainable is crucial. It
allows him, for example, to argue that were God not to exist, his
non-existence must be explainable. Since God is a substance, Spinoza
argues, his existence or non-existence cannot be caused or explained
externally (Spinoza takes substances to be causally independent of
each other); hence, were God not to exist, he would have to be the
cause of his non-existence, just as a square-circle is the cause of
its non-existence. But since God is not a contradictory entity, He
cannot internally rule out His own existence, and hence He must exist
(E1p11d).
Spinoza accepts a very strong version of the PSR. According to some
readings, he grants the PSR unlimited extension, and takes it to be
necessary. In fact, the PSR seems to be the primary motivation behind
Spinoza’s strict necessitarianism. For Spinoza, if there are two
(or more) possible worlds, it would seem that neither one would have a
sufficient reason or cause (for if there were such a
sufficient reason, this world would be necessitated, and all other
worlds would be impossible). In other words, for Spinoza, the PSR
dictates that there is only one possible world (see Della Rocca 2008:
69–78, and Lin 2011: 23–25. Occasionally, however,
Spinoza’s endorsement of the PSR is in tension with other
principles of his metaphysics, such as the priority of the infinite
(see Melamed 2012b and Melamed 2013a: xvii).
Spinoza holds not only that the existence of things must be
explained, but also that the coherence, or incoherence, of their
essences (what others would call their possibility) must be
explained (E1p33s1). Similarly, the essences of things must also have
a cause (E1p25). In general, many commentators have thought that
Spinoza relies, either explicitly or implicitly on the PSR to motivate
many of his most important and innovative doctrines, such as the
Identity of Indiscernibles (E1p4. Although see Lin
forthcoming for a dissenting view), substance monism (E1p11
and E1p14), and the rejection of free will (E1p32 and
E2pp48–49). In E1p21d Spinoza relies on the PSR to infer a bold
causal principle: a simple cause has one, and only one, simple effect.
Had the cause more than one effect, the difference between the two
effects would be unexplainable insofar as each effect is supposed to
be fully explained by the same cause. Thus, if we experience a cause
bringing about more than one effect, we should conclude that that the
cause was not simple, but comprised of parts (so that the different
parts contributed to the causation of the different effects. See
Melamed 2013a: 117–119, and Melamed 2013b: 212–213.
Recently, Michael Della Rocca argued not only that the PSR
“provide[s] the key to unlocking many of the mysteries of
Spinoza’s philosophical system” (2008: 9), but that
Spinoza requires the reduction of the most basic
philosophical concepts to reason or intelligibility. This alleged
“double use of the PSR” stipulates (1) that everything
must be explainable, and (2) that it should be (ultimately) explained
in terms of intelligibility. Hence, according to Della Rocca, Spinoza
reduces his major philosophical concepts—existence, causation,
rightness, and power—to intelligibility (2008: 8–9). While
this is a fascinating and bold reading of Spinoza’s metaphysics,
it seems to contradict his crucial doctrine of the causal and
conceptual barrier between the attributes (E1p10 and E2p6). The
reduction of any non-Thought item to intelligibility (presumably, a
feature of the attribute of
 thought[6])
 undermines the barrier between the attributes, and with it the entire
edifice of Spinoza’s ontology (see Della Rocca 2012:
12–16; Melamed 2012a; and Melamed 2013a: xv and 196 n. 84).
How would Spinoza respond to the Agrippan Trilemma? Clearly Spinoza is
unsympathetic to any acceptance of brute facts. Yet he allows for
some, restricted cases of self-explanation and infinite regress of
explanation. Let us take a brief look at these two issues.
Spinoza begins the Ethics with the definitions of causa
sui (E1d1), and of substance as that which “is conceived
through itself” (E1d3). Positing these reflexive definitions at
the outset might have been a calculated methodological move whose aim
was to bypass the challenging task of proving the legitimacy of these
notions. But since Spinoza considers his definitions as not merely
stipulative (see TIE §95 and Ep. 60), we may well ask for a
defense of the legitimacy of self-explanations.
The class of truths that Spinoza considers as self-explanatory are
truths that follow merely from the essence or—what is
the same—the nature of a thing. In E1p11d, Spinoza provides two
examples of self-explanation: 
[T]he very nature of a square circle indicates the reason why it does
not exist, viz. because it involves a contradiction…, the
reason why a substance exists also follows from its nature alone,
because it involves existence. 
In contrast, claims Spinoza, the existence (as well as the
non-existence) of a triangle (or any other thing that is not a
substance) do no follow merely from the essence of the
triangle: 
The reason why a circle or triangle exists, or why it does not exist,
does not follow from the nature of these things, but from the order of
the whole of corporeal Nature. (E1p11d). 
Thus, consider the following three propositions: (i) The triangle has
three angles, (ii) The substance exists, and (iii) The triangle
exists. Proposition (i) is clearly self-explanatory, since the essence
of the triangle (which contains the nature of the number three and the
nature of an angle) is the sufficient reason for its having three angles
(adding any other information is of no explanatory value). Spinoza
considers proposition (ii) as self-explanatory as well. Notice that
Spinoza does not define substance (in E1d3) as existing by virtue of
its essence, but rather derives this claim from the definition of
substance (in E1p7). In contrast to (i) and (ii), the existence of a
triangle does not follow merely from its essence (since it is caused
by entities external to the triangle, and therefore has to be
explained through these external causes).
Let us turn now to the question of the legitimacy of infinite regress.
In E1p28, Spinoza openly states that within each attribute there is an
infinite causal chain of finite modes:
Every singular thing, or any thing which is finite and has a
determinate existence, can neither exist nor be determined to produce
an effect unless it is determined to exist and produce an effect by
another cause, which is also finite and has a determinate existence;
and again, this cause also can neither exist nor be determined to
produce an effect unless it is determined to exist and produce an
effect by another, which is also finite and has a determinate
existence, and so on, to infinity. [Italics added]
Each link in this causal chain is preceded by infinitely many causes
and is followed by infinitely many effects. Each link also provides at
least part of the explanation for the existence of the
following link. Is the existence of such an infinite regress
consistent with the PSR? Spinoza has no qualms about answering this
question in the positive. We may legitimately ask what is the cause of
each link in the chain, and the answer would be: the preceding link.
Spinoza also thinks that we may—indeed, should—ask what is
the cause, or reason, for the existence of the entire infinite
chain? He simply thinks that he can provide a clear answer to the
latter question as well: God (or the being which is the ground of its
own existence). Consider the following passage from Spinoza’s
celebrated “Letter on the Infinite” in which he criticizes
proofs of the existence of God which rely on the impossibility of an
actual infinity of causes and effects.
In passing I should like to note here that the more recent
Peripatetics have, as I think, misunderstood the demonstration by
which the Ancients tried to prove God’s existence. For as I find
it in a certain Jew, called Rab Chasdai, it runs as follows: if
there is an infinite regress of causes, then all things that
are will also have been caused; but it does not pertain to anything
which has been caused, to exist necessarily by the force of its own
nature; therefore, there is nothing in Nature to whose essence it
pertains to exist necessarily; but the latter is absurd; therefore,
the former is also. Hence the force of this argument does not lie
in the impossibility of there being an actual infinite or an infinite
regress of causes, but only in the supposition that things which do
not exist necessarily by their own nature are not determined to exist
by a thing which does necessarily exist by its own nature. [Ep.
12| IV/61/15–62/10; italics added]
In this passage, Spinoza follows the late medieval Jewish philosopher
Hasdai Crescas in rejecting the Aristotelian ban on actual infinity
(see Melamed 2014). For Spinoza (and Crescas) the existence of an
infinite regress of causes is perfectly legitimate. Yet, if all the
items in this infinite chain are contingent beings (i.e.,
“things which do not exist necessarily by their own
 nature”[7]),
 the chain itself remains a contingent being, and there must be a reason
which explains its instantiation in reality. The ultimate reason for
the instantiation of such an infinite chain of contingent beings must,
claims Spinoza, be a being whose existence is not contingent (for
otherwise, the chain will remain merely contingent and its
instantiation in reality would not be sufficiently explained). Thus,
Spinoza allows for an infinite regress of causes (or explanations) as
long as the entire infinite chain is grounded in a 
being which exists by virtue of its mere essence.
No philosopher is more closely associated with the PSR than Gottfried
Wilhelm Leibniz (1646–1716). He was the first to call it by name
and, arguably, the first to formulate it with full generality. His
treatment of the PSR is also noteworthy for its systematicity and the
centrality that he accords it.
Leibniz often presents it, along with the Principle of Contradiction,
as a principle of “reasoning”. For example, in the
Monadology he writes:
31. Our reasonings are based on two great principles, that of
contradiction, in virtue of which we judge that which involves a
contradiction to be false, and that which is opposed or contradictory
to the false to be true.
32. And that of sufficient reason, by virtue of which we consider that
we can find no true or existent fact, no true assertion, without there
being a sufficient reason why it is thus and not otherwise, although
most of the time these reasons cannot be known to us. (G VI, 612/L
646)
These principles are characterized in what appears to be epistemic
terms. They are principles of “our reasoning”. They
concern what we “judge” or “find”. And yet it
is clear that Leibniz intends them to have metaphysical as well as
epistemic import. In the case of the PSR, this will become more
evident when we discuss how Leibniz understands the notion of a
sufficient reason but it is already indicated in the passage quoted
above by the fact that Leibniz explicitly states that there are
sufficient reasons for every truth or fact even if such reasons are
unknowable by us.
The scope of the PSR, as stated above, includes facts and truths.
Leibniz sometimes, however, characterizes the scope of the principle
in different terms. For example, he writes:
[T]he principle of sufficient reason, namely, that nothing
happens without a reason. (G VII 355; LC L2; AG 321, our
emphasis)
The PSR is here said to apply to what “happens”. This
suggests a version of the PSR that applies not to truths or facts but
rather events: Every event has a sufficient reason.
These vacillations in the formulation of the PSR are not typically
taken to register indecision on Leibniz’s part as to the scope
of the PSR. Rather they are usually understood as indicating that
Leibniz views the scope of the PSR to be very wide, perhaps even
absolutely general, but at least wide enough to encompass facts,
truths, and events (see Rodriguez-Pererya forthcoming).
Leibniz associates the Principle of Contradiction and the PSR with a
variety of domains where each is especially important. For example,
there are domains where the truths of the domain depend on
one of the two principles. These domains are characterized modally:
The Principle of Contradiction rules over the domain of necessary
truths and the PSR rules over the domain of contingent truths (A 6 4
1616/MP 75; G VII 355–56/LC 15–16).
There are also domains that are characterized in terms of subject
matter or areas of inquiry. The Principle of Contradiction allows us
to study mathematics, whereas the PSR allows us to study metaphysics,
natural theology, and physics (G VII, 355–6; LC L2; AG 321). It
is far from obvious that these two ways of assigning domains to the
Principles are equivalent. For example, it would be natural to assume
that metaphysics and natural theology would include necessary
propositions and thus the PSR would encroach upon the territory
assigned to the Principle of Contradiction according to the modal
characterization.
We must therefore distinguish distinct ways of associating the
principles with various domains. The first way is to specify the
domain to which each principle applies. Leibniz appears to
believe that, according to this approach, there is a single universal
domain and it is associated equally with each principle. There are no
contradictory contingent facts or truths and so the Principle of
Noncontradiction applies to all contingent truths as well as
all necessary truths. Likewise, it is usually assumed that, for
Leibniz, every necessary truth has a sufficient reason (see Broad
1975: 12 and 34 and Rodriguez-Pererya forthcoming). For
example, mathematical truths, might have sufficient reasons in the
form of proofs that rest on statements of identity. Thus the PSR
applies to all necessary truths as well as all contingent
truths.
The second way of associating the principles with specific domains is
to specify the domain of truths that is grounded on or
depends on each principle. According to Leibniz, only
contingent truths depend on and are grounded by the PSR. Likewise,
Leibniz believes that only necessary truths depend on and are grounded
by the Principle of Contradiction. What does it mean for some truths
to depend on a principle? Leibniz is not explicit on this
point but we will get a better idea in the next section when we
consider the question of what counts as a sufficient reason.
The third way is to specify a domain of truths that can be
investigated on the basis of each principle. For Leibniz, we
can know mathematical truths only on the basis of the Principle of
Contradiction and only metaphysical, theological, and physical truths
require the PSR in order to be known. We will see in more detail in
what way the PSR allows us to investigate these domains the section on
applications.
When Leibniz insists that every truth or fact requires a sufficient
reason, what does he mean by “sufficient reason?” In some
texts he suggests that sufficient reason is an “a
priori proof”. This should not be understood in Kantian
terms as a proof that doesn’t require any input from sense
experience. Rather, Leibniz uses the term “a
priori” in its original pre-Kantian meaning, which means an
argument from causes to effects. An a priori proof is a proof
that reflects the causal order. Thus a sufficient reason would be a
proof that is both a demonstration and an explanation (see Adams 1994:
109).
In order to fully understand Leibniz’s conception of a
sufficient reason, we need to also understand his theory of truth and
its relationship to his theory of modality. Let us begin with truth.
To keep things simple, we will focus only on categorical propositions
of subject-predicate form. A proposition is true, according to
Leibniz, just in case the concept of the predicate is contained in the
concept of the subject. Uncontroversially, the concept of the
predicate is unmarried is contained in the concept
bachelor and it is this conceptual containment which explains
the truth of the statement bachelors are unmarried. But
Leibniz makes the further highly controversial claim that all
true statements are true for this reason, even statements like
Caesar crossed the Rubicon. That is, this statement is true
because the concept crossed the Rubicon is contained in the
concept of Caesar. This theory of truth is sometimes called the
conceptual containment theory of truth. It has as a
consequence that all truths are analytic. But wouldn’t such a
theory entail that all truths are necessary? After all, how could an
analytic truth be contingent?
In response to this worry, Leibniz develops an account of contingency
in terms of infinite
 analysis.[8]
 Leibniz understands analysis as the process of replacing the terms of
a proposition with definitions or partial definitions. A demonstration
results when an identity is obtained through the process of analysis
in a finite number of steps. Leibniz claims that all and only
necessary truths have a finite demonstration by analysis and all and
only contingent truths do not have a demonstration by analysis in a
finite number of steps. In this way, he preserves the distinction
between necessary and contingent truths while also maintaining that
all truths are analytic, that is, true in virtue of the meaning of the
concepts involved.
This has led some commenters to think that Leibniz gave up the account
of sufficient reason as an a priori proof. If there were a
proof or demonstration, it would reveal that the concept of the
predicate was contained in the concept of the subject in a finite
number of steps and hence every proposition would be necessary.
Leibniz is not a necessitarian in his mature philosophy and thus he
could not have accepted this consequence. Instead, he must have
shifted from the conception of a sufficient reason as an a
priori proof to that of an a priori proof sequence,
where the latter notion is understood as an analysis that converges on
an identity without reaching it in a finite number of steps (see
Sleigh 1983: 200). What it means for an analysis to converge on an
identity is, unfortunately, obscure. Nevertheless, there is some clear
sense in which every contingent truth has a sufficient reason on this
understanding. The sufficient reason why it is true that Caesar
crossed the Rubicon, for example, is that the concept crossing the
Rubicon is contained in the concept Caesar. The truth of
the proposition obtains in virtue of the concepts of the subject and
the predicate. Of course, this reason is undiscoverable by any finite
human mind because it is buried too deeply in the concept of Caesar.
Only God, in his omniscience sees the conceptual connection between
them. It is enough for there to be such a connection for there be a
sufficient reason.
Such a conception of the nature of a sufficient reason have lead some
commentators to think that for Leibniz the PSR is a logical notion or
that it is a metaphysical notion that is ultimately reducible to logic
(Couturat 1901: 123ff and Russell 1937: v). But the notion of a
sufficient reason as a non-terminating proof sequence is not the only
conception of a sufficient reason to be found in Leibniz. And other
conceptions have a decidedly less logical and more metaphysical
flavor.
One such characterization of a sufficient reason comes from
Leibniz’s conviction that in order to preserve the notion of
causal activity, without which substances are not really
substances—i.e., truly fundamental building blocks of
reality—philosophy must revive something like the ancient
Aristotelian notion of a substantial form (see the discussion in the
entry on
 Aristotle’s Metaphysics).
 Each genuine substance, for Leibniz, has what he calls a
“primitive active force”. This force is the nature or
essence of the substance. Now according to Leibniz, substances do not
causally interact with one another (see the entry
 Leibniz on causation).
 The changes that they undergo derive solely from their own natures or
primitive active force, which consequently determines the whole of its
history. Many texts suggest that, for Leibniz, the sufficient reason
for any state of a substance is its primitive active force (NE
65–6; T 400/G VI, 354; Mon. 18/G VI, 609–610; G IV, 507; G
III, 72).
In many ways primitive active force plays the role of the concept of
the subject in the logical version of the PSR. Just as on the logical
version the PSR that a is F is explained by the fact
that the concept of F-ness is in the concept of a,
so too on the metaphysical version of the PSR fact that a is
F is explained by the primitive active force of a
that determines it to be F. Whereas commentators such as
Couturat and Russell emphasize the logical notion of a sufficient
reason to the detriment of the metaphysical notion, other commentators
see the logical and the metaphysical as two equally fundamental
presentations of the same datum (see Frankel 1994).
Another metaphysical characterization of a sufficient reason connects
with the Principle of the Best, which says that for any proposition
p, p is true just in case p holds in the
best possible world (G VI.448/DM 22; Mon. 46, 53, 54/G VI,
614–616). Is the Principle of the Best a supplement to the PSR
or a rival to the PSR? It is, in fact, a consequence of the PSR in
conjunction with three additional assumptions: (1) the sufficient
reason for every choice is that the chooser perceives it to the best;
(2) God chooses the actual world; (3) God perceives something to be
what is best just in case it is the best.
In some texts, Leibniz suggests that the sufficient reason for
contingent truths cannot be found in the concepts or natures of
things. We must instead look to the Principle of the Best (Mon.
36–38/G VI, 613). In other words the sufficient reason for any
contingent proposition of the form “a is
F” is that a is F is true in the best
possible word. This appears to be an entirely different sort of reason
than the fact that “a is F” is analytic
or that the nature of a determines that it is F.
Those reasons are to be found internal to the concept of the subject
or the nature of the substance. Reasons that advert to the Principle
of the Best look outside the concept of the subject or the nature of
the substance and make comparisons between worlds in terms of their
relative perfections. It is possible that Leibniz thought that these
different conceptions of sufficient reasons were equivalent but that
they are so is far from obvious.
Leibniz argues for the PSR in three distinct ways: (1) from the
concept of a sufficient reason and the concept of a
“requisite”; (2) from his theory of truth; and (3)
inductively.
In some texts, Leibniz argues that the PSR is a conceptual truth that
is derivable from the concepts of a sufficient reason and the concept
of a requisite (A VI, ii, 483; see also G VII 393, LC L5.18; A
VI.iii.133). The concept of a requisite is that of a necessary
condition. In this context, Leibniz defines a sufficient reason as a
sufficient condition. If something exists, then all of its requisites
have been posited. Leibniz then asserts that if all of a things
requisites have been posited, then it exists. Thus all of a
thing’s requisites are a thing’s sufficient reason. The
question-begging assumption is that all the necessary conditions for
something to exist are jointly sufficient for it to exist. Anybody who
denies the PSR will not agree with this assumption and it is clearly
not encoded in the definitions of requisite and
sufficient reason provided by Leibniz.
In other texts, Leibniz argues that the PSR follows from the
conceptual containment theory of truth (A VI.iv.1645/L 268). Every
truth is such that the concept of the predicate is contained the
concept of the subject. This conceptual connection is the sufficient
reason for the truth. Thus every truth has a sufficient reason.
It is worth noting that Leibniz believed the PSR before he developed
his conceptual containment Theory of Truth. In fact, the PSR is one of
Leibniz’s earliest and most stable philosophical commitments
(see, for example, Leibniz’s 1671 letter to Wedderkopf A
II.ii.117f/L146). This observation has led some scholars to conclude
that rather than deriving the PSR from the conceptual containment
theory of truth, Leibniz was in fact led to the conceptual containment
theory from his antecedent commitment to the PSR. The conceptual
containment theory explains how there could be a sufficient reason for
every truth by guaranteeing that there will be an explanation in terms
of conceptual relations (see Adams 1994: 69).
In his Fifth paper to Clarke, Leibniz argues for the PSR inductively.
He says that there are many cases where a fact has a sufficient reason
and no cases where fact is known not to have a sufficient reason. He
then says that it is reasonable to assume that the PSR holds in all
cases where we do not know that sufficient reason. Leibniz describes
this as “the method of experimental philosophy, which proceeds
a posteriori” (G VII 420; LC, L5.129).
Leibniz says that PSR is needed if we are to go beyond mathematics to
metaphysics and natural science. How does the PSR help in those
domains of inquiry? There is a general pattern of argument that
Leibniz uses to establish conclusions using the PSR. First he assumes
the falsity of what he wants to prove. Call the proposition to be
proved p. Then he tries to show that if p were
false, there would be some fact or truth for which there was no
sufficient reason. But by the PSR, there is no fact or truth.
Therefore, p is true. Leibniz uses this template to argue for
a number of claims, including the identity of indiscernibles,
relationalism with respect to space and time, and the existence of
God. Let us briefly look at how Leibniz uses the PSR to argue for each
of these theses.
Leibniz presents arguments for the existence of God from the PSR in a
number of different places (for example, The Ultimate Origination
of Things, G VII 302–3; L 486–8. Monadology
§37). Suppose that God does not exist. If God does not exist,
then the only things that exist are contingent beings. Would the
entire series of contingent things have an explanation? The
explanation of the entire series cannot be a member of the series
since then it would explain itself and no contingent thing is
self-explanatory. But the explanation cannot be outside of the series
because we have assumed that there is no non-contingent being, i.e.,
God. Thus if God did not exist, there would be something unexplained:
the series of contingent beings. Everything has an explanation.
Therefore God exists.
Leibniz also thinks that the PSR rules out the possibility that there
could be two or more indistinguishable, that is, indiscernible, things
(A VI, iv, 1541/AG 42). If there were two such things, God would have
treated them differently insofar as he has related them differently to
the rest of the world. For example, if there were two blades of grass
that were indiscernible from each other, then one blade would stand in
spatial and temporal relation \(R\) to the rest of the world, whereas
the other blade would stand in some other spatial and temporal
relation \(R'\) to the rest of the world. Why did God choose to put
the first blade relation \(R\) to the rest of the world instead of
\(R'\)? Leibniz claims that since they are indiscernible from each
other, there could be no reason for God to treat them
differently. Thus if there were two indiscernible individuals, then
God would have acted for no reason. But there is a reason for
everything. So, there are no indiscernible yet numerically distinct
things.
For similar reasons, Leibniz thinks that space and time cannot be
substances or anything else absolute and must ultimately be a system
of relations that obtain between bodies (e.g., LC, L, 3.5). This is
because if space, for example, were absolute, then there would be
space points that were indiscernible from one another. God would treat
these space points differently from each other insofar as he orients
his creation in space one way rather than another. This would have to
be an arbitrary decision for the reasons outlined above. So, space and
time are not absolute (see Lin 2011).
The PSR is nearly as old as philosophy itself. Anaximander, one of the
earliest of the pre-Socratics, is usually credited—on the basis
of Aristotle’s de Caelo, (b12
295b10–16)—with being the first to make use of it.
Anaximander argues, we are told, that the Earth remains stationary in
space because it is indifferent between motions in any direction. This
indifference means that there is no reason why it should move in one
direction rather than another. Since he concludes from this that it
does not move, we can assume that Anaximander believes that motion in
the absence of a reason is impossible.
Parmenides, another pre-Socratic, implicitly appeals to the PSR when
he claims that the world cannot have come into existence because then
it would have come from nothing (Fragment B8 9–10). Nothing
comes from nothing. If it did, Parmenides asks, why did it not come
into existence at an earlier or a later time? Parmenides appears to
reason as follows. If the world came into existence, the actual moment
that it came into existence would be arbitrary. It would be a brute
fact. There are no brute facts (the PSR). So, the world did not come
into existence.
Another ancient source for the PSR is Archimedes who writes: 
Equal weights at equal distances are in equilibrium, and equal weights
at unequal distances are not in equilibrium but incline towards the
weight which is at the greater distance (On the Equilibrium of Planes, 189). 
This is a special case of the PSR and is cited by Leibniz in his
correspondence with Clarke as a precedent for the PSR.
In the medieval period, Peter Abelard argued that God must create the
best of all possible worlds. If he didn’t, Abelard argues, there
would have to be some reason for it. But what reason could that be
except God’s injustice or jealousy? But God cannot be unjust or
jealous. So there is no possible reason for God making anything less
than the best. Everything has a reason. Thus God makes the best
possible world (McCallum 1948, 93). Abelard’s opinion was rejected as heresy and
mainstream opinion of philosophers during the Middle Ages appears to
reject the PSR. God, on the mainstream medieval view, enjoys freedom
of indifference with respect to his creation. Thus there is no
sufficient reason for why God created what he did and the PSR slips
from prominence until its early modern revival at the hands of Spinoza
and Leibniz.
Some great epistemological rationalists, such as Plato and Descartes,
appear to endorse the PSR but in fact do not. For example, in the
Timaeus Plato writes, 
[E]verything that comes to be must of necessity come to be by the
agency of some cause, for it is impossible for anything to come to be
without a cause. (28a4–5) 
This passage appears to assert the PSR. But Plato believes that there
are things that are not among the things that “come to
be”, and some of these things have no cause or reason. For
example, the Demiurge creates the world by imposing order on
disorderly motion. The disorderly motion preexists the work of the
Demiurge. It is uncaused and there is no reason for it.
At times, Descartes appears to endorse the PSR. For example, he argues
for the existence of God in the third Mediation on the basis
of the principle that there must be at least as much reality in the
cause as in the effect. And he justifies this causal principle by
claiming that “Nothing comes from nothing”. This appears
to make him as much an adherent of the PSR as Parmenides who, as we
have seen, argues for his conclusions on the same basis. But elsewhere
Descartes claims that God creates the eternal truths, such as
mathematical and metaphysical truths (Letters to Mersenne, April 15,
May 6, and 27, 1630; Fifth Replies, AT 7:380, CSM 2:261).
Moreover, he claims that God creates these truths by an act of will
which is free and indifferent. Thus there can be no reason for
God’s will to create any of these truths. If the act of will by
means of which God creates the mathematical and metaphysical truths is
contingent and yet has no sufficient reason according to Descartes,
then his philosophy is deeply antithetical to the PSR. Of course,
Descartes, like many of the others we have discussed may have endorsed
a restricted version of the PSR. But the most natural and
rationalistically acceptable restriction would be to contingent
truths. Descartes’ doctrine of the creation of the eternal
truths holds that there is at least one contingent truth (the act of
will by means of which God creates the eternal truths) which lacks a
sufficient reason.
Hume’s critique of causation presents an important challenge to
the PSR. In his Treatise of Human Nature (I, 3, 3) Hume
considers several arguments which attempt to prove the “general
maxim in philosophy, that whatever begins to exist, must have a
cause” and finds all of them wanting. Hume argues that
since the ideas of cause and its effect are evidently distinct, we can
clearly conceive or imagine an object without its cause. He takes the
separability of the two ideas to show that there is no necessary
conceptual relation between the ideas of cause and effect insofar as
conceiving the one without the other does not imply any contradiction
or absurdity.
Christian Wolff (1679–1754), the most influential German
philosopher of the first half of the eighteenth century, was a
follower of Leibniz and developed the latter’s system. Like
Leibniz, Wolff assigned to the PSR a central role in his system while
attempting to avoid necessitarianism (or “fatalism”). Like
Spinoza and Leibniz, Wolff demanded a reason for both the possibility
of things [ratio essendi] (i.e., coherence of essence) and
for the actualization, or coming to be, of essences [ratio
fiendi]. Wolff mildly criticized Leibniz’s grounding of the
PSR merely in experience and attempted to marshal several proofs for
the principle (Rational Thoughts on God, the World, and the Soul of Human Beings, §§30–31,
143; Ontologia, §§56–78). One of these proofs
attempts to prove the PSR relying on the principle of the Identity of
Indiscernibles (Rational Thoughts on God, the World, and the Soul of Human Beings §31), while the
most famous proof attempts to derive the PSR from the Law of
Non-Contradiction. According to the latter, if a thing \(A\) is
assumed to exist without reason, than “nothing is posited that
explains why \(A\) exists”. This, according to Wolff, would
mean that \(A\) exists because of nothing (Ontologia,
§70), which Wolff claims to be absurd. Kant criticized the proof
claiming that it is based on an equivocal use of the term
“nothing” (AK 1:398).
Leonhard Euler, the great Swiss mathematician and a contemporary of
Wolff, warned against the “wretched abuse” of the PSR by
those who 
employ it so dexterously that by means of it they are in a condition
to demonstrate whatever suits their purpose, and to demolish whatever
is raised against them. (Letters to German Princess, Letter
XIII) 
According to Euler, many of the proofs which rely on the PSR amount to
nothing over and above a petitio principii, while others
derive carelessly the impossibility of things from our ignorance of
the causes of these things.
In the Critique of Pure Reason (1781, 1787), Kant claims to
provide a proof for the PSR by showing that 
[T]he PSR is the ground of possible experience, namely the objective
cognition of appearances with regards to their relation in the
successive series of time. (B/246/A201) 
Relying on his transcendental method Kant argues in the “Second
Analogy of Experience” that a certain version of the PSR is a
condition for the possibility of experience, and as a result also a
condition for the possibility of objects of experience. Yet, this
argument also restricts the validity of the PSR to human experience,
i.e., to things which appear in space and time. Any use of the PSR
that transgresses the boundaries of human experience is bound to
generate antinomies.
Kant’s view of space and time as exhibiting brute
difference (i.e., the non-identity of locations in space and time
cannot be reduced to conceptual explanation) stands in sharp contrast
to the Principle of the Identity of Indiscernibles, and thereby also
to the PSR. Salomon Maimon, Kant’s rationalist critic, attempted
to enforce rationalist strictures on Kant’s philosophy by
arguing that Kant is unable to explain the necessary agreement of
intuitions and concepts. According to Kant, intuitions and concepts
come from entirely different sources: sensibility and understanding.
But if this were the case, claims Maimon, we could not explain the
constant agreement between intuitions and concepts, which is necessary
for the possibility of experience. This agreement can be explained if
we reject the radical heterogeneity of intuitions and concepts, and
view intuitions as disguised concepts. Thus, any difference exhibited
in space and time must have its ground in the universal forms of our
thought in general (Maimon, Essay on Transcendental
Philosophy, Ch. 1, p. 13). Maimon also argued that we must seek
an explanation for the fact that we have two forms of
intuition rather than one, and suggested that it is only the interplay
between the two forms of intuition which allows us to exhibit
difference, by using a unity in one form to exhibit difference in the
other form, i.e., conceive different times by concentrating on the
change occurring at the same location in space, or conceive different
locations in space at the same point in time (Essay, Ch. 1,
pp. 13–14).
Ground [Grund] and the Principle of Sufficient Ground
[der Satz vom zureichenden Grund] play a significant role in
Hegel’s Logic. For Hegel, the demand for ground provides a major
source of transition from one thing to another. It is, Hegel says,
“the expulsion of itself from itself” (Encyclopedia
Logic, §121A). Ground, for Hegel, is the unity of identity
and difference: the ground of \(x\) has to explain all features of
\(x\), and in sense duplicates it, yet it must also be different
from \(x\) in order to have explanatory value and not be a mere
petitio principii.
The PSR is the subject of Schopenahuer’s 1813 doctoral
dissertation: The Fourfold Root of the Principle of Sufficient
Reason. In this work, Schopenhauer provides a brief history of
the PSR, and then raises the questions of the justification for the
PSR and the proper scope of the principle. Schopenhauer follows Wolff
in distinguishing among four kinds of reasons, corresponding to four
kinds of objects, and charges that much philosophical confusion arises
from attempts to explain objects of one kind by reasoning that belongs
to the other kind. These four kinds of explanation, or four variants
of the PSR, share the very same ground. Along Kantian lines
Schopenhauer suggests that it is the subject’s activity in
regularly connecting representations that is the ground of the PSR
(The Fourfold Root, §16).
The notion of grounding has been increasingly a topic of
discussion in contemporary metaphysics. Grounding is said to be a kind
of explanation distinct from causal explanation. It is a metaphysical or
constitutive explanation. It is generally taken to be asymmetric,
irreflexive, and transitive. Alleged examples of grounding relations
are: dispositions (e.g., fragility) are grounded in categorical
features (e.g., molecular structure); semantic facts (e.g., Jones
means addition by “+”) are grounded by
non-semantic facts (e.g., Jones is disposed to draw certain
inferences); mental properties (e.g., pain) are grounded by physical
properties (e.g., c-fibers firing; see Rosen 2010 and Fine 2012). It has recently been
proposed by Dasgupta that a version of the PSR could be formulated in
terms of grounds. The proposal is formulated as follows:
PSR: For every substantive fact \(Y\) there are some facts, the
\(X\)s, such that (i) the \(X\)s ground \(Y\) and (ii) each
one of the \(X\)s is autonomous. (Dasgupta 2016: 12)
Here substantive means apt for grounding and
autonomous means not apt for grounding. For example, perhaps
essentialist facts are autonomous where essentialist facts are facts
of the form: it is essential to \(x\) that \(\phi\). The idea is that
just as definitions are not apt for proof, essentialist facts are not
apt for grounding explanations, that is, they are autonomous (Dasgupta
2016: 6–9). The notion of an autonomous fact allows the adherent
of this version of the PSR to avoid the Agrippan Trilemma without
allowing for self-explanatory facts or infinite regresses. Chains of
explanation terminate with autonomous facts, which are not brute
because they are not apt for explanation. 
Following Bolzano (Theory of Science:
vol. II, 259–264), most contemporary theories of grounding
affirm the irreflexivity of this relation (see Fine 2001: 15; Schaffer
2009: 364; and Rosen 2010: 115). More recently, Fine showed that given
certain plausible premises, one may point out counterexamples to
irreflexivity (Fine 2010; cf. Krämer 2013), and the issue has
been further challenged by Jenkins (2011).
Jonathan Schaffer has relied on the notion of ground to revive an
Aristotelian, structured metaphysics, i.e., a metaphysics which is
ordered by priority relations (Schaffer 2009), and to defend Priority
Monism (see the entry on
 monism).
 In response, Michael Della Rocca (2014) has argued that strict
adherence to the PSR—and to Ockham’s Razor (see the entry
on
 simplicity)—undermines
 Schaffer’s structured metaphysics (and Priority Monism), since
insofar as all the features of the grounded are already present in the
ground, the existence of the grounded is just redundant. (See also
the entry on
 metaphysical grounding).
The role of the PSR in ethics and political theory has not been
seriously studied so far. Clearly, the PSR may be marshaled in order
to question our reliance on mere intuitions. The repugnance of a
certain view cannot be taken at face value, but rather requires a
justification. In the past, various racist and conservative views
relied merely on the alleged repugnance of certain sexual acts (e.g.,
homosexuality, interracial relations). The requirement to dig deeper
and ask a person to justify her intuitions may help the person
understand the maxims guiding her specific moral beliefs. Adherence to
the PSR may also shift the onus of proof in the debate between those
who consider our preferential evaluation of human beings over other
things in nature as simply brute (Williams 2006: 195) and those who
insist that if human beings have a special value, there must be a
reason for the ascription of such value (Buss 2012: 343).