Aristotle’s distinction between the public sphere of politics and
political activity, the polis, and the private or domestic
sphere of the family, the oikos, as two distinct spheres of
life, is a classic reference to a private domain. The public/private
distinction is also sometimes taken to refer to the appropriate realm
of governmental authority as opposed to the realm reserved for
self-regulation, along the lines described by John Stuart Mill in his
essay, On Liberty. Furthermore, the distinction arises again
in Locke’s discussion of property in his Second Treatise on
Government. In the state of nature all the world’s bounty is held
in common and is in that sense public. But one possesses oneself and
one’s own body, and one can also acquire property by mixing one’s labor
with it, and in these cases it is one’s private property. Margaret Mead
and other anthropologists have demonstrated the ways various cultures
protect privacy through concealment, seclusion or by restricting access
to secret ceremonies (Mead, 1949). Alan Westin (1967) has surveyed
studies of animals demonstrating that a desire for privacy is not
restricted to humans. However, what is termed private in these multiple
contexts varies. Privacy can refer to a sphere separate from
government, a domain inappropriate for governmental interference,
forbidden views and knowledge, solitude, or restricted access, to list
just a few.
More systematic written discussion of the concept of privacy is often
said to begin with the famous essay by Samuel Warren and Louis
Brandeis titled “The Right to Privacy” (Warren and
Brandeis, 1890). Citing “political, social, and economic
changes” and a recognition of “the right to be let
alone” they argued that existing law afforded a way to protect
the privacy of the individual, and they sought to explain the nature
and extent of that protection. Focusing in large part on the press and
publicity allowed by recent inventions such as photography and
newspapers, but referring as well to violations in other contexts,
they emphasized the invasion of privacy brought about by public
dissemination of details relating to a person’s private life. Warren
and Brandeis felt a variety of existing cases could be protected under
a more general right to privacy which would protect the extent to
which one’s thoughts, sentiments, and emotions could be shared with
others.  Urging that they were not attempting to protect the items
produced, or intellectual property, but rather the peace of mind
attained with such protection, they said the right to privacy was
based on a principle of “inviolate personality” which was
part of a general right of immunity of the person, “the right to
one’s personality” (Warren and Brandeis 1890, 195, 215). The
privacy principle, they believed, was already part of common law and
the protection of one’s home as one’s castle, but new technology made
it important to explicitly and separately recognize this protection
under the name of privacy. They suggested that limitations of the
right could be determined by analogy with the law of slander and
libel, and would not prevent publication of information about public
officials running for office, for example. Warren and Brandeis thus
laid the foundation for a concept of privacy that has come to be known
as control over information about oneself.
Although the first cases after the publication of their paper did
not recognize a privacy right, soon the public and both state and
federal courts were endorsing and expanding the right to privacy. In an
attempt to systematize and more clearly describe and define the new
right of privacy being upheld in tort law, William Prosser wrote in
1960 that what had emerged were four different interests in privacy.
Not claiming to be providing an exact definition, and admitting that
there had been confusion and inconsistencies in the development of
privacy protection in the law, Prosser nevertheless described the four
“rather definite” privacy rights as follows:
Prosser noted that the intrusion in the first privacy right had
expanded beyond physical intrusion, and pointed out that Warren and
Brandeis had been concerned primarily with the second privacy right.
Nevertheless, Prosser felt that both real abuses and public demand had
led to general acceptance of these four types of privacy invasions. On
his view, answers to three main questions were at the time as yet
unclear: (i) whether appearance in public implied forfeiture of
privacy, (ii) whether facts part of a “public record”
could still be private, and (iii) whether a significant lapse of time
affected the privacy of revelations. Note that Warren and Brandeis
were writing their normative views about what they felt should be
protected under the rubric of privacy, whereas Prosser was describing
what courts had in fact protected in the 70 years following
publication of the Warren and Brandeis paper. Thus it is not
surprising that their descriptions of privacy differ. Because the
Supreme Court has been explicit in ruling that privacy is a central
reason for Fourth Amendment protection, privacy as control over
information about oneself has come to be viewed by many as also
including protection against unwarranted searches, eavesdropping,
surveillance, and appropriation and misuses of one’s
communications.  Thomas Nagel (2002) gives a more contemporary
discussion of privacy, concealment, publicity and exposure.
Despite the well-established protection of tort privacy to control
information about oneself in the courts, and the almost universal
acceptance of the value of informational privacy by philosophers and
the populace, Abraham L. Newman (2008) and others have persuasively
argued that the United States (US), and multiple countries in Asia, has
developed a limited system of privacy protection that focuses on
self-regulation within industry and government so that personal
information is often readily available. In contrast, the European
Union (EU) and others have adopted an alternative vision highlighting
consumer protection and individual privacy against the economic
interests of firms and public officials. This latter model
developed from comprehensive rules about data privacy enacted in the
EU’s Data Protection Directive in 1995, now adopted in some form
by all 27 EU nations. European-style privacy protection
regulations have spread rapidly across the industrial world, with the
United States as a major exception, and have transformed and led the
global privacy debate, while the US has relied on a more laissez-faire
mentality about protection of personal information and a patchwork of
privacy guidelines. This patchwork includes privacy regulations
on student records, video rentals, the Children’s Online Privacy
Protection Act (COPPA, 2000), the Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act (HIPPA, 2006) and more. 
The European Union empowered individual privacy commissioners or
group agencies that had technical expertise, were given governmental
authority, and were able to form political coalitions to lobby
successfully for enhanced individual privacy protection, requiring that
personal information not be collected or used for purposes other than
those initially intended without individual consent, and so on.
This contrasts sharply with the American approach allowing entities
such as insurance companies and employers ample access to personal
information not covered by the separate privacy guidelines, given a
lack of governmental support for more comprehensive privacy legislation
and a more fragmented political system. The US has generally
stood behind efficiency arguments that business and government need
unfettered access to personal data to guarantee economic growth and
national security, whereas the EU has sent a coherent signal that
privacy has critical value in a robust information society because
citizens will only participate in an online environment if they feel
their privacy is guaranteed against ubiquitous business and government
surveillance.
In 1965 a quite different right to privacy, independent of
informational privacy and the Fourth Amendment, was recognized
explicitly by the Supreme Court. It is now commonly called the
constitutional right to privacy. The right was first announced in the
Griswold v. Connecticut (381 U.S. 479) case, which overturned
convictions of the Director of Planned Parenthood and a doctor at Yale
Medical School for dispersing contraceptive related information,
instruction, and medical advice to married persons. The constitutional
right to privacy was described by Justice William O. Douglas as
protecting a zone of privacy covering the social institution of
marriage and the sexual relations of married persons. Despite
controversy over Douglas’ opinion, the constitutional privacy right
was soon cited to overturn a ban against interracial marriage, to
allow individuals to possess obscene matter in their own homes, and to
allow distribution of contraceptive devices to individuals, both
married and single. The most famous application of this right to
privacy was as one justification of abortion rights defended in 1973
in Roe v.  Wade (410 U.S. 113) and subsequent decisions on
abortion. While Douglas vaguely called it a “penumbral”
right “emanating” from the Constitution, and the Court has
been unable to clearly define the right, it has generally been viewed
as a right protecting one’s individual interest in independence in
making certain important and personal decisions about one’s family,
life and lifestyle. Which personal decisions have been protected by
this privacy right has varied depending on the makeup of the Court. In
1986 in
Bowers v. Hardwick (478 U.S. 186) privacy was not held to
cover a ban on anti-sodomy laws in Georgia, despite the intimate sexual
relations involved.
Criticism of the constitutional right to privacy has continued,
particularly in the popular press, Roe v. Wade may be in
jeopardy, and many viewed the Bowers decision as evidence of
the demise of the constitutional right to privacy.  Yet in 2003 in
Lawrence v. Texas (538 U.S. 918), the Supreme Court ruled
5–4 that a Texas statute making it a crime for two people of the
same sex to engage in certain intimate behavior violated the guarantee
of equal protection and vital interests in liberty and privacy
protected by the due process clause of the Constitution, thus
overruling Bowers v. Hardwick.  Jean L. Cohen (2002) gives a
theoretical defense of this inclusive view of the constitutional right
to privacy.  She defends a constructivist approach to privacy rights
and intimacy, arguing that privacy rights protect personal autonomy
and that a constitutionally protected right to privacy is
indispensable for a modern conception of reason and her interpretation
of autonomy.  Currently many non U.S. countries protect interests in
what is now called constitutional privacy, without the controversy
that is somewhat more common in the U.S. For example, constitutional
privacy has been used in the U.S. to strike down anti-sodomy laws, and
to protect individual choice of one’s marriage partner. In
Europe many countries now protect same sex marriage, such as the
Netherlands for over 10 years and more recently Germany since
2017.
One way of understanding the growing literature on privacy is to
view it as divided into two main categories, which we may call
reductionism and coherentism. Reductionists are
generally critical of privacy, while coherentists defend the coherent
fundamental value of privacy interests. Ferdinand Schoeman (1984)
introduced somewhat different terminology which makes it easier to
understand this distinction. According to Schoeman, a number of
authors have believed
Theorists who deny both the coherence thesis and the distinctiveness
thesis argue that in each category of privacy claims there are diverse
values at stake of the sort common to many other social issues and that
these values exhaust privacy claims. The thrust of this complex
position is that we could do quite well if we eliminated all talk of
privacy and simply defended our concerns in terms of standard moral and
legal categories (Schoeman 1984, 5).
These latter theorists, who reject both Schoeman’s coherence thesis
and distinctiveness thesis, may be referred to as
reductionists, for they view what are called privacy concerns
as analyzable or reducible to claims of other sorts, such as infliction
of emotional distress or property interests. They deny that there is
anything useful in considering privacy as a separate concept. They
conclude, then, that there is nothing coherent, distinctive or
illuminating about privacy interests.
On the other side, more theorists have argued that there is
something fundamental and distinctive and coherent about the various
claims that have been called privacy interests. On this view, privacy
has value as a coherent and fundamental concept, and most individuals
recognize it as a useful concept as well. Those who endorse this view
may be called coherentists. Nevertheless, it is important to
recognize that coherentists have quite diverse, and sometimes
overlapping, views on what it is that is distinctive about privacy and
what links diverse privacy claims.
Probably the most famous reductionist view of privacy is one from
Judith Jarvis Thomson (1975). Noting that there is little agreement on
what privacy is, Thomson examines a number of cases that have been
thought to be violations of the right to privacy. On closer
inspection, however, Thomson believes all those cases can be
adequately and equally well explained in terms of violations of
property rights or rights over the person, such as a right not to be
listened to. Ultimately the right to privacy, on Thomson’s view,
is merely a cluster of rights. Those rights in the cluster are always
overlapped by, and can be fully explained by, property rights or
rights to bodily security. The right to privacy, on her view, is
“derivative” in the sense that there is no need to find
what is common in the cluster of privacy rights. Privacy is derivative
in its importance and justification, according to Thomson, as any
privacy violation is better understood as the violation of a more
basic right. Numerous commentators provide strong arguments against
Thomson’s critique (Scanlon, 1975; Inness, 1992).
Richard Posner (1981) also presents a critical account of privacy,
arguing that the kinds of interests protected under privacy are not
distinctive. Moreover, his account is unique because he argues that
privacy is protected in ways that are economically inefficient. With
respect to information, on Posner’s view privacy should only be
protected when access to the information would reduce its value (e.g.
allowing students access to their letters of recommendation make those
letters less reliable and thus less valuable, and hence they should
remain confidential or private). Focusing on privacy as control over
information about oneself, Posner argues that concealment or selective
disclosure of information is usually to mislead or manipulate others,
or for private economic gain, and thus protection of individual privacy
is less defensible than others have thought because it does not
maximize wealth. In sum, Posner defends organizational or corporate
privacy as more important than personal privacy, because the former is
likely to enhance the economy.
Another strong critic of privacy is Robert Bork (1990), whose
criticism is aimed at the constitutional right to privacy established
by the Supreme Court in 1965. Bork views the Griswold v.
Connecticut decision as an attempt by the Supreme Court to take a
side on a social and cultural issue, and as an example of bad
constitutional law. Bork’s attack is focused on Justice William
O.  Douglas and his majority opinion
in Griswold. Bork’s major point is that Douglas did not
derive the right to privacy from some pre-existing right or from
natural law, but merely created a new right to privacy with no
foundation in the Constitution or Bill of Rights.  Bork is correct
that the word “privacy” never appears in those
documents. Douglas had argued, however, that the right to privacy
could be seen to be based on guarantees from the First, Third, Fourth,
Fifth, and Ninth Amendments. Taken together, the protections afforded
by these Amendments showed that a basic zone of privacy was protected
for citizens, and that it covered their ability to make personal
decisions about their home and family life. In contrast, Bork argues
i) that none of the Amendments cited covered the case before the
Court, ii) that the Supreme Court never articulated or clarified what
the right to privacy was or how far it extended, and he charges iii)
that the privacy right merely protected what a majority of justices
personally wanted it to cover. In sum, he accuses Douglas and the
Court majority of inventing a new right, and thus overstepping their
bounds as judges by making new law, not interpreting the law.
Bork’s views continue to be defended by others, in politics and
in the popular press.
Theorists including William Parent (1983) and Judith Thomson (1975)
argue that the constitutional right to privacy is not really a privacy
right, but is more aptly described as a right to liberty. Other
commentators believe, to the contrary, that even if Douglas’ opinion is
flawed in its defense, using vague language about a penumbral privacy
right emanating from the Constitution and its Amendments, there is
nevertheless a historically and conceptually coherent notion of
privacy, distinct from liberty, carved out by the constitutional
privacy cases (Inness, 1992; Schoeman, 1992; Johnson, 1994; DeCew,
1997).
In response to Bork’s complaint that constitutional privacy
protection is not at all about privacy but only concerns liberty or
autonomy, it has been successfully argued that while we have multiple
individual liberties such as freedom of expression, many do not seem to
be about anything particularly personal or related to the types of
concerns we might be willing and able to see as privacy issues.
If so, then liberty is a broader concept than privacy and privacy
issues and claims are a subset of claims to liberty. In support
of this view, philosophical and legal commentators have urged that
privacy protects liberty, and that privacy protection gains for us the
freedom to define ourselves and our relations to others (Allen, 2011;
DeCew, 1997; Reiman, 1976, 2004; Schoeman, 1984, 1992).
A moving account supporting this view—understanding privacy as a
necessary and an indispensable condition for freedom—comes from
literature, here a quotation from Milan Kundera.
It is not difficult to see the analogies between Kundera’s
scenario and electronic surveillance and street cameras common in
society today. There is more detailed evidence that privacy and
liberty are distinct concepts, that liberty is a broader notion, and
that privacy is essential for protecting liberty. We have many
forms of liberty that do not appear to have anything to do with what we
might value as private and inappropriate for government intervention
for personal reasons. The right to travel from state to state
without a passport, for example, seems to be a freedom far different
from freedom to make decisions about personal and intimate concerns
about one’s body – such as contraception use, abortion
choice, sterilization (Buck v. Bell, 274 U.S. 200, 1927) and
vasectomies (Skinner v, Oklahoma 316 U.S. 535, 1942, striking
down a statute mandating sterilizations for those who commit three
felonies). It is clear that the U.S. Supreme Court has recognized
this by saying that the constitutional privacy cases are about a second
interest in privacy, namely an “individual interest in making
certain kinds of important decisions” (Whalen v. Roe,
429 U.S. 589, 1977).
There is no single version of the feminist critique of privacy, yet it
can be said in general that many feminists worry about the darker side
of privacy, and the use of privacy as a shield to cover up domination,
degradation and abuse of women and others. Many tend to focus on the
private as opposed to the public, rather than merely informational or
constitutional privacy. If distinguishing public and private realms
leaves the private domain free from any scrutiny, then these feminists
such as Catharine MacKinnon (1989) are correct that privacy can be
dangerous for women when it is used to cover up repression and
physical harm to them by perpetuating the subjection of women in the
domestic sphere and encouraging nonintervention by the state. Jean
Bethke Elshtain (1981, 1995) and others suggest that it appears
feminists such as MacKinnon are for this reason rejecting the
public/private split, and are, moreover, recommending that feminists
and others jettison or abandon privacy altogether. But, Elshtain
points out, this alternative seems too extreme.
A more reasonable view, according to Anita Allen (1988), is to
recognize that while privacy can be a shield for abuse, it is
unacceptable to reject privacy completely based on harm done in
private. A total rejection of privacy makes everything public, and
leaves the domestic sphere open to complete scrutiny and intrusion by
the state. Yet women surely have an interest in privacy that can
protect them from state imposed sterilization programs or government
imposed drug tests for pregnant women mandating results sent to police,
for instance, and that can provide reasonable regulations such as
granting rights against marital rape. Thus collapsing the
public/private dichotomy into a single public realm is inadequate. What
puzzles feminists is how to make sense of an important and valuable
notion of privacy that provides them a realm free from scrutiny and
intervention by the state, without reverting to the traditional
public/private dichotomy that has in the past relegated women to the
private and domestic sphere where they are victims of abuse and
subjection. The challenge is to find a way for the state to take very
seriously the domestic abuse that used to be allowed in the name of
privacy, while also preventing the state from insinuating itself into
all the most intimate parts of women’s lives. This means drawing new
boundaries for justified state intervention and thus understanding the
public/private distinction in new ways.
Narrow views of privacy focusing on control over information about
oneself that were defended by Warren and Brandeis and by William
Prosser are also endorsed by more recent commentators including Fried
(1970) and Parent (1983). In addition, Alan Westin describes privacy
as the ability to determine for ourselves when, how, and to what
extent information about us is communicated to others (Westin,
1967). Perhaps the best example of a contemporary defense of this view
is put forth by William Parent. Parent explains that he proposes to
defend a view of privacy that is consistent with ordinary language and
does not overlap or confuse the basic meanings of other fundamental
terms. He defines privacy as the condition of not having undocumented
personal information known or possessed by others. Parent stresses
that he is defining the condition of privacy, as a moral value for
people who prize individuality and freedom, and not a moral or legal
right to privacy. Personal information is characterized by Parent as
factual (otherwise it would be covered by libel, slander or
defamation), and these are facts that most persons choose not to
reveal about themselves, such as facts about health, salary, weight,
sexual orientation, etc. Personal information is documented, on
Parent’s view, only when it belongs to the public record, that is, in
newspapers, court records, or other public documents. Thus, once
information becomes part of a public record, there is no privacy
invasion in future releases of the information, even years later or to
a wide audience, nor does snooping or surveillance intrude on privacy
if no undocumented information is gained. In cases where no new
information is acquired, Parent views the intrusion as irrelevant to
privacy, and better understood as an abridgment of anonymity,
trespass, or harassment.  Furthermore, what has been described above
as the constitutional right to privacy, is viewed by Parent as better
understood as an interest in liberty, not privacy. In sum, there is a
loss of privacy on Parent’s view, only when others acquire
undocumented personal information about an individual. DeCew (1997)
gives a detailed critique of Parent’s position. Although Parent’s
definition is valuable because he does view privacy as a coherent
concept with unique and fundamental value, it is problematic for
several reasons.  It is too narrow an account because he only allows
for a descriptive and not a normative use of the term. As another
example, if personal information is part of the public record, even
the most insidious snooping to attain it does not constitute a privacy
invasion. DeCew (1997) and Scanlon (1975, 317) discuss other
difficulties with Parent’s view as well.
In an article written mainly as a defense of Warren and Brandeis’
paper and as a response to William Prosser, Edward J. Bloustein (1964)
argues that there is a common thread in the diverse legal cases
protecting privacy. According to Bloustein, Warren and Brandeis failed
to give a positive description of privacy, however they were correct
that there was a single value connecting the privacy interests, a
value they called “inviolate personality.” On Bloustein’s
view it is possible to give a general theory of individual privacy
that reconciles its divergent strands, and “inviolate
personality” is the social value protected by privacy. It
defines one’s essence as a human being and it includes individual
dignity and integrity, personal autonomy and independence. Respect for
these values is what grounds and unifies the concept of
privacy. Discussing each of Prosser’s four types of privacy rights in
turn, Bloustein defends the view that each of these privacy rights is
important because it protects against intrusions demeaning to
personality and against affronts to human dignity. Using this
analysis, Bloustein explicitly links the privacy rights in tort law
described by Prosser with privacy protection under the Fourth
Amendment. He urges that both leave an individual open to scrutiny in
a way that leaves one’s autonomy and sense of oneself as a person
vulnerable, violating one’s human dignity and moral personality. The
common conceptual thread linking diverse privacy cases prohibiting
dissemination of confidential information, eavesdropping,
surveillance, and wiretapping, to name a few, is the value of
protection against injury to individual freedom and human dignity.
Invasion of privacy is best understood, in sum, as affront to human
dignity. Although Bloustein admits the terms are somewhat vague, he
defends this analysis as conceptually coherent and illuminating.
A more common view has been to argue that privacy and intimacy are
deeply related. On one account, privacy is valuable because intimacy
would be impossible without it (Fried, 1970; Gerety 1977; Gerstein,
1978; Cohen, 2002). Fried, for example, defines privacy narrowly as
control over information about oneself. He extends this definition,
however, arguing that privacy has intrinsic value, and is necessarily
related to and fundamental for one’s development as an individual with
a moral and social personality able to form intimate relationships
involving respect, love, friendship and trust. Privacy is valuable
because it allows one control over information about oneself, which
allows one to maintain varying degrees of intimacy. Indeed, love,
friendship and trust are only possible if persons enjoy privacy and
accord it to each other. Privacy is essential for such relationships
on Fried’s view, and this helps explain why a threat to privacy is a
threat to our very integrity as persons. By characterizing privacy as
a necessary context for love, friendship and trust, Fried is basing
his account on a moral conception of persons and their personalities,
on a Kantian notion of the person with basic rights and the need to
define and pursue one’s own values free from the impingement of
others. Privacy allows one the freedom to define one’s relations with
others and to define oneself. In this way, privacy is also closely
connected with respect and self respect.
Gerstein (1978) argues as well that privacy is necessary for
intimacy, and intimacy in communication and interpersonal relationships
is required for us to fully experience our lives. Intimacy without
intrusion or observation is required for us to have experiences with
spontaneity and without shame. Shoeman (1984) endorses these views and
stresses that privacy provides a way to control intimate information
about oneself and that has many other benefits, not only for
relationships with others, but also for the development of one’s
personality and inner self. Julie Inness (1992) has identified intimacy
as the defining feature of intrusions properly called privacy
invasions. Inness argues that intimacy is based not on behavior, but on
motivation. She believes that intimate information or activity is
that which draws its meaning from love, liking, or care. It is privacy
that protects one’s ability to retain intimate information and activity
so that one can fulfill one’s needs of loving and caring.
A number of commentators defend views of privacy that link closely
with accounts stressing privacy as required for intimacy, emphasizing
not just intimacy but also more generally the importance of developing
diverse interpersonal relationships with others. Rachels (1975)
acknowledges there is no single answer to the question why privacy is
important to us, because it can be necessary to protect one’s assets
or interests, or to protect one from embarrassment, or to protect one
against the deleterious consequences of information leaks, to name
just a few. Nevertheless, he explicitly criticizes Thomson’s
reductionist view, and urges that privacy is a distinctive right. On
his view, privacy is necessary to maintain a variety of social
relationships, not just intimate ones. Privacy accords us the ability
to control who knows what about us and who has access to us, and
thereby allows us to vary our behavior with different people so that
we may maintain and control our various social relationships, many of
which will not be intimate. An intriguing part of Rachels’ analysis of
privacy is that it emphasizes ways in which privacy is not merely
limited to control over information. Our ability to control both
information and access to us allows us to control our relationships
with others. Hence privacy is also connected to our behavior and
activities.
Another group of theorists characterize privacy in terms of access.
Some commentators describe privacy as exclusive access of a person to
a realm of his or her own, and Sissela Bok (1982) argues that privacy
protects us from unwanted access by others — either physical
access or personal information or attention. Ruth Gavison (1980)
defends this more expansive view of privacy in greater detail, arguing
that interests in privacy are related to concerns over accessibility
to others, that is, what others know about us, the extent to which
they have physical access to us, and the extent to which we are the
subject of the attention of others. Thus the concept of privacy is
best understood as a concern for limited accessibility and one has
perfect privacy when one is completely inaccessible to others. Privacy
can be gained in three independent but interrelated ways: through
secrecy, when no one has information about one, through anonymity,
when no one pays attention to one, and through solitude, when no one
has physical access to one. Gavison’s view is that the concept of
privacy is this complex of concepts all part of the notion of
accessibility.  Furthermore, the concept is also coherent because of
the related functions privacy has, namely “the promotion of
liberty, autonomy, selfhood, human relations, and furthering the
existence of a free society” (Gavison 1980, 347).
Carefully reviewing these various views, Anita Allen (1988) also
characterizes privacy as denoting a degree of inaccessibility of
persons, their mental states, and information about them to the senses
and surveillance of others. She views seclusion, solitude, secrecy,
confidentiality, and anonymity as forms of privacy. She also urges that
privacy is required by the liberal ideals of personhood, and the
participation of citizens as equals. While her view appears to be
similar to Gavison’s, Allen suggests her restricted access view is
broader than Gavison’s. This is in part because Allen emphasizes that
in public and private women experience privacy losses that are unique
to their gender. Noting that privacy is neither a presumptive moral
evil nor an unquestionable moral good, Allen nevertheless defends more
extensive privacy protection for women in morality and the law. Using
examples such as sexual harassment, victim anonymity in rape cases, and
reproductive freedom, Allen emphasizes the moral significance of
extending privacy protection for women. In some ways her account can be
viewed as one reply to the feminist critique of privacy, allowing that
privacy can be a shield for abuse, but can also be so valuable for
women that privacy protection should be enhanced, not diminished.
Most recently, Adam Moore (2003), building on the views of Gavison,
Allen and others, offers a “control over access” account
of privacy. According to Moore, privacy is a culturally and species
relative right to a level of control over access to bodies or places
and information. While defending the view that privacy is relative to
species and culture, Moore argues that privacy is objectively valuable
— human beings that do not obtain a certain level of control
over access will suffer in various ways.  Moore claims that privacy,
like education, health, and maintaining social relationships, is an
essential part of human flourishing or well-being.
There is a further issue that has generated disagreement, even among
those theorists who believe privacy is a coherent concept. The
question is whether or not the constitutional right to privacy, and
the constitutional privacy cases described involving personal
decisions about lifestyle and family including birth control,
interracial marriage, viewing pornography at home, abortion, and so
on, delineate a genuine category of privacy issues, or merely raise
questions about liberty of some sort. Parent (1983) explicitly
excludes concerns about one’s ability to make certain important
personal decisions about one’s family and lifestyle as genuine privacy
issues, saying the constitutional right to privacy cases focus solely
on liberty. Among the others who take this view are Henkin (1974),
Thomson (1975), Gavison (1980), and Bork (1990). Allen (1988) defines
privacy in terms of access and excludes from her definition protection
of individual autonomous choice from governmental interference, which
she terms a form of liberty. Yet she refers to this latter protection
as “decisional privacy” and says determining its category
is purely a definitional point and one of labels. Ultimately she
believes interference with decisions involving procreation and
sexuality raise the same moral concerns as other privacy intrusions,
offending the values of personhood. The Supreme Court now claims
(Whalen v.  Roe, 429 U.S. 589, 1977) that there are two
different dimensions to privacy: both control over information about
oneself and control over one’s ability to make certain important types
of decisions.
Following this sort of reasoning, a number of theorists defend the
view that privacy has broad scope, inclusive of the multiple types of
privacy issues described by the Court, even though there is no simple
definition of privacy. Most of these theorists explore the links
between the types of privacy interests and the similarity of reasons
for valuing each. Some stress that privacy is necessary for one to
develop a concept of self as a purposeful, self determining agent.
Privacy enables control over personal information as well as control
over our bodies and personal choices for our concept of self (Kupfer,
1987). Some emphasize the importance of intimacy for all privacy
issues, noting the need for privacy to protect intimate information
about oneself, access to oneself, as well as intimate relationships
and decisions about one’s actions (Inness, 1992). Some focus on the
importance of privacy norms that allow one to restrict others’ access
to them as well as privacy norms that enable and enhance personal
expression and the development of relationships. Privacy provides
protection against overreaching social control by others through their
access to information or their control over decision making (Schoeman,
1992). Some defend a “control over access” account of
privacy that includes control over access to bodies as part of the
concept of privacy along with access to places and information (Moore,
2003). Others suggest that privacy is best understood as a cluster
concept covering interests in i) control over information about
oneself, ii) control over access to oneself, both physical and mental,
and iii) control over one’s ability to make important decisions about
family and lifestyle in order to be self expressive and to develop
varied relationships (DeCew, 1997). These three interests are related
because in each of the three contexts threats of information leaks,
threats of control over our bodies, and threats to our power to make
our own choices about our lifestyles and activities all make us
vulnerable and fearful that we are being scrutinized, pressured or
taken advantage of by others. Privacy has moral value because it
shields us in all three contexts by providing certain freedom and
independence — freedom from scrutiny, prejudice, pressure to
conform, exploitation, and the judgment of others.
Yet it has been difficult for philosophers to provide clear
guidelines on the positive side of understanding just what privacy
protects and why it is important. There has been consensus that
the significance of privacy is almost always justified for the
individual interests it protects: personal information, personal
spaces, and personal choices, protection of freedom and autonomy in a
liberal democratic society. (Allen, 2011; Moore, 2010; Reiman 2004;
Roessler, 2005). Schoeman (1992) eloquently defended the
importance of privacy for protection of self-expression and social
freedom. More recent literature has extended this view and has
focused on the value of privacy not merely for the individual interests
it protects, but also for its irreducibly social value. Concerns
over the accessibility and retention of electronic communications and
the expansion of camera surveillance have led commentators to focus
attention on loss of individual privacy as well as privacy protection
with respect to the state and society (Reiman, 2004; Solove, 2008;
Nissenbaum, 2010).
Priscilla Regan writes, for example, “I argue that privacy is
not only of value to the individual, but also to society in
general…..Privacy is a common value in that all
individuals value some degree of privacy and have some common
perceptions about privacy. Privacy is also a public value in
that it has value not just to the individual as an individual or to
all individuals in common but also to the democratic political
system. Privacy is rapidly becoming a collective value in
that technology and market forces are making it hard for any one
person to have privacy without all persons having a similar minimum
level of privacy” (Regan, 1995, 213). According to Daniel
Solove, “By understanding privacy as shaped by the norms of
society, we can better see why privacy should not be understood solely
as an individual right…. Instead, privacy protects the
individual because of the benefits it confers on society.”
Moreover, “the value of privacy should be understood in terms of
its contribution to society” (Solove, 2008, 98, 171fn.). Solove
believes privacy fosters and encourages the moral autonomy of
citizens, a central requirement of governance in a democracy. One way
of understanding these comments, that privacy not only has intrinsic
and extrinsic value to individuals but also has instrumental value to
society, is to recognize that these views develop from the earlier
philosophical writings (Fried 1970; Rachels, 1975; Schoeman; 1984,
1992) on the value of privacy in that it heightens respect for
individual autonomy in decision-making for self-development and
individual integrity and human dignity, but also enhances the value of
privacy in various social roles and relationships that contribute to a
functioning society. According to this contemporary scholarship,
privacy norms help regulate social relationships such as intimate
relations, family relationships, professional relationships including
those between a physician and a patient, a lawyer or accountant and a
client, a teacher and a student, and so on. Thus privacy enhances
social interaction on a variety of levels. According to Solove, a
society without respect for privacy for oneself and others becomes a
“suffocating society” (Solove 2008; see also Kundera,
1984).
Schoeman (1984) points out that the question of whether or not privacy
is culturally relative can be interpreted in two ways. One question is
whether privacy is deemed valuable to all peoples or whether its value
is relative to cultural differences. A second question is whether or
not there are any aspects of life that are inherently private and not
just conventionally so. Most writers have come to agree that while
almost all cultures appear to value privacy, cultures differ in their
ways of seeking and obtaining privacy, and probably do differ in the
level they value privacy (Westin, 1967; Rachels, 1975). Allen (1988)
and Moore (2003) are especially sensitive to the ways obligations from
different cultures affect perceptions of privacy.  There has been far
less agreement on the second question. Some argue that matters
relating to one’s innermost self are inherently private, but
characterizing this realm more succinctly and less vaguely has
remained an elusive task. Thus it may well be that one of the
difficulties in defining the realm of the private is that privacy is a
notion that is strongly culturally relative, contingent on such
factors as economics as well as technology available in a given
cultural domain.
The earliest arguments by Warren and Brandeis for explicit recognition
of privacy protection in law were in large part motivated by expanding
communication technology such as the development of widely distributed
newspapers and multiply printed reproductions of
photographs. Similarly Fourth Amendment protection against search and
seizure was extended later in the twentieth century to cover telephone
wiretaps and electronic surveillance. It is clear that many people
still view privacy is a valuable interest and realize it is now
threatened more than ever by technological advances. There are massive
databases and Internet records of information about individual
financial and credit history, medical records, purchases and telephone
calls, for example, and most people do not know what information is
stored about them or who has access to it. The ability for others to
access and link the databases, with few controls on how they use,
share, or exploit the information, makes individual control over
information about oneself more difficult than ever before.
There are numerous other cases of the clash between privacy and
technology. Consider the following new technologies. Caller ID,
originally designed to protect people from unwanted calls from
harassers, telemarketers, etc., involves privacy concerns for both the
caller and the called. There is widespread mandatory and random drug
testing of employees and others, and the Supreme Court has said
policies requiring all middle and high school students to consent to
drug testing in order to participate in extracurricular activities
does not violate the Fourth Amendment, although the Court has
disallowed mandatory drug tests on pregnant women for use by police.
It had seemed that heat sensors aimed at and through walls to detect
such things as growing marijuana would be acceptable.  However in 2001
in Kyllo v. U.S. (533 U.S. 27), another close 5–4
decision, the Court decided that thermal imaging devices that reveal
information previously unknowable without a warrant does constitute a
violation of privacy rights and the Fourth Amendment. Surveillance
photos are commonly taken of those using Fast Lane, resulting in
tickets mailed to speeding offenders, and similar photos are now taken
at red lights in San Diego and elsewhere, leading to surprise
tickets. Face scanning in Tampa, at casinos, and at large sporting
events such as the Super Bowl, matches those photos with database
records of felons, resulting in the capture of multiple offenders on
the loose but also posing privacy issues for other innocents
photographed without their knowledge. Some rental car drivers are now
tracked by Global Positioning System (GPS) satellites, enabling car
rental companies, not police, to levy stiff fines for
speeding. Immigration officials in Australia are considering proposals
to tag asylum seekers with electronic trackers before sending them
into the community to await hearings. The media has recently uncovered
an FBI Web surveillance system called Carnivore, that appears to
sample the communications of as many Internet users as it chooses, not
just suspects. Echelon is a covert global satellite network said to
have the ability to intercept all phone, fax, and e-mail messages in
the world, and may have up to 20 international listening
posts. Airline passengers will soon be able to go through customs with
a two second biometric scan that confirms identity by mapping the iris
of the eye, and U.S.  airlines are considering using “smart
cards” which will identify passengers by their
fingerprints. There is a proliferation of biometric identification
using faces, eyes, fingerprints, and other body parts for identifying
specific individuals, and the technology for matching the information
with other databases is advancing quickly. Anton Alterman (2003)
discusses various privacy and ethical issues arising from expanding
use of biometric identification. For more on some of the other issues
noted above, see other articles in
Ethics and Information Technology 5, 3 (2003).
 
For some cases in the clash between privacy and advancing
technologies, it is possible to make a compelling argument for
overriding the privacy intrusions. Drug and alcohol tests for airline
pilots on the job seem completely justifiable in the name of public
safety, for example. With the development of new and more
sophisticated technology, however, recent work on privacy is examining
the ways in which respect for privacy can be balanced with justifiable
uses of emerging technology (Agre and Rotenberg, 1997; Austin, 2003;
Brin, 1998; Etzioni, 1999, and Ethics and Information
Technology, 6, 1, 2004). Daniel Solove (2006) takes seriously the
criticism that privacy suffers from an embarrassment of meanings and
the concern that new technologies have given rise to a panoply of new
privacy harms. He then endeavors to guide the law toward a more
coherent understanding of privacy, by developing a taxonomy to
identify a wide range of privacy problems comprehensively and
completely. Moore argues that privacy claims should carry more weight
when in conflict with other social values and interests. For example,
he defends the view that employee agreements that undermine employee
privacy should be viewed with suspicion, and he argues that laws and
legislation prohibiting the genetic modification of humans will
unjustifiably trample individual privacy rights (Moore, 2000). He also
defends the view that free speech and expression should not be viewed
as more important than privacy (Moore, 1998). Clearly, in the wake of
the terrorist attacks on September 11, 2001, the literature on privacy
increasingly focuses on how to balance privacy concerns with the need
for public safety in an age of terrorism. Moore (2000) argues that
views which trade privacy for security typically strike the wrong
balance and in many cases undermine both (Moore, 2000). Etzioni and
Marsh (2003) provide a varied collection of essays on balancing rights
and public safety after 9/11, highlighting views about where the
government will need to expand its authority in fighting the war
against terrorism, and where it risks overreaching its
authority. Revisions to the U.S. Patriot Act and the extent to which
there have been increases in surreptitious electronic surveillance
without court-issued warrants in violation of the Foreign Intelligence
Surveillance Act (FISA) will lead to further debates on the importance
of privacy protection versus governmental power post 9/11. A more
recent example is Edward Snowden’s unauthorized acquisition of
privileged National Security Agency (NSA) information and his further
breach of sharing the information without permission. (Some view him
as a hero, others as a traitor.) Although the government needs strong
powers to protect its citizens, the executive branch also needs to
provide a strong voice on behalf of civil liberties and individual
rights, including privacy.
 
As writers continue to be especially concerned with privacy and
technology, and how it affects all citizens, there is increasing
concern with the social dimension of privacy which was first
introduced at the end of section 3.6 above.  For more contemporary
essays on this topic, a new anthology edited by Beate Roessler and
Dorota Mokrosinska, Social Dimensions of Privacy:
Interdisciplinary Perspectives (2015) is a follow up to
Schoeman’s famous 1984 Philosophical Dimensions of Privacy:
An Anthology, but emphasizing topics on the social dimensions of
privacy. Roessler and Mokrosinska realize that technological
developments have inspired a lively debate on data and privacy,
because privacy is a central lens through which to view protection of
individual liberty and autonomy in liberal democratic societies. What
is new is the worrisome development of privacy-invasive technologies
that intrude on both individuals and society.  Regan (1995), Solove
(2008) and Nissenbaum (2010) took the first steps in analyzing the
social dimensions and value of privacy in a democratic society, but
are now, along with others in this volume (2015), focusing on the role
of privacy in political and social practice, in law, in media and
communication, in health care, and in the marketplace. Privacy
concerns are also arising in new disciplines beyond philosophy, law
and political science, reaching into the health sciences, engineering,
media studies, sociology and information sciences. Thus Roessler and
Mokrosinska have encouraged further work on recent controversies in
these different domains of social life, exploring the ways in which
the emphasis on the social relevance of privacy helps try to resolve
them.  They also urged contributors to address challenges that arise
for the social dimension of privacy given the increasing regulation of
privacy.
Thus, for example, Gary Marx, Regan and Solove discuss the social
meaning and value of privacy, and DeCew and Moore assess the
public/private boundary in the family, given that family conventions
are among the most crucial for this primary human socialization
setting (Roessler and Mokrosinska, 2015). As another example,
Roessler and Mokrosinska themselves, along with Jeroen van den Hoven,
Annabelle Lever and others address genetic data, markets in personal
data, and privacy as a political value, especially given the tension
between the right to privacy and freedom of expression. Other papers
in this cluster look at Internet surveillance and the democratic role
of privacy and social media. While posing many questions, these
essays isolate the central dilemmas that arise when addressing privacy
in social contexts and when groups, not merely individuals, have a
stake in the regulation of privacy (Roessler and Mokrosinska, 2015).
Finally, a third group of essays in this volume help readers
understand privacy regulations in the European Union and Canada.
Anita Allen emphasizes the limitations of privacy regulations in
health care, and the discrimination and disadvantages these
regulations lead to for people of color and women. Others discuss
both the combination and maze of privacy regulations at the federal
level in the U.S., across states, and within different privacy
legislation bodies. For current privacy controversies in these new
technical areas, there may be few concrete answers about the best way
to answer particular questions arising from the clash between privacy
and other important values. Nevertheless, “the authors have
taken privacy research an important step further and have demonstrated
that the recognition of the social dimensions of privacy should play a
central role in the way we understand privacy and approach current
privacy controversies” (Roessler and Mokrosinska, 7).
As debate has expanded over privacy and advancing technology, another
recent anthology has made important contributions to the
literature.  Privacy, Security and Accountability: Ethics, Law and
Policy edited by Adam D. Moore (2016) ushers in a cogent
articulation and defense of privacy even when privacy seems to
conflict with other important values. For example, new technologies
allowing increased data mining, re-identification of anonymized data
sets, heat-sensing cameras, license-plate readers, predictive
analytics and facial recognition technology can all expose information
we thought was protected as private to become more public than we had
ever imagined. These technologies and others can make us worry about
the moral, legal and social foundations and interrelationships between
privacy, security and accountability. Moore and his co-author for the
“Introduction”, Michael Katell, use a control-based
definition of privacy, that “A right to privacy is a right to
control access to, and uses of, places, bodies, and personal
information” (Moore, 3), urging that “the ability to
control access to our bodies, capacities, and powers, and to sensitive
personal information, is an essential part of human flourishing or
well-being” (Moore, 5). Security basically provides individuals
with control over their lives, projects and property, and to be free
from unjustified interference from other individuals, corporations and
governments. At this level, privacy and security seem to go hand in
hand, reinforcing each other.  However, it is important to ask when
external interference is justified, leading to conflicts between
privacy and security. People may have different views about when an
issue of national security, for example, is strong enough to override
individual or group privacy concerns.  Kenneth Einar Himma defends a
strong account, arguing that classical social contract theory implies
that citizens submit to state authority to gain security, a value the
state is morally obligated to protect. Thus armed services, police,
intelligence agencies, public health institutions and legal systems
provide security for individuals and groups (Moore, ch. 8).  But few
would accept the extreme claim that security always overrides privacy,
and in our “technologically enabled, fear-inspired environment,
balancing the legitimate needs with cherished rights and competing
values is an ongoing struggle for a deliberative democracy and society
in general” (Moore, 7). While we can appreciate somewhat
different categories of moral, social and legal accountability, just
as we discuss moral, social and legal responsibility, we all
understand it becomes clear that accountability can sometimes
supersede privacy rights, and yet privacy rights can on other
occasions override accountability in its multiple forms. As the
authors in this volume note, there is good reason to conclude that
privacy, security and accountability are all morally valuable.  Yet we
may all wonder what the appropriate balance is between these different
values when they conflict.
 To describe just a few of the contributions in this volume, Anita
Allen argues that individuals have an obligation to protect their own
privacy (Moore, ch. 1). While that may be true, it is not at all clear
that individuals can protect their own privacy in the face of national
security concerns or demands for accountability. Dorota Mokrosinska
emphasizes privacy as a democratic value, thus strengthening
privacy’s value when it competes with freedom of expression and
other political interests.  Privacy can facilitate setting aside deep
disagreements in order for political engagement in a democracy to
proceed.  Thus Mokrosinska proposes a strategy for mediating between
privacy and free speech when they collide (Moore, ch. 4). As noted,
Kenneth Himma “argues that security is a more important right
that always ‘trumps’ privacy, which on his view is not an
absolute or fundamental right, but merely ‘instrumental’
to other rights” (Moore, 12, and ch. 8). Himma’s defense
is based on his view that security is fundamental to survival – our
most valuable duty and obligation. In contrast, responding to this
view, Adam Moore defends privacy over security with multiple
arguments, perhaps the most powerful of which is demonstrating
“the importance of privacy as a bulwark against the tyrannical
excesses of an unchecked security state” (Moore, 13, and ch. 9).
Alan Rubel discusses data collection by the National Security Agency
(NSA) in ch. 10, Bryce Clayton Powell focuses on surveillance
practices in chapter 11, and echoes Rubel’s concerns about
accountability and transparency in the processes of data collection
and surveillance, thus focusing on the importance of privacy rights in
this new technological era. Their concerns about law enforcement and
the implementation of many practices taken to fall under the Patriot
Act are also supported by Nadine Strossen’s discussion of such
enforcement as often both illegal and ineffective (Moore,
ch. 12). These discussions in information technology draw readers into
current debates about the boundaries between and relative values of
privacy, security and accountability.
Another discussion of privacy as a concept and its role and associated
tensions in discussions of advancing technology, is Privacy: What
Everyone Needs to Know, (Francis & Francis, 2017). It
provides an excellent new overview of the literature and topics
covered in this article. It is both a thoughtful and expansive book,
discussing privacy as it relates to concepts such as security and
autonomy in decision-making. Also assessing the state of privacy in
our changing technological era, the book addresses privacy questions
for individuals, families and other groups, with detailed attention to
personal information, health care, education, employment and other
financial issues, law enforcement, the Internet and social media, and
the importance of privacy in a democracy. It gives a balanced
treatment of alternative views in each of these areas, emphasizing the
multiple ways protection of privacy can vary substantially in
different spheres of our lives. The authors have expertise in both
philosophy and law, which is particularly timely and increasingly
necessary in any discussion of the value of privacy in these multiple
contexts.