Although Whitehead was Hartshorne’s senior by thirty-six years,
the two men began seriously to develop their ideas about God in
written form at roughly the same time. In his Harvard doctoral
dissertation (1923), Hartshorne argues for the existence of a God that
is the eminent exemplification of relational and social
values. Whitehead’s writings on the concept of God appear only
after 1924, when he moved to America. Between the publication
of Science and the Modern World (1925) and Process and
Reality (1929)—a time of intense creativity for
Whitehead—he articulated his metaphysical system, including the
concept of God. During Whitehead’s first year at Harvard,
Hartshorne was in Europe for his second year as a Sheldon Traveling
Fellow. When he returned to Harvard in 1925 he was given the dual
assignment of editing the papers of Charles Sanders Peirce and of
serving as Whitehead’s assistant. After 1940 Hartshorne became
the primary conduit for Whitehead’s theistic ideas. Indeed, the
elaboration and defense of process theism fell largely to Hartshorne
and his students at the University of Chicago (1928–1955), Emory
University (1955–1962), and the University of Texas at Austin
(1962–2000). So great was Hartshorne’s influence that some
scholars try to rescue Whitehead from a too Hartshornean
interpretation. This fact should serve as a warning that
Hartshorne’s version of process theism is not the same as
Whitehead’s. We shall see that Hartshorne’s treatment of
theism owes much to Whitehead’s metaphysics while departing from
it in ways that the Englishman would not accept.
Hartshorne accepted the task of chronicling process theism’s history
and showing its importance as a significant alternative to classical
theism, pantheism, atheism, and other lesser known options in
philosophical theology. His 1953 anthology (republished in 2000),
Philosophers Speak of God, edited with the help of his student
William L. Reese, is a massive critical study of the varieties of
concepts of God as they relate to process theism. The book includes
selections from and commentaries on a wide range of thinkers from
Western and Eastern traditions, both well-known and obscure. It is safe
to say that Hartshorne’s vigorous efforts on behalf of process theism
are the single most important factor in eroding the consensus among
philosophers that an eternal, immutable, and impassible deity should be
considered normative for philosophical theology.
Philosophers Speak of God demonstrates that Whitehead and
Hartshorne are not the sole representatives of process theism,
although they are its chief exponents. Buddhism, with its twin
emphases on impermanence and dependent origination, is arguably the
most sophisticated ancient form of process philosophy. Buddhist
philosophers criticized the notion of a timeless absolute without,
however, developing a form of process theism (e.g. Arnold 1998). Whitehead remarks that
his concept of God has more richness than the Buddhist concept of
nirvana and that his philosophy of religion could be viewed as an
effort to “true up” the Buddhist idea (Johnson 1983,
8). Hartshorne maintains that aspects of process theism are in Plato’s
later writings—specifically, the Sophist,
the Timaeus, and the
Laws—but they are never brought together into a
coherent theory. Hartshorne sees process theism as providing the needed
coherence (Dombrowski 2005 and Viney 2007).
In the generation immediately preceding Whitehead, C. S. Peirce
(1839–1914) and William James (1842–1910) closely
anticipated process theism and served as important influences on its
development. There was also a cross fertilization of ideas from some
of Whitehead’s contemporaries: Henri Bergson (1859–1941),
Samuel Alexander (1859–1938), and William Ernest Hocking
(1873–1966)—Hocking was one of Hartshorne’s teachers
at Harvard. Philosophers and religious thinkers who independently
formulated aspects of process theism in the twentieth century include:
Bernardino Varisco (1850–1933), Nicholas Berdyaev
(1874–1948), Mohammad Iqbal (1877–1938), Martin Buber
(1878–1965), Pierre Teilhard de Chardin (1881–1955), Edgar
Sheffield Brightman (1884–1953), Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan
(1888–1975), Sri Aurobindo (1892–1950), Hans Jonas
(1903–1993), and Abraham Joshua Heschel (1907–1972).
Because process theists reject the idea of a deity whose moral
character is ever questionable, John Stuart Mill’s essay,
“Theism,” is not an anticipation of process
theism. By parity of reasoning, Peter Forrest’s proposal of a God that
grows from pure power to pure love is not a version of theism that
process theists would find appealing (Forrest 2007). Some of the
central themes and arguments of process theism, however, are evident
in less well-known thinkers scattered throughout history. One can
mention the names of Levi ben Gerson (1288–1340), Fausto Socinus
(1539–1604), Friedrich Wilhelm Schelling (1775–1854),
Gustav Theodor Fechner (1801–1887), Rowland Gibson Hazard
(1801–1888), Jules Lequyer [or Lequier] (1814–1862),
Lorenzo D. McCabe (1817–1897), and Otto Pfleiderer
(1839–1908). Some might count G. W. F. Hegel (1770–1831)
as a forerunner of process theism, but his case is not clear. The idea
of development is central to Hegel’s thinking about the Absolute
Spirit.  On the other hand, his philosophy was more influential in
ushering in what he himself called “the death of God” than
in providing a clearly articulated theistic alternative to
classical theism (cf. Küng 1980, 138–42). It is also ironic
that it was much less in the positive influence of Hegelian idealism
than in the negative reactions to it that process philosophy, and by
implication process theism, matured in the twentieth century.
Philosophers and theologians who have published a monograph defending
some variety of process theism informed by Whitehead or Hartshorne
include: Henry Nelson Wieman (1884–1975), Bernard Meland
(1899–1993), Paul Weiss (1901–2002), Norman Pittenger
(1905–1997), Daniel Day Williams (1910–1973), John Moskop,
William L.  Reese, John B. Cobb, Jr., Schubert Ogden, Edgar A. Towne,
Eugene H. Peters (1929–1983), Bowman Clarke (1927–1996),
Joseph Bracken, Burton Z. Cooper, Marjorie Hewitt Suchocki, Gene
A. Reeves, Lewis S. Ford, André Gounelle, Rem B. Edwards,
Delwin Brown (1935–2009), David A. Pailin, Franklin I. Gamwell,
Forrest Wood, David Ray Griffin, James A. Keller, Jorge Luis Nobo,
Tyron Inbody, Carol P. Christ, George L. Goodwin, Barry Whitney,
Santiago Sia, Jay McDaniel, George W. Shields, Donald Viney, Daniel
A. Dombrowski, Anna Case-Winters, Kurian Kachappilly, Gregory A. Boyd,
Roland Faber, Thomas Jay Oord, Donna Bowman, Derek Malone-France, and
Julia Enxing; Williams, Reese, Cobb, Ogden, and Peters were
Hartshorne’s students at Chicago; Clarke and Edwards studied with him
at Emory; Nobo was Hartshorne’s student at Texas.
The question of the metaphysical relation of God and creativity is a
watershed between process theism and more traditional forms of theism.
Process philosophy, modifying a statement from Plato’s Sophist
(247e), affirms that the most concrete real beings—in
Whitehead’s language, actual entities—are characterized by the
power to act and to be acted upon (Plato says real beings act
or are acted upon). In process metaphysics no actual entity is
wholly determined by the activity of another; or phrased positively,
every actual entity retains some power of self-determination,
however minimal or slight it may be. According to this view, to have
power in relation to others is to have power in relation to other
entities with some degree of power. This is process philosophy’s
doctrine of universal creativity. Hartshorne says, “To be is to
create” (Hartshorne 1970, 1, 272). The logic of the matter does
not change if God is included in the metaphysical scheme. For process
theism, God is the supreme or eminent creative power, but not the only
creative power. Thus, process theists speak of God and the creatures as
co-creators (Hartshorne and Reese 2000, 140; Hartshorne 1967a, 113).
Process theism’s doctrine of creativity differs from that of
classical theism according to which God alone is genuinely creative.
Thomas Aquinas says that in the proper sense of the word, only God
creates (Summa Theologica I, Q 45, a. 5). Aquinas explains
that to create is to bring something from nothing, and this is possible
only for deity. This is the famous doctrine of creatio ex
nihilo, or creation from no pre-existing material. This ex
nihilo creation is logically distinct from the claim that the
universe is temporally finite. Aquinas, for example, treats the
questions whether God is the creator and whether the universe had a
beginning under separate headings. Aquinas is clear that he accepts the
temporal finitude of the universe as a matter of faith, from
revelation, and not because of rational argument. On the other hand,
like other traditional theists (Gottfried Leibniz for example), Aquinas
holds that God could have created a temporally infinite universe, but
it too would have been created ex nihilo.
Process theists generally, though not unanimously, deny that the
universe had a first temporal moment. Those wishing to demonstrate the
compatibility between process theism and Jewish and Christian
Scripture commonly follow David Griffin’s arguments that the Bible
neither requires nor implies an absolute beginning of the universe
(Griffin 2001b, 109–114). There is still the objection, however,
that by conceiving both God and the creatures as creative, process
theists seem to destroy one of the most meaningful contrasts between
God and the world: God as creator and the world as created. Indeed,
Whitehead says, “It is as true to say that God creates the
World, as that the World creates God” (Whitehead 1978, 348). One
must, however, separate Whitehead’s poetic expression from his
philosophical meaning.  In process theism, as in traditional theism,
the existence of God is in no way precarious, in no way
dependent upon the activity of other entities; likewise, process
theism and traditional theism are in agreement that non-divine
individuals are contingent (they can fail to exist)—in the case
of non-angelic beings, they are born and they die. In Whitehead’s and
Hartshorne’s form of theism, God’s existence is everlasting, but the
existence of any particular creature is not. Nevertheless, the
creatures, being lesser creators, create something in God, if only the
knowledge of their own activity. For process theism, the activity of
the creatures makes no difference to God’s existence, only to God’s
experience of them.
Implicit in traditional theism’s doctrine of creation are the ideas
that God’s creative act and God’s knowledge of the world are
non-temporal. Augustine, for example, in the Confessions
(book XI, chapters 13 and 14), considers it nonsensical to ask what
God was doing before the creation of the world; God, in creating the
universe, brings time—and with it, relations of before and
after—into existence; thus, it is no more meaningful to ask what
came
before the first moment of time than it is to ask what is
north of the north pole. In traditional theism, the temporal world is
spread out before God who can see it in its entirety from an eternal
vantage point, like an observer on a hill viewing travelers in a
caravan. As Boethius says in The Consolation of Philosophy
(book 5, prose 6), eternity is the complete, simultaneous and perfect
possession of everlasting life. Process theism takes a contrary view
that time is the process of creation. In other words, the
order of beings in time is the process whereby beings are created. For
process metaphysics, there is no eternal act of divine creation that
fixes the world in existence and there is no eternal perspective from
which the universe can be considered a finished product. Furthermore,
the “creative advance,” as Whitehead calls the universe,
is inherently open-ended and growing, like a line to which tiny
segments are continually being added. Where Aquinas could liken God’s
prescience to a man viewing a caravan of travelers from a high tower,
Hartshorne says, “There is not (either now or eternally) a fixed
totality of travelers for God to survey, but a new totality each
moment” (Hartshorne 1970, 135).
Whitehead remarks that, “In all philosophic theory there is an
ultimate which is actual in virtue of its accidents” (Whitehead
1978, 7). In process thought, this ultimate is creativity. It would be
misleading, however, to speak as though creativity were “the
ultimate reality” according to process theism (Hick 1990, 49).
Creativity is not a metaphysical agency that produces anything;
rather, it is the character of every concrete fact, from the humblest
flicker of existence in non-divine actual entities to God. Whitehead’s
pithy summary of process philosophy is, “The many become one,
and are increased by one” (Whitehead 1978, 21). Creativity,
then, is the ultimate metaphysical principle. A principle, however, is
not a real being. Whitehead explained to his student A. H. Johnson
that God is not a principle but an actuality (Johnson 1983, 5). That
which is best described, in process theism, as the ultimate reality,
is God. For Whitehead and Hartshorne, God should not be treated as the
exception to metaphysical principles; otherwise, there can be no
reasoned discourse about the divine (that is, no theology). Whitehead
and Hartshorne strive to conceive God as the chief exemplification of
metaphysical principles. In process theism, the divine or eminent form
of creativity provides the basis for cosmic order and achieved
value. In Whitehead’s words, God is “the poet of the
world,” leading it with tender patience by the divine vision of
truth, beauty, and goodness (Whitehead 1978, 346).
Process theism is critical of the traditional metaphysical question,
“Why is there something rather than nothing?” In process
thought, the proposition, “Something exists,” is a
necessary truth (Hartshorne 1971). Insofar as traditional theism
maintains the doctrine of the necessary existence of God, it too
accepts the necessity of something existing. Therefore, the difference
between process theism and traditional theism is not in whether
something necessarily exists, but in the nature of the
necessarily existent. According to traditional theism, the
totality of non-divine entities is a multiplicity in need of
grounding in a primordial unifying activity—the “pure
act” (actus purus) of existing that is God.
Process theism refuses to give a privileged metaphysical status to the
one over the many. In Whitehead’s words, “The term
‘many’ presupposes the term ‘one,’ and the term
‘one’ presupposes the term ‘many’”
(Whitehead 1978, 21). Taking creativity as the category of the ultimate
is an attempt to keep the one and the many on equal metaphysical
footing by taking reality itself as necessarily social. God, considered
as the ultimate reality in any version of process metaphysics,
necessarily exists as a social being in dynamic interaction with all
non-divine entities.
Clearly, treating creativity as the ultimate metaphysical principle
has far-reaching consequences for the concept of God and of God’s
relations to others. It is not possible, in process metaphysics, to
conceive divine activity as a “supernatural” intervention
into the “natural” order of events. Process theists usually
regard the distinction between the supernatural and the natural as a
by-product of the doctrine of creation ex nihilo. In process
thought, there is no such thing as a realm of the natural in contrast
to that which is supernatural. On the other hand, if “the
natural” is defined more neutrally as “what is in the
nature of things,” then process metaphysics characterizes the
natural as the creative activity of actual entities. In Whitehead’s
words, “It lies in the nature of things that the many enter into
complex unity” (Whitehead 1978, 21). It is tempting to emphasize
process theism’s denial of the supernatural and thereby highlight what
the process God cannot do in comparison to what the traditional God can
do (that is, to bring something from nothing). In fairness, however,
equal stress should be placed on process theism’s denial of the natural
(as traditionally conceived) so that one may highlight what the
creatures cannot do, in traditional theism, in comparison to what they
can do in process metaphysics (that is, to be part creators of the
world with God).
Process theists generally regard the notion of creation ex
nihilo, as explained above, as going hand-in-hand with the idea
that the relations between God and the world are one-way relations. God
creates, but the creatures lack all creative power, the one wholly
uncreated, the other wholly uncreative (Hartshorne 1970, 9). It is not
within the ability of any creature, according to this view, to make a
difference to God. Aquinas’s way of expressing this asymmetry is to say
that the relation from God to the creatures is real (for it makes a
difference, all the difference, to them) whereas the relation from the
creatures to God is rational, or in the mind only (for the existence of
the creatures makes no difference to the being of God) (Summa
Theologica I, Q 13, a. 7). Aquinas borrows, and places in a
Christian context, Aristotle’s terms of “pure act” and
“unmoved mover” to apply to God. To say that God is pure
act is to say that anything God could be, God already is—there
is no potentiality in God for any type of change. To say that God is
the unmoved mover is to say that the divine moves others but is unmoved
by another—this includes the idea that God is impassible,
literally, without feeling or emotion.
In the view of process theism, the denial of real relations in God
renders classical theism paradoxical to the point of incoherence.
According to classical theism, God has perfect knowledge of a
contingent and changing world, yet nothing in God could be other than
it is. The one condition, however, contradicts the other (cf.
Hartshorne 1948, 13–14; Shields 1983; Viney 2013). If any event is
contingent then it could be otherwise—for example, this bird
at this place and time is singing rather than sleeping; but if the
event could be otherwise, then God’s knowledge of the event could be
otherwise—knowing this bird at this place and time as singing
rather than as sleeping. The contingency implied for God’s knowing is
not that God might have been ignorant of something but that the thing
that God knows might have been different. An infallible knower
necessarily knows whatever exists; it does not follow, however, that
what exists is necessary unless one adds the premise, taken
from classical theism, that nothing in God could be other than it
is. Process theism jettisons the premise that there is nothing
contingent in God. The only other non-atheistic alternatives, say
process theists, are to follow Aristotle and deny that God knows the
world or to follow Spinoza and deny that nothing in God or in the
world could be other than it is (Hartshorne 1976, 12). What is
impossible is a God with no contingent aspects knowing a contingent
world.
The denial of real relations in God also has
paradoxical consequences for the concept of divine goodness. If God is
unaffected by the creatures, then God is impassible, not moved by
their suffering. Anselm, in Proslogion chapter VIII, asks how
God can be compassionate towards the creatures without feeling
sympathy for them. His answer—in effect a kind of theological
behaviorism (Dombrowski 2006, 140)—is that the creatures feel
the effects of divine compassion but that God feels nothing. This
leaves unanswered how non-sympathetic compassion is possible. Aquinas
provides a less obviously question begging reply. He says that to love
another is to will the good of the other; God necessarily wills the
good of the other, so God is love (Summa Theologica I, Q 20,
a. 2).  Process theists do not deny that love requires willing the
good of the other, but they maintain that it requires something more,
or at very least that there are greater forms of love of which willing
the good of the other is a necessary aspect. Divine love is more than
beneficence; it includes sensitivity to the joys and sorrows of the
beloved. This idea is expressed in Whitehead’s depiction of God as
“the great companion—the fellow-sufferer who
understands” (Whitehead 1978, 351). Hartshorne points out that
Anselm’s God can give us “everything except the right to believe
that there is one who, with infinitely subtle and appropriate
sensitivity, rejoices in all our joys and sorrows in all our
sorrows” (Hartshorne 1948, 54).
Closely related to the problem of passionless love, for classical
theism, is the question of the world’s value. The denial of real
relations in God, coupled with the concept that the world and its
creatures have no value except as it is borrowed from God, implies that
that total reality described by God-and-the-world contains no
more value than that described by God-without-the-world. This
view has two unhappy consequences. First, it implies that there is no
value in God’s creating the world—nothing is gained, or lost,
in God’s decision to create. Second, it implies that there is no value
in God’s interaction with the creatures. Process theists point out that
these ideas do not square with analogies drawn from human experience.
There is value in giving one’s love to another, as for instance,
bringing children into the world and loving them; there is also value
in one’s love being received and returned, as when the children mature
and cherish relations with their parents. Yet, one cannot love another
unless the other exists, or once existed. Thus, if there is a value in
love, it requires the existence of the other, not merely
the idea of the existence of the other. Process theism rejects
the counter-intuitive claim that the world as actually existing has no
more value than the world as possibly existing. By parity of reasoning,
process theism rejects the view that it is no better for God to create
the world than to contemplate the possibility of creating it.
Perhaps the most disastrous consequences of the denial of real
relations in God, as far as process theists are concerned, are the
problems that it poses for free will and creaturely suffering. The
creative or causal relation flows one way only, from God
to the world. The world and its creatures are products of a
unilateral divine decision that things should be one way rather than
another. Hartshorne poses a dilemma for this view. Either biological
parents are part creators of their children or they are not. If they
are then God alone is not the creator. On the other hand, if parents
are not genuine creators of their children then the creatures never
create anything and we don’t know what “create” means, for
parents having children would seem to be a paradigm of
creation—note the word “procreative” (cf. Hartshorne
1987, 88–89).  Classical theists accept precisely the implication that
Hartshorne finds absurd, namely, that the creatures never create
anything. The Thomist, for example, holds that one’s parents are not
creative; they are the vehicles whereby matter-energy is rearranged so
as to form (not to create) a new human being. Strictly speaking, for
Aquinas, what God creates is your-parents-having-you. Your
parents had no part in your creation.
Aquinas’s theory poses complications for human freedom. The reality
described by your-parents-having-you includes the decisions
they make in having you. God, in creating that reality, also creates
those decisions. Aquinas says that God’s will is perfectly
efficacious—that is, what God wills comes to pass. Therefore,
your parents’ decisions in your-parents-having-you must
occur. Would this view of decision making jeopardize human freedom?
Aquinas, representing classical theism, says no, but Hartshorne,
representing process theism, says yes. In Aquinas’s view, one’s free
decisions have two sufficient explanations, one’s own will
and God’s will. In other words, God brings it about not
only that one freely decides something, but what one
freely decides (Summa Theologica I, Q 19, a. 8). Process
theists counter that multiple freedom (whether between God and the
creatures or among the creatures) implies the possibility of wills
coming into conflict or being in harmony. Hartshorne says, “Risk
and opportunity go together, not because God chooses to have it so,
but because opportunity without risk is meaningless or
contradictory” (Hartshorne 1970, 238). If this is true, then it
must be possible for the will of the creatures to be at cross purposes
with the divine will. We have already seen that classical theists and
process theists agree that God wills the good of the creatures. Human
beings, however, do not always will their own good, or the good of
other people. In those cases, on the classical view, God brings it
about that people freely decide not to will the good of
others. Process theists argue that this makes God responsible for evil
and suffering in a way that contradicts divine goodness. On the
classical view, for example, the crimes that disfigure human history
are the fault of human beings, but they are also God’s doing.
Classical theists are not without responses to these criticisms. One
well-known reply, used by Augustine and Aquinas, is to invoke the
distinction between divine permission and divine causation of human
wickedness and suffering. On this view, the evil in the world is
permitted by God in order to bring about a greater good. For example,
the Exultet of the Easter Vigil, sometimes ascribed to Ambrose of
Milan, speaks of the sin of Adam and Eve as a blessed fault (O
felix culpa!) that made possible the sacrificial death of Christ.
Process theists argue that there can be no distinction between
permitting and causing in a being that creates the universe ex
nihilo. On the principles of classical theism, whatever is
divinely “permitted” is also divinely created to be as it
is (cf. Griffin 1976, 63–64 and 82–83)—this is one
of the few points on which process theism agrees with John Calvin
(Case-Winters, 1990, 71). On the process view, creaturely decisions
are themselves acts of creation, which means that the universe is a
joint product of God and the creatures. Process theists do not see
how, in creation ex nihilo, creaturely decisions that God
permits are not orchestrated by God so as to fulfill the purposes God
has for them.  Albert Einstein is reported to have said that God does
not play dice with the universe. Although he was not a classical
theist, his view on this issue is in accord with that philosophy. God
may, as it were, allow or permit the dice to fall where they may, but
only if they fall as God desires them to fall; this seems different in
name only from playing with loaded dice. Hartshorne replies,
“Einstein’s rejection of a ‘dice-throwing God’
was a great man’s error. And human individuals are some of the dice
…” (Hartshorne 1967a, 113).
The dominant theological position in the West, which we have been
referring to as classical theism, denies all relativity to God. One
might suppose that the Christian doctrines of the Trinity and the
Incarnation of God in Christ would temper disbelief in divine
relativity. The trend, however, was to argue that these doctrines do
not conflict with the denial of real relations in God. Claims of
revealed truth aside, the core doctrine has been that God, to be God,
must be in all respects absolute and in no respects relative. As goes
the contrast between absolute and relative, so go other metaphysical
contrasts. Theists traditionally held that God is in all
respects creator, active, infinite, eternal, necessary,
independent, immutable, and impassible and in no respects
created, passive, finite, temporal, contingent, dependent, mutable, or
passible. This view can be interpreted either as a doctrine about the
nature of God or as a thesis about the parameters of responsible
discourse about God (in the latter case it is called the via
negativa, or negative path). Hartshorne complains that, on
either interpretation, traditional theology is guilty of a
“monopolar prejudice,” placing God (or talk about God) on
one side of polar contrasts and the world on the other. It is
monopolar insofar as deity is characterized by only one side
of each pair of contrasts; it is prejudicial insofar as it
holds to the invidious nature of the contrasts. As Hartshorne notes,
“One pole of each contrary is regarded as more excellent than the
other, so that the supremely excellent being cannot be described by the
other and inferior pole” (Hartshorne and Reese 2000, 2).
Classical theists certainly made provisions for speaking of God in
ways that suggested divine passion and even mutability. As Paul
Gavrilyuk argues, for the Church Fathers, divine impassibility was
less a denial of God’s emotional life than it was a qualifier that
ruled out “passions and experiences that were unbecoming of the
divine nature” (Gavrilyuk 2004, 16). In a similar vein, Michael
Dodds emphasizes that Aquinas did not construe divine immutability as
an attribute of God nor did he think that it implies inertness or
stagnation. Nevertheless, Dodds, interpreting Aquinas, maintains that
immutability “seems to signify divine being (esse) more
appropriately [than mutability] since it more clearly indicates its
distinction from all other things and its transcendence of all human
thought and language” (Dodds 2008, 157–158).
Process theists also emphasize our limitations in knowing the reality
of God, but they are not persuaded that it is best signified by only
one pair of the metaphysical contraries. If one is willing to concede
that God should not be conceived as immutable in the bad ways that
creatures are unchanging, why may not God be conceived as changeable
in the good ways that creatures are, with the proviso that God’s
excellence necessarily surpasses all else? Hartshorne notes that
ordinary language provides scanty support for and abundant evidence
against the superiority of one pole over the other. We have already
seen that process theism finds positive value in God’s love being
active as well as passive; it is as important that God wills the good
of the creatures as that God is affected by their joy and
suffering. Here is another of Hartshorne’s many examples, expressed
with some humor:
Hartshorne’s larger point is that the pairs of metaphysical
contraries are not related as superior to inferior, but that
there are admirable and deficient manifestations of both sides. He sums
this up in the principle of the non-invidiousness of the
metaphysical contraries (Hartshorne 1970, 268). If this principle
is correct, and if God is conceived as the eminent embodiment of value
and supremely worshipful being, then God must be conceived not in
monopolar terms but as dipolar, exemplifying the admirable forms of
both pairs of metaphysical contrasts. For example, rather than saying
that God is in all respects active and in no respects passive, the
alternative is to say that God is active in some respects and passive
in other respects, each in uniquely excellent ways. This is one meaning
of the expression “dipolar theism”; in light of other
meanings to be given to “dipolar” in discussions of process
theism, it is perhaps clearer to use Hartshorne’s expression for this
idea: dual transcendence, that is to say, God as the supreme
embodiment of each pair of metaphysical contraries.
The most elegant statement of dual transcendence is in the closing
pages of Process and Reality, a line of which we have already
quoted. The complete quotation reads like a litany:
It is as true to say that God is permanent and the world fluent, as
that the World is permanent and God is fluent.
It is as true to say that God is one and the World many, as that the
World is one and God many.
It is as true to say that, in comparison with the World, God is actual
eminently, as that, in comparison with God, the World is actual
eminently.
It is as true to say that the World is immanent in God, as that God is
immanent in the World.
It is as true to say that God transcends the World, as that the World
transcends God.
It is as true to say that God creates the World, as that the World
creates God.
We saw above in the discussion of divine creativity that Whitehead
indulges in poetic expression and that understanding his meaning
requires looking more closely at his metaphysical categories. Above
all, however, what is required is a way of making principled
distinctions between different aspects of God so that the doctrine of
dual transcendence does not collapse into contradiction. Let us examine
the different ways in which Whitehead and Hartshorne attempt to save
the doctrine of dual transcendence from incoherence.
In Whitehead’s philosophy, every actual entity has a physical and a
mental pole. For this reason, Whitehead speaks of actual entities as
“dipolar” (thus, a second meaning of the word). The
physical and mental poles are aspects of every real being (actual
entities) but they are not real beings themselves. In other words,
Whitehead is not a mind-body dualist. It is
also important to note that, for Whitehead, human consciousness is a
higher form of mentality but not the only form. Thus, Whitehead does
not claim that every real being is a conscious entity. As with
Leibniz, Whitehead recognizes a continuum of mind-like qualities
ranging from very primitive feelings to the most advanced form of
self-awareness.  Whereas Leibniz speaks of every real being—he
calls them monads—as having apperception and appetition,
Whitehead speaks of every actual entity as prehending, or
grasping or taking account of, its environment and as striving to
realize the
subjective aim of coordinating its prehensions in some
determinate fashion. In Process and Reality, Whitehead uses the
word “feeling” as a synonym for prehension to indicate the
vector character of feelings—a feeling is always a
feeling of something. Whitehead’s belief in a continuum of
mental qualities fits neatly with evolutionary theory where it is
commonplace to conceive differing forms of organic complexity as
associated with differing levels of mental capacity. For example, the
frontal cortex of a human brain allows for more advanced mentality
than one finds in a chimpanzee, whose brain is not as complex.
Whitehead is fully aware that there is an imaginative leap in
applying these categories to God, but he believes the application can
be done in a disciplined and systematic fashion. Whitehead conceives
God as an actual entity. In God, the physical and mental poles are
called the consequent nature and the primordial
nature respectively. As with the physical and mental poles of
actual entities, so the two “natures” are distinguishable
but inseparable aspects of deity. That is to say, neither can exist
apart from the other and each requires the other. The primordial nature
is God’s envisagement of all possibilities; in the idiom of Leibniz, it
is God’s knowledge of all possible worlds. It is called
“primordial” because it represents what could be
in a sense not tethered to the actual course of events. It is logical
space, deficient in actuality apart from the consequent nature says
Whitehead. The consequent nature is God’s prehensions of the actual
processes of the world. Conversely, it is the world’s influence on God.
It is called “consequent” because it is consequent upon, or
dependent upon, the decisions of non-divine actual entities (Whitehead
calls them actual occasions). The consequent nature is the record of
all achieved fact, a perfect memory of what has been—Whitehead
speaks of the “objective immortality” of the world in God.
The two natures work in concert in the process of God’s interaction
with the creatures. The deity receives the world of actual occasions
into its experience; then, comparing what has actually occurred with
the realm of pure possibility, God informs the world with new ideals
(new aims), customized for each actual entity, for what realistically
could be achieved. Whitehead sometimes refers to this aspect of the
process as the superjective nature of God. It is God’s
relevance for the world as a “lure for feeling,” urging the
creatures to strive for whatever perfection of which they are
capable.
Each of the statements in Whitehead’s “litany” can be
interpreted in terms of the interaction between the two natures and
God’s interaction with the world. God is permanent in the sense of
everlastingly envisioning the realm of possibility; the world is
permanent as objectively immortal in God’s memory. God is fluent in
constantly acquiring new experiences of the world and the world is
fluent in the rhythm of the birth and death of actual occasions. God is
one in being a single actual entity; but God is many in the graded
relevance of possibilities provided for each emergent occasion. The
world is one in virtue of God’s experience of it; the world is many
because of the plurality of occasions that make it up. God is eminently
actual in comparison to the world by achieving a unification of worldly
occasions in the consequent nature that is beyond any of them taken
singly; but the world is eminently actual in comparison to God’s
primordial nature, which is not concrete, although it is as infinite as
the entire range of possibility. God and the world are immanent in each
other in that each experiences the other; yet God and the world
transcend each other by being realities whose experiences are not
entirely determined by the other. Finally, as we have seen, God creates
the world by informing it with possibilities (technically speaking, God
provides “initial aims” for every nascent occasion). The
world creates God, not by bringing God into existence, but by creating
something in God, namely the material for what shall become objectively
immortal.
Hartshorne develops the concept of dual transcendence by drawing a
distinction of logical type between, on the one hand, an individual’s
existence and enduring characteristics and, on the other hand, the
actual states of the individual. Using an example dear to his
ornithological interests, Hartshorne says, “That I shall (at
least probably) exist tomorrow is one thing; that I shall exist hearing
a blue jay call at noon is another” (Hartshorne 1962, 63). The
logical relationship between the two sentences “I shall exist
tomorrow” and “I shall exist tomorrow as hearing a blue jay
call at noon” is that the second cannot be inferred from the
first, but the first can be inferred from the second. The relation of
entailment between the sentences is a function of the information
provided in them. Both sentences speak of the individual’s existence,
but only the second sentence speaks of the experience that the
individual is having. Hartshorne argues that this logical relation
between the sentences reflects an ontological difference between the
bare fact of one’s existence and the actual states in which one exists.
Existence, says Hartshorne, is abstract compared to actuality, which is
the concrete. What is true of existence is also true of one’s defining
or enduring characteristics. The state of affairs described by
“Hartshorne existing as an ornithologist” is abstract
compared to the state of affairs described by “Hartshorne
existing as an ornithologist hearing a blue jay call at noon.”
The more abstract statement leaves more details concerning the
individual’s actuality to be defined. Unless strict determinism is the
case—which would require that there is only one future that is
genuinely possible—the ornithologist can exist tomorrow without
hearing a blue jay call at noon (perhaps he will hear another bird, or
none at all).
In effect, Hartshorne lays out a three-fold distinction between
what a thing is (its essence or defining characteristics),
that a thing is (its existence), and the particular
manner in which it exists (its actual states or actuality).
Hartshorne maintains that this distinction, familiar enough in ordinary
experience, is applicable to God and is the basis for speaking of dual
transcendence in deity. Between the cases of God and the creatures,
however, there are important differences. Human existence and character
are fragile and subject to variation. God’s existence and character, on
the other hand, are not insecure, unstable, or transient; in a word,
they are not contingent. Hartshorne agrees with traditional theism that
God exists without the possibility of not existing (sometimes called
necessary existence or existence a se) and that God is
necessarily supreme in love, knowledge, and power. A closely related
point is that, in the divine case, existence and essence are identical,
whereas they are not the same thing in the creatures. Aquinas speaks of
the “existential composition” of the creatures to indicate
that no creature necessarily exists. Hartshorne agrees with Aquinas
about this. Since, in God, existence and essence are the same,
Hartshorne customarily abbreviates the distinction among existence,
essence, and actuality to that between existence and actuality.
The importance of the distinction between existence and actuality is
to demonstrate that the necessary aspects of deity do not preclude God
having contingent aspects, provided they do not conflict with the
necessary ones. We saw previously, in the discussion of real relations,
that there must be contingent aspects of the divine being if it is to
have perfect knowledge of contingent things. Aquinas resists this
conclusion, in part, because he sees contingency as a kind of
metaphysical virus that infects the very existence of the one of which
it is a characteristic. He says that a being whose substance has any
admixture of potency is subject to decay (as in physical creatures) or
annihilation (as in the case of angels) (Summa Contra Gentiles
I, ch. 16, para. 2). The logical type distinction between existence and
actuality ensures that contingencies in God pose no threat to the
deity’s necessary existence. Thus, Hartshorne says, “That God
exists is one with his essence and is an analytic truth … but
how, or in what actual state of experience or knowledge or will, he
exists is contingent in the same sense as is our own existence”
(Hartshorne 1948, 87). It is also part of Hartshorne’s theory that
God’s character or essence is supremely excellent. Thus, the
contingencies in the divine actuality do not include the possibilities
of God being selfish, cruel, or wicked as they do in the human
case.
The mention of angelic existence in the previous paragraph brings up a
point seldom noticed in discussions of process theism. Aquinas
approximates the Hartshornean distinction between immutable existence
and mutable actuality in what he says about the nature of
angels. (Thomists might say that Hartshorne approximates Aquinas.)
Aquinas holds that angels are not subject to natural decay or
destruction for they are incorporeal. Like God, their existence is not
affected by the flow of time. They are, however, capable of certain
kinds of change. While their existence is constant, they have free
will and their knowledge can increase, and in a certain sense, they
can move from place to place. Aquinas says that between the
unqualified changelessness of God’s eternity and the qualified
changeableness of corporeal existence, there is the qualified
immutability of angelic being. The technical expression for this
is æviternity, which is the mean between the extremes
of eternity and time (Summa Theologica I, Q 19, a. 5). One is
almost tempted to say that God, as conceived by Hartshorne,
is æviternital, except for three important differences:
(1) angelic existence is unaffected by time, but it is still
contingent, unlike the existence of Hartshorne’s God; (2) angelic
freedom includes the freedom to be wicked and Hartshorne does not view
that as an option for God; (3) angels are entirely nonphysical, but
Hartshorne argues, as we shall see, that God has a body of sorts in
the universe itself.
Hartshorne often refers to his theism as “neoclassical”
to indicate both its affinities with and its departures from classical
theism—it retains much of what is “classical” in
classical theism, but adds something that is new (neo).
Classical theism holds to the necessity, eternity, infinity,
independence, immutability, and impassibility of God. Hartshorne agrees
that God can be so characterized, but only with respect to the divine
existence and essence. Hartshorne adds that God’s
actuality is contingent, temporal, finite, dependent, mutable,
and passible. Indeed, Hartshorne agrees with Whitehead that all
achieved value is necessarily finite in the sense of not
exhausting all that can be. Whitehead makes the point that the
limitation of God is a necessary condition of God’s goodness.
It is noteworthy that Whitehead does not say that God is not
infinite, but that God is not infinite in all respects. Thus, dual
transcendence does not entail that God is in no sense infinite.
Hartshorne locates the infinity of God primarily in the unlimited
capacity to influence, know, and care for the creatures in any
conceivable world.
One may rightly demand an answer to the question: If
God is finite in some respects, what prevents there being a reality
that surpasses God? Hartshorne’s response is that there is indeed a
possible reality that surpasses God in any actual state of the divine
existence, but what can surpass God is only a subsequent actual state
of Godself. Hartshorne calls on Gustav Fechner’s distinction between
“surpassable by others, including self” and
“surpassable, but only by self.” It is only the latter
phrase, according to Hartshorne, that applies to God. This is what
Hartshorne calls R-perfection (for relative perfection), a form of
perfection that permits a contingent actuality in God that is
unsurpassed by all others, excluding self. This is by way of
contrast with A-perfection (for absolute perfection)—which
applies to the divine existence and essence—which is to be
unsurpassable by all others, including self. To speak of God
as having dual transcendence is to say that God is both R-perfect and
A-perfect, but in different respects. Thus, one of Hartshorne’s
preferred definitions of God: “the self-surpassing surpasser of
all” (Hartshorne 1948, 20).
Hartshorne’s version of dual transcendence is quite different from
Whitehead’s. To be sure, Whitehead and Hartshorne are in firm
agreement, and are at pains to emphasize, that the relations between
God and the world are symmetrical. In addition, both philosophers
regard God as supremely worshipful not only with respect to the divine
absoluteness but also with respect to the divine relativity. Indeed,
one of the main objectives of Hartshorne’s book The Divine
Relativity (1948) is to show that only by having an eminent form
of relativity can the deity qualify as worshipful. Nevertheless,
Hartshorne conceives God as an individual who endures through various
actual states. In the technical language of Whitehead’s philosophy,
this makes God a “society,” that is to say, a collection
of actual entities extended in time, each member of which shares a
defining characteristic, passed along from one moment to the next. All
enduring objects are societies of actual entities; moreover, no actual
entity endures through various states. Whitehead’s God is not
an enduring object but a single actual entity. To speak of Whitehead’s
God as dipolar is to indicate that God has a physical and a mental
pole. This sense of “dipolar” is different from the
meaning that Hartshorne commonly gives the expression. Hartshorne does
not deny that actual entities are dipolar, nor does he deny that there
are physical and mental aspects of deity, but his God is dipolar in
having an enduring character embodied in successive states, the
character being abstract compared to the concrete actual
states—this gives us a third meaning of “dipolar”
(cf. Griffin’s rather different view on the meanings of dipolarity in
God, Griffin 2001a, 150). Hartshorne says, “Unlike Whitehead, I
… define God as an enduring society of actualities, not a
single actuality. Here I think Whitehead was just mistaken”
(Hartshorne 1967b, 287).
Whitehead indicated that he considered the possibility of God being
an enduring object, and thus a society, but rejected it on the grounds
that God’s consequent nature loses nothing of the past whereas
societies are characterized by partial loss of the past (Johnson 1983,
9). This argument is curious, for it would seem to apply to actual
entities as well as to societies. No non-divine actual entity preserves
its entire past without distortion and loss; yet Whitehead attributes
to deity—in the doctrine of objective immortality of the past
in God—what no other actual entity can accomplish. Hartshorne
notes that the unique excellence of retaining the past perfectly in
memory must be no less true if God is an actual entity than if God is a
society (Hartshorne 1964, 324). He argues that the consequent nature of
God is itself abstract, for it is the generic property of being
somehow actual or affected by others (Hartshorne 1972,
75–76).  Thus, Hartshorne proposes that Whitehead would be more true
to his own metaphysics by conceiving God as an enduring object, and
thus as a society, rather than as a single actual entity. Hartshorne
acknowledged that his own theory is not without its problems. Not
least of these is how to coordinate the concept of a divine temporal
world-line with the relativistic view of space-time in contemporary
physics (Hartshorne 1970, 123–125; Sia 1990, 276; cf. Griffin
1992). Suffice it to say that the question whether God is best
conceived as a single actual entity or as an enduring object is a
major parting of the ways between process theists. Griffin, for
example, refers to the idea of God as a single everlasting actual
entity as Whitehead’s “greatest blunder” (Griffin 2001a,
152). Nevertheless, Whitehead’s view has a number of able defenders,
including Jorge Nobo and Palmyre Oomen (Nobo 1989; Oomen 1998).
The doctrine of prehension, developed by Whitehead but also
enthusiastically endorsed by Hartshorne, insures that the world is,
in some sense, part of God. Actual entities, by virtue of
their prehensions of one another, are internally related to their
predecessors and externally related to their successors. Whitehead’s
“organic” philosophy can thereby affirm both that an
individual is in the world and the world is in the
individual. This generalization applies equally to God, but with
differences that allow for a clear distinction between the divine and
the non-divine. Whitehead maintains that events in the world have a
specific locus with reference to God, but God has no locus with
reference to the world (Johnson 1983, 9). Hartshorne says that God is
the one individual conceivable a priori—God is
individuated by, though not exhausted by, concepts alone (Hartshorne
1948, 31). This is because God’s scope of interaction is universal
whereas the scope of interaction for any creature is localized. To be
God is to causally affect and be affected by every real being;
to be a non-divine entity is to causally affect and be affected by
some, but not all, creatures. Whitehead and Hartshorne also
say that God and the creatures differ in the quality of interaction.
For example, any non-divine individual’s knowledge of others is
imperfect and partial whereas God’s knowledge is without defect
(Hartshorne 1967, 40).
While both philosophers deny that God has location within the
universe, they consider God to be in some sense a physical or
material being. Since process thought affirms the goodness of God, it
is clear that it denies the ancient Manichean and Gnostic ideas that
there is something inherently evil in being material. Even so, in order
to fully appreciate the process view, it is well to keep in mind that
Whitehead and Hartshorne reject the traditional concept of matter as
devoid of any activity or feeling—Whitehead refers to the
traditional view of matter as “vacuous actuality.” Because
actual entities are dipolar, all of them have a physical aspect, but
none are entirely lacking in psychic qualities, although in most cases
these qualities are negligible. Thus, in process thought, being
physical does not mean having no mind-like qualities. The closest
anticipation of process ideas about mind and body are in Leibniz,
although process thought denies Leibniz’s view that the monads have no
“windows.” Leibniz maintains that no monad enters into the
internal constitution of another; Whitehead’s doctrine of prehension
insures that actual entities are internally related to their
predecessors.
A common criticism of process theism is that it conceives God as
“needing” the world. In one sense this is true, but in
another sense it is false. It is true that, in process metaphysics, the
structure of reality is social, and necessarily so. Thus, it promotes a
social view of God—God as necessarily related to non-divine
actualities. On the other hand, the process God does not require any
particular universe in order to exist. Whitehead speaks of a succession
of “cosmic epochs” which are, in effect, different
universes where the very laws of nature are different. God presides
over each universe as its eminent creative power, making possible all
localized expressions of creativity, but no universe sustains God’s
existence. Hartshorne makes a similar point by comparing God’s
existence and actuality to a set that necessarily has members.
“To say that a class could not be empty is not at all to say that
its particular members are necessary” (Hartshorne 1970, 144).
From the perspective of process theism, the criticism that God
“needs” the universe is, at best, simply another way of
raising the question of how best to conceive the necessarily existent:
Is it, or is it not, social in nature?
Trinitarians sometimes argue that a social concept of ultimate reality
can be formulated if God is necessarily related to the divine
self. Process theists, especially those who are Christians, are not
averse to this suggestion. Nevertheless, if this is to be taken
seriously as a philosophical proposal, then there can be no mere
appeal to the “mystery” of the Trinity. Some effort should
be made to retain the primary meaning of “social” as
multiple entities in a network of relations, some of which are
internal and some external. That is to say, a genuinely social concept
of reality is one in which the multiple identities of each of the
interrelated and interacting entities are not absorbed into each
other. Whitehead and Hartshorne claim to do this apart from the
Christian doctrine of the Trinity, but there is no reason a
priori to suppose that Trinitarian metaphysics cannot be one
version of process metaphysics, or that the latter could not be
adapted to the former (Boyd 1992; Inbody 1997, ch. 8; Bracken and
Suchocki 2005).
Whitehead and Hartshorne part company concerning the proper analogy
for conceiving the God-world relation. Hartshorne modifies
Plato’s world-soul analogy in the Timaeus
(30a–34c). In Plato’s myth, the eternal demiurge creates a
universe that is a living creature, animated by a soul. Hartshorne
argues that the best philosophical interpretation of the myth is to
consider the demiurge and the world-soul as two aspects of the same
deity (Hartshorne & Reese 2000, 55). If this is correct, then
Plato affirms a version of dual transcendence, with one aspect of God
being the universe. According to this interpretation, Plato came close
to Hartshorne’s view that, “the world is God’s
body” (Hartshorne 1941, 185; Dombrowski 2005, chapter 1). This
is not to say that God has a location within the universe, but that
the location of the universe is in God, for the divine
being-in-becoming is all-inclusive. Hartshorne borrows a word invented
by Karl Krause (1781–1832) to express this
view: panentheism—everything (pan, all) is in
(en, in) God (theos, God) (Cooper 2006,
121). Panentheism is a mediating position between pantheism and
classical theism. For pantheism, the world is identical to God; for
classical theism, the world is completely external to God; for
panentheism, the world is within God.
Hartshorne makes qualifications to Plato’s analogy. Whereas Plato
apparently conceives the soul-body (or mind-body) relationship as a
one-to-one relation, Hartshorne, following modern biology, argues that
it is more plausible to construe it as a one-to-many relation. The
human body is a hierarchical society of thousands of kinds of cells.
Thus, Hartshorne maintains that God is related to the universe in a
manner similar to the way that a person is related to the cells of his
or her body. In an important respect, Whitehead can make a better
claim than Hartshorne that the relationship of God to the World is
one-to-many. Whitehead’s God is a single actual entity whereas
Hartshorne’s God is a society. Thus, if it is a question of the
relations of actual entities, then the God-to-World relation in
Hartshorne’s theism is a many-to-many relation. Hartshorne’s point
requires clarification: God, a single enduring object, is related to
every non-divine actual entity and society. Clarity on this point
brings out another comparison. By conceiving God as an actual entity,
Whitehead weakens the analogy between God and a person. Donald
Sherburne shows that in Whitehead’s metaphysics, persons are enduring
objects of a specific type (Sherburne 1969). Therefore, Hartshorne’s
view of God as an enduring object apparently provides more of a basis
for speaking of God as a person.
Randall E. Auxier and Gary L. Herstein (2017) maintain, on the
contrary, that a Whiteheadian view is friendlier to conceiving God as
a person than Hartshorne’s view. Their argument turns on the idea of
negative prehensions, that is, experience which “eliminates
[certain data] from feeling” (Whitehead 1978, 23). According to
Auxier and Herstein, one cannot be a person or experience temporal
passage apart from negative prehensions, which, they say, allow
distinctions both between what was and
what might-have-been and between what will-be and
what might-be (Auxier and Herstein 2017, 243 and
265). Hartshorne consistently rejected the idea of negative
prehensions in God whereas Whitehead, at least in some of his
statements, seemed to allow for them. The metaphysical issues run
deep; suffice it to say that Hartshorne distinguished the actual and
the possible in ways that diverged significantly from Whitehead (see
Ramal 2010, 139–157).
The analogy of God to a person is, of course, an analogy. A person’s
feelings cannot be entirely separated from the feelings of cells in
the body—damage to the cells hurts the person. In a similar
fashion, God is affected by what affects the creatures. On the other
hand, God knows—in Whiteheadian language, God
prehends—each “cell” of the divine body in a
perfectly distinct fashion whereas others experience their
cells en masse, much as one sees the green of the grass but
not each blade. Another difference, as we have seen, is that God is
not located within the universe as are non-divine
individuals. Hartshorne turns this difference to his advantage by
following a suggestion in Plato. He says that Plato’s argument
concerning the spherical nature of the universe adequately explains
why the divine body has neither internal organs nor sense
organs. Bodily organs in the creatures, including a central nervous
system, are needed to mediate with an external environment, but there
is nothing external to the universe (Hartshorne 1984, 134). God’s only
“environment” is internal to God. Thus, the world-soul
analogy does not entail that God has a brain or any other bodily organ
that one finds in the creatures. In addition, the lack of an external
environment for God means that there can be no threat to the divine
existence from such a source. The “harm” done to God by
creaturely suffering can never be fatal.
Whitehead’s view of God as a single actual entity is arguably one
factor that prevented him from taking the Platonic analogy as a serious
proposal. His remarks on the topic are entirely negative.
It is clear that Whitehead and Hartshorne take the Timaeus
in very different directions. Whitehead read the dialogue through the
lens of neo-Platonism, conceiving the world-soul as an emanation from a
wholly transcendent demiurge. Hartshorne agrees that this is not the
solution to the problem of permanence and flux. However, Hartshorne
sees in Plato’s myth the elements of a solution, provided the demiurge
and the world-soul are not separate deities, but aspects of the same
deity. For this reason, Hartshorne says that Whitehead rejected the
analogy for “weak reasons” (Hahn 1991, 642).
Late in his career, Hartshorne saw other advantages to the
world-soul analogy that touch on the problem of God and gender. He was
sympathetic to feminist complaints about the male bias in traditional
theology and he made a concerted effort in the closing decades of his
life to use inclusive language (Hartshorne 2001, 258). For example, in
the 1980s he began using “He-She” when referring to God and
he remarked in 1996 that he would title his third book Our Vision
of God rather than Man’s Vision of God (Auxier and Davies
2001, 159). Hartshorne goes further than simply worrying about
pronouns. If the world-soul analogy is combined with the
parent-to-child analogy, then he argues that, “it is the mother,
not the father, who furnishes by far the best symbol of deity. The
fetus-mother relationship is decidedly more intimate than the
fetus-father relationship” (Hartshorne 1984, 60). Hartshorne
never expressed his thoughts on feminism systematically, but it is
instructive that Carol P. Christ explicitly develops her
feminist philosophy of religion in light of Hartshorne’s metaphysics in
her book She Who Changes. Generally speaking, feminist
theologians have been friendly to process thought, seeing Whitehead and
Hartshorne as articulating ideas about the divine that speak to
feminist concerns (Christ 2003, 4–5).
One objection to the concept of a deity whose “body” is
the universe is that it implies that all values, both the good and the
evil, are within God. Hartshorne counters that this is true, but not in
a sense that compromises divine goodness. As a point of logic, wholes
do not necessarily share the characteristics of their parts. On
Hartshorne’s model, the relation of God to any non-divine creature is a
relation of whole to part. Indeed, this is the basis of Hartshorne’s
view of religion as the acceptance of our fragmentariness—we
are fragments of the cosmos, not the whole of it. Thus, Hartshorne can
say that God’s goodness is not diminished if a fragmentary being is
heedless of the good of others, by indifference or harmful intent.
Nevertheless, precisely because of God’s goodness, the
suffering and wickedness of the creatures enter God’s experience. God
sympathizes with the sufferer and grieves for the criminal in losing an
opportunity for creating the good. God can feel the contrast between
what could have been and what is. The “what is,” moreover,
is not unilaterally determined by God but is left, in part, to the
creatures; we have seen that God and the creatures are co-creators in
process theism. For this reason, Hartshorne, following Berdyaev, speaks
of tragic and sublime aspects of divine love (cf. Hartshorne 1953,
chapter 8). Whitehead agrees that, “there is a tragedy which even
God does not escape” (Johnson 1983, 7).
Process theism provides unique, if controversial, thoughts on the
traditional problem of evil. Simply stated, the problem of evil comes
to this: if God is all-powerful then God has the ability to prevent
unjustified suffering; if God is perfectly good then God has the
motive to prevent unjustified suffering; but unjustified suffering
apparently exists; therefore, there is reason to believe that God is
not all-powerful or not perfectly good. The argument can be taken in
at least two ways. According to one interpretation, the problem of
evil poses a challenge to belief in God. In other words, it is a
stepping stone towards atheism. Another interpretation is that it is a
challenge to rethink the attributes of God. In this case, if one
considers the argument sound, it is not belief in God that one should
abandon, but belief in certain concepts of God. Process theists
generally approach the problem of evil in the spirit of the second
interpretation.  Moreover, they point out that to assume the first
interpretation—that the problem of evil is an argument against
the existence of God—is an invitation to beg the question
against alternative proposals about the nature of God such as process
theism offers.
A central contention of process theism is that the problem of evil is
aggravated by flawed accounts of omnipotence commonly assumed by
theists and their critics. Most theists agree with Aquinas that God
cannot bring about logically impossible states of affairs, like
creating a circle with unequal radii (Summa Contra Gentiles
II, ch. 25, para. 14). This is not, Aquinas argues, a limitation on
God but a condition of responsible theological discourse. To say, as
Descartes does, that God could have made such irregularly shaped
circles, is to utter nonsense according to Aquinas (Cottingham 1991,
25). Whitehead remarks that some medieval and modern philosophers got
into the unfortunate habit of paying God “metaphysical
compliments”—that is to say, attributing properties to God
that seem to make the divine more worthy of devotion but that are
contrary to sound metaphysical reasoning (Whitehead 1925,
258). Whitehead’s observation is more applicable to Descartes than to
Aquinas. Indeed, process theism has no quarrel with Aquinas on this
point. It is rather, the stronger claim that God can bring about any
state of affairs the description of which is not contradictory, with
which process theism takes issue. It is a fair question whether
Aquinas held this view (see Summa Theologica I, Q. 25,
a. 3). Nevertheless, it is a widely accepted view of omnipotence as
Griffin makes clear (Griffin 1976, chapter 17).  In a deliberate play
on J. B. Phillips’ classic, Your God is Too Small, Tyron
Inbody sums up the criticism of traditional accounts of divine power
by saying, “Your God is too big” (Inbody 1997, 139).
Griffin warns against what he calls “the omnipotence
fallacy.” This is the fallacy of assuming that if a state of
affairs is logically possible—that is, its description involves
no contradiction—then an omnipotent being could single-handedly
bring it about (Griffin 1976, 263f). Griffin represents all process
theists in considering it a fallacy, for it is their contention that
there are logically possible states of affairs that no being, including
God, could bring about by itself. For example, a contractual agreement
between two individuals or parties is impossible unless each agrees to
keep the conditions of the contract. This is expressed colloquially in
English by saying, “It takes two to tango.” The example of
making contracts is especially relevant since it is a theme in Jewish
Scripture that God enters into numerous covenants with the creatures.
The emphasis is invariably on the divine initiative in making the
covenants and on God’s reliability in keeping a promise; nevertheless,
when “covenant” is not simply shorthand for God’s promises,
the agreements are two-sided affairs, including God’s blessings and
demands and human obligations. Arguably, the logic of contracts,
agreements, and covenants, does not change when one of the parties is
divine. These examples are evidence that there are logically possible
states of affairs that require something more than the decisions of
God.
Hartshorne argues the case as follows. Suppose X and
Y are agents who make decisions A and B,
respectively. The conjunction, AB, is something that neither
X nor Y, individually, decided, even if one of
the agents is God. Suppose, however, for the sake of argument,
that this reasoning does not apply in the divine case. According to
this view, if X is God, then it is possible for X to
decide not only A, but also AB. We can imagine that
A represents God loving an individual and B
represents the individual freely accepting God’s love. If God decides
AB then God must also bring it about that B, that the
individual freely accepts God’s love, for this is part of AB.
Hartshorne responds that this view divorces the concept of decision
making from any meaningful connection with lived experience. Numerous
analogies have been discussed in the literature for how free creatures
might be related to a deity that makes their decisions—the
creatures as God’s marionettes; as androids programmed by God; as
subjects hypnotized by God; as objects of God’s dreaming; as characters
in God’s novel. Each analogy faces the dilemma that either the
decisions of the person are not fully determined (e.g., the hypnotism
case) or the person is not an actual individual (e.g., the fictional
character case). In ordinary language, an individual that tries to
control a relationship is called manipulative, overbearing, or
colloquially, “a control freak.” Doubtless, it was
considering this kind of analogy that led Hartshorne to speak of
“the tyrant ideal of power” in classical theism
(Hartshorne 1984a, 11). In a similar vein, Whitehead speaks of the
idolatry of fashioning God in the image of imperial rulers: “The
Church gave unto God the attributes which belonged exclusively to
Caesar” (Whitehead 1978, 342).
James Keller argues that the traditional concept of omnipotence can
only be justified by appealing to metaphysical schemes or intuitions
that are no better established than omnipotence itself (Keller 2007,
131). Hartshorne goes further and says that the traditional concept of
omnipotence was not coherent enough to be false (Hartshorne 1978,
86). The denial that an individual’s free decisions can be totally
determined by another is what is behind the slogan—often found
in discussions of process theism—that God acts by
persuasion rather than by coercion. Whitehead attributes this
idea to Plato’s later thought, in the Sophist and the
Timaeus, and calls it, “one of the greatest
intellectual discoveries in the history of religion” (Whitehead
1933, 213; ch.  X, sec. III). Unfortunately, the slogan has often been
misinterpreted, even by process thinkers. It does not mean that,
according to Whitehead and Hartshorne, God acts only as a final cause
and never as an efficient cause, as Griffin has shown (Griffin 1991,
98–99). “Coercion,” in the sense intended by the slogan,
is the ability of one actual being to unilaterally bring about the
decision of another actual being. In process metaphysics, no
individual possesses this ability. Thus, in a metaphysical sense, it
is not only God that acts persuasively and not coercively, but every
actual being.
Of course, “persuasion” and “coercion” have
meanings in ordinary language. To persuade is to convince others to do
something of their own will. To coerce is to force one’s will
upon others who are unwilling. The italicized phrases are
important, for they demonstrate that persuasion and coercion presuppose
the ability of the individual who is being persuaded or coerced to make
decisions. Even in the case of coercion, the person being coerced
retains the power to resist, even if only mentally. This indicates that
coercion is an inferior form of power, used either out of ignorance or
when persuasion has failed. Cobb says, “In my relations with
other people, such as my children, the use of such power is a last
resort which expresses my total powerlessness in all ways that
matter” (Cobb 1969, 89). Thus, even if the words
“persuasive” and “coercive” are taken in their
ordinary, non-metaphysical, senses, it makes sense to speak of the
supreme or eminent form of power as persuasive rather than
coercive.
David Basinger presses the following objection. Coercion in the
ordinary sense may be an inferior form of power, but there is sometimes
a moral imperative to use it, otherwise we would never have a police
force. Thus, a deity that possesses both coercive and persuasive power
is greater than a deity that possesses only persuasive power (Basinger
1988). Hartshorne, who argues against strict pacifism, agrees that the
use of brute force can sometimes be morally justified. In response to
the threat of Naziism he wrote, “Freedom must not be free to
destroy freedom” (Hartshorne 1941, 173). In process theism,
however, coercion in the ordinary sense represents an indirect
form of power that is available only for localized beings within the
cosmos (Hartshorne 1948, 155). It is indirect in the sense that it is
exerted on aggregates of actual entities and not on actual entities
themselves, as when one person prevents another from performing a
vicious act by restraining the aggressor’s body. God’s power over
aggregates is nothing over and above the direct persuasive power over
the actual entities that comprise them. Barry Whitney argues
that there is a coercive aspect of God’s power in process theism
insofar as the laws of nature are the result of a divine decision that
no creature is free to abrogate (Whitney 1985, 99–114). That there
should be this form of divine power—which is also a form of
efficient causation—providing for an ordered world that no
creature has decided, is a necessary condition for any creaturely
activity, Hartshorne believes. “God decides upon the basic
outlines of creaturely actions, and guaranteed limits within which
freedom is to operate. That not everything can be guaranteed does not
mean that nothing can be” (Hartshorne 1966, 206).
Griffin maintains that it lies at the heart of process theism’s
answer to the problem of evil that God’s power is exerted on
individuals rather than aggregates (Griffin 1991, 104). Theists of a
more traditional bent may view this as an indication of the inadequacy
of process metaphysics, for there is no provision for a run-of-the-mill
coercive power in its concept of God. The idea that persuasion plus
coercion is a greater form of power than persuasion alone ignores,
however, a significant difference between God and the creatures. Every
person has the power of persuasion and coercion (in their ordinary
senses), but neither of these powers involves a violation of the laws
of nature. In order to attribute both forms of power to God seems to require
that God have the power to violate the laws of nature. That may not
seem unreasonable since God, as traditionally conceived, acts
miraculously in ways that break or suspend the laws of nature.
Nevertheless, to speak, as Basinger does, of a moral imperative to act
coercively is tantamount, in the divine case, to demanding that the
deity contravene the very laws that, according to traditional theism
and process theism, it imposed in the first place. There is an
additional irony where the problem of evil is concerned. Traditional
theists fault process theists for, in effect, not attributing to God
the power to prevent gratuitous suffering. Traditional theists, on the
other hand, attribute this power to God but are obliged to argue that
God is not at fault for not using it or for using it in ways that we
find utterly baffling.
The felt contrast between what could have been the case and what is
the case is the scaffolding on which the problem of evil is built.
Things do not always work out for the best and it seems that there are
events that the world would have been better without. There are
various names in the literature for these occurrences, but Griffin’s
expression, “genuine evil” (correlative to “genuine
good”) is as good as any. A hallmark of process theism is to
draw attention to the value inherent in the twin probabilities of
genuine good and evil. Process thought raises the
question—and answers it in the affirmative—whether a world
with a probability, not merely a possibility, of genuine good and evil
is preferable to a world without it. In the closing pages of
Pragmatism, James raises this question by means of a thought
experiment. If God asked you before the creation of the universe if
you would agree to be part of a world that was not certain to be
saved—where there was real adventure and real risk—what
would you say? James recognizes that a world where the risk of failure
is real does not appeal to everyone; but he says that the chances for
success that it promises brings zest to life and makes it rational to,
“add our fiat to the fiat of the creator”
(James 1907, 290–291).
Hartshorne says that a universe with
multiple freedom or creativity is a universe where the non-identical
twins of opportunity and risk are inevitable. As already noted,
process theists do not believe in a God that plays with loaded
dice. What James’s image adds to this picture is the idea that a
world-order with the opportunity for genuine good and the risk of
genuine evil is of greater value than a world-order devoid of
these opportunities and risks. James’s idea also implies that, in such
a world-order, the risks would be real for deity.  We have already
seen that process theism affirms tragedy in God. The silver linings on
this cloud are: (1) God preserves the universe in the divine memory
which means that the creatures contribute something to God; (2) God,
considered as superject, has an inexhaustible capacity to bring order
from chaos and make fresh beginnings, providing a sense of hope amidst
the ruin of our lives.
The problem of evil is often presented primarily as an ethical
concern, but there is an aesthetic dimension to the problem that is
emphasized by process theism (cf. Whitney 1994). If a perfectly good deity would have the
motive to overcome discord and wickedness, it would also have a motive
to avoid triviality and boredom. This is especially the case in the
universe as conceived by process theism where feeling (prehension) is a
metaphysical category. The etymology of “aesthetic” is
aesthesis, which means “feeling,” and process
thought emphasizes that aesthetic values are fundamentally values for
an experiencing subject. Moreover, the experiencing subject, in most
cases, is not human. This fact is evident not only by looking at the
contemporary world with its countless varieties of species, but also
when one considers the nearly unfathomable stretches of time on this
planet when humans did not exist. Process theism takes the
non-anthropocentric, and non-relativist, stance that the experiences of
non-human creatures are valuable whether or not humans value them. This
is not to say that all experience is equally valuable—the
experience of a cockroach can have value without being fully comparable
to human experience. Process metaphysics provides for an aesthetic
theory that recognizes objective criteria of value such as unity amid
contrast and intensity amid complexity (see Dombrowksi 2004). The long
process of evolution can be charted on a curve of ever increasing
varieties and complexities of organisms with augmented capacity for
valuable types of experience. As Cobb and Griffin note, the escape from
triviality meant an increased risk of discord, but this brings us full
circle to James’s thought experiment (Cobb and Griffin 1976, 73).
The Preacher in Ecclesiastes gives eloquent expression to
world-weariness by saying that there is nothing new under the sun.
Nevertheless, process thought reminds us that there was once a time
when the sun itself was new. We noted earlier that in process
metaphysics, time is the process of creation. The universe is not a
totality, fixed once and for all, but a dynamic vector growing from a
determinate past into an open (partly indeterminate) future. We have
also seen that process theism conceives God as being really related to
the world through prehensions or feelings. If divine knowing is
considered perfect, then it follows from these premises that God knows
the past as fully determinate (as created), the present as the process
of determination (as being created), and the future as partly
indeterminate (as yet to be created). Some have criticized process
theism for advocating a limited God who is ignorant of the future.
Process theists reply that this is incorrect and represents a subtle
begging of the question. The question is not whether God knows a fully
determinate future but whether there is a fully determinate future to
know. It is the nature of time, not the nature of divine knowing, that
is at issue. If the future exists as partially indeterminate,
unsettled, or uncreated, then a perfect knower must know it as
such.
The fact that process theism construes God’s knowledge as prehensive
means that it is a mistake to interpret it solely in terms of the
information content of declarative sentences. This is not to say that
God does not have this information, but it is well to keep in mind
that omniscience, for process theism, is more akin to what Bertrand
Russell calls knowledge by acquaintance than it is to knowledge by
description (Hartshorne 1941, 241). Divine prehensions of the world
include not only information but affective tone (Whitehead calls it
the “subjective form” of prehensions); God’s knowledge is
empathetic, feeling the feelings of the creatures. Again, this
contrasts with the traditional account of omniscience which
“attributes to God the informational content of our perceptions
without the hedonistic content” (Kenny 1979,
32). E. S. Brightman (Auxier and Davies 2001, 43, 70), Henri
Simoni-Wastila (1999), and Auxier and Herstein (2017, 264) argue that
claiming this kind of knowledge for God is excessive, for it would
mean, for example, that in knowing a creature’s fear of death, God
would also fear death.  Hartshorne’s response is that God
feels how we feel without feeling as we feel,
similar to the way in which persons can vividly remember emotions they
once experienced without actually having those emotions as their own
in the present experience of memory (Hartshorne 1984b, 199). This
issue highlights a tension between Whitehead and Hartshorne. Whitehead
speaks of an actual entity’s subjectivity as “perishing”
as it becomes past, but Hartshorne insists that the divine memory
preserves the immediacy of our experiences, making them objectively
immortal (Whitehead 1978, 351; Hartshorne 1970, 118).
Process theism provides an account of the mechanics of
omniscience—that is, an account of how God knows the
world—that fits well with analogies drawn from experience. Apart
from complications introduced by quantum physics, events do not occur
because we know about them; we know about them, in part, because they
occur. Process theism applies the same logic to God. This account
differs from traditional views in two important ways.  First, many
theists follow Aquinas in reversing the cognitive relation in God. For
Aquinas, God knows events in the world because God is their cause
(Summa Theologica I, Q. 14, a. 11). This allows Aquinas to
affirm omniscience while denying real relations in God; however, it
also makes an unambiguous affirmation of the contingency of creaturely
decisions difficult if not impossible, as we have already seen in our
discussion of God and creativity. Second, the process view contradicts
the Boethian concept of eternity as a non-temporal viewpoint on
temporal events. For Boethius (and for Aquinas) events in time are
related to God as the points on the circumference of a circle are
related to its center (Consolation of Philosophy, bk 5, prose
6; Summa Contra Gentiles I, ch. 66, para. 7). For process
thought, time is more like a line being added to from moment to
moment, but never complete, so there is no vantage from which it can
be taken in all at once (Hartshorne 1945, 284).
There are peculiarities in traditional metaphors for omniscience that
process thought rejects. God, it was said, “sees” all of
time in one eternal instant; yet seeing, like knowing, requires real
relations in the perceiver; moreover, one cannot see as fully
actualized that which is still only possibly to be actualized, that is
to say, the partially indeterminate future. It is noteworthy, however,
that process theism retains one element of the traditional view. We
have seen that Hartshorne attributes the laws of nature to an act of
God. For this reason, God knows the extent to which the future is
open—what the laws allow and what they do not allow. The process
God must also be aware of the conditions that creaturely decisions set
upon future actualization, opening up some possibilities and closing
others.
Process theists were not the first to notice the problems that the
Thomistic account poses for human freedom. William of Ockham, for
example, despaired of explaining how God could come to know the future
free decisions of the creatures (Shields 1993, 298). Luis de Molina
developed the chief rival in classical theism to Aquinas’s account of
the mechanics of omniscience. Molinism has been much discussed in
recent literature and vigorously defended (Shields & Viney 2004,
241, n. 15). Molina claims that there are true statements about what
any possible creature would freely do in any situation in
which that creature existed. The truth of these statements, called
“middle knowledge conditionals,” is decided by neither God
nor the creatures; they are simply eternally true, a kind of innate
divine knowledge. Molina agrees with Aquinas that the deity knows the
product of its own creative activity—called “free
knowledge” (Kenny 1979, 62). Using free knowledge, in
conjunction with middle knowledge conditionals, God can deduce what
any actual creature will freely do. The deduction has the
form: “If individual X were in situation S,
then X would freely decide A” (middle
knowledge conditional); and “X is in S”
(God’s free knowledge); therefore, “X will freely
decide A.” Molina’s theory is designed to save both the
freedom of the creatures and the divine immutability and
impassibility. Thus, it poses as much of a challenge to process theism
as does Thomism which claims for itself the same advantages.
Neither Whitehead nor Hartshorne addresses Molinism, but process
metaphysics provides resources for a number of criticisms (Shields
& Viney 2004, 225–233). One objection is that Molinism endows God
with an innate knowledge of an elaborate set of contingent truths
which have no explanation. Yet, contingent truths are precisely the
sorts of truths for which we legitimately seek
explanations—indeed, this is one of the marks of contingency
(Hartshorne 1962, 74). A related problem is that the distinction
between the possible and the actual is finessed. It is common to refer
to what an actual individual would do in a certain
circumstance, for one can speak of that individual’s dispositions and
character as so far formed. To refer to what a possible
individual would do is entirely different.  Possible individuals
are either fictional (like Sherlock Holmes) or they are tied to the
creative powers of the actual world (like a child yet to be
conceived). The properties of fictional characters are defined by
someone’s imagination and so there is no fixed truth about what they
would do. Arguably, persons yet to be conceived can only be said to have the
properties that link them to the reproductive potentialities of actual
persons. Thus, most babies have the capacity to
grow up to become parents themselves. What may the first child (call
it Chris) of a particular newborn (call it Kim) be like? The most that
can be said with certainty is that half of Chris’s chromosomes will be
inherited from Kim. To speak informatively about what Chris would do
under any given circumstances presupposes uncountable human decisions
and years of development beyond Kim’s own childhood.
A third and final criticism of Molinism, from a process perspective,
is that it doesn’t really preserve the freedom of the creatures in the
way it claims. Molina verbally accepts the idea that one is
significantly free only if one could have done otherwise in the same
circumstances (in the literature this is called incompatibilist
freedom). For example, if Oswald’s assassination of President Kennedy
was a genuinely free act then if, per impossibile, the clock
could be turned back to the moments before the murder, Oswald could
have decided not to pull the trigger. Alternately stated, Oswald’s not
pulling the trigger in the exact situation where he in fact did pull
the trigger could have become actual. In Hartshorne’s view, and as far
as incompatibilist freedom is concerned, to be actually possible
is to be (or to have been) possibly actual. On Molinist
principles, it is difficult to see how Oswald’s not pulling the
trigger in those circumstances could have become actual. It is true
that, in Molina’s view, there is no contradiction in conceiving Oswald
in those circumstances not pulling the trigger. But, given the set of
middle knowledge conditionals about Oswald, Oswald’s not pulling the
trigger happens in no world that God can create (this is not to say
that if a different set of middle knowledge conditionals were true of
Oswald God could not create those possible worlds). The events,
however, that can become actual, that are actually possible, are
events in universes created by God. Since, under the assumption of the
set of middle knowledge conditionals we know to be true of Oswald, no
universe that could be created by God—no possible
actuality—is one in which Oswald freely refrains from pulling
the trigger, Oswald’s act cannot be considered a free act. Of course,
it may be the case that the set of middle knowledge conditionals
concerning Oswald are such that he could have refrained from pulling
the trigger had God created a slightly different universe; but it is
Oswald’s freedom in the actual universe that is at issue.
The problems of the mechanics of omniscience aside, the traditional
theist might argue that the process view of God’s knowledge is
problematic because it either limits God’s knowledge or it violates
elementary principles of logic. The argument is apparently
straightforward. Every proposition of the form, “p or
not-p” is true because one or the other side of the
disjunction is true. To use Aristotle’s example from De
Interpretatione IX, either a sea battle will occur tomorrow or it
will not. Let p represent “A sea battle will occur
tomorrow” and not-p, “A sea battle will not occur
tomorrow.” In that case, “A sea battle will occur tomorrow
or a sea battle will not occur tomorrow” is a tautology and hence
true. If God does not know which side of the disjunction is true then
God’s knowledge is limited. If the disjunction itself is not true then
some tautologies are false. Any theory that commits one to the falsity
of some tautologies flaunts the fundamental principles of logic and
thereby faces a steep burden of proof.
Aristotle apparently believed that, where future contingents are
concerned, “p or not-p” is true but the
two halves of the disjunction have indeterminate truth values. This
idea seems logically counter-intuitive. If p and not-p
are indeterminate, shouldn’t “p or not-p”
also be indeterminate? For a brief period, Hartshorne defended
the Aritotelian idea (Hartshorne 1939), but he discovered a more
parsimonious solution (Hartshorne 2011c, 123). Instead of locating the
indeterminacy of the future in truth values, he focused on predicates
that reflect the extent to which the future is open for any given
event. Either all causal conditions are such that the sea battle will
occur, or no causal conditions are such that it will occur, or it is
permitted by some but not all causal conditions (cf. Hartshorne 1970,
145). It “will” occur means that all the possibilities for
tomorrow which are still left open involve the occurrence in question;
while it “may” occur means that some of the open
possibilities involve the occurrence; and it “will not”
occur means that none of the possibilities involve it (Hartshorne
1941, 100).
Although Hartshorne rejected Aristotle’s view on future contingents,
his solution to the problem that Aristotle tried to solve neatly
parallels Aristotle’s square.  “Z will occur” and
“Z will not occur” are contraries—they may
both be false but they cannot both be true. The contradictory of
“Z will occur” is “Z may not
occur”; similarly, the contradictory of “Z will
not occur” is “Z may occur.” In A
Christmas Carol, Scrooge presupposes this schema when he asks the
Ghost of Christmas Yet to Come, “Are these the shadows of the
things that Will be or the shadows of things that May be, only?”
Of this example, Hartshorne said, “There is a master of language
[i.e. Dickens]. Will and May are nicely distinguished in ordinary
speech” (Hartshorne & Viney 2001, 39).
Hartshorne maintains that, “the semantic analysis of truth
with reference to future events should not be so formulated as to make
‘will’ and ‘will not’ the sole
possibilities” (Hartshorne 2011a, 83). Following Hartshorne’s
suggestion, George Shields says that, “Z will
occur” and “Z will not occur” should not be
symbolized in the propositional calculus as p and
not-p but as p and q, where “If
p then not-q” and “If q then
not-p.” The conjunction of these propositions, “If
p then not-q and if q then
not-p” mirrors the truth value semantics of contrariety,
not contradiction, which is mirrored by “It is false that
‘p if and only if q,’” or exclusive
disjunction. Shields argues that it is question begging to assume that
“Z will or will not occur” must be an instance of
“p or not-p”. The question at issue is
the formalization of future tense statements; thus, it will not do to
assume that verb tense makes no difference in the formalization
(Shields & Viney 2004, 220).
Whitehead says that, “Philosophy never reverts to its old
position after the shock of a great philosopher” (Whitehead 1978,
11). Whether or not Whitehead and Hartshorne are considered great
philosophers, they seem to have occasioned a seismic shift in
contemporary discussions of the philosophy of religion in which
philosophers take the doctrine of real relations in God more seriously.
For example, some Neo-Thomists have taken the criticisms of process
theism to heart and admitted real relations in God, contrary to the
teaching of the angelic doctor (Whitney 1985, 75–81). The Jesuit
philosopher W. Norris Clarke advises Thomists to “simply
drop” the doctrine of the lack of real relations in God and to
adopt the view that, “[God’s] consciousness is contingently and
qualitatively different because of what we do” (Clarke
1979, 92). At times, Clarke almost sounds like a Whiteheadian or a
Hartshornean: “God is the supreme Receiver, gathering
together in His consciousness all that creatures do and responding
appropriately to it” (Ibid., 93). Another example of a group of
theists influenced by process thinking, are those Evangelical Christian
philosophers calling themselves “open theists” or
“free will theists.” While careful to distance themselves
from the more heretical dimensions of process metaphysics, they have
stirred controversy in their communities of faith by defending aspects
of process theism (Pinnock et al. 1994; Enxing 2013, ch. 5).
The extent to which theists outside the process camp accept the
elements of the doctrine of dual transcendence varies greatly.
Neo-Thomists like Clarke and some other theists, like William Alston,
accept real relations in God but retain the timelessness, immutability,
and non-corporeality of God. Clarke and Alston also affirm creation
ex nihilo. Alston, who was Hartshorne’s student at Chicago,
refers to his view as a “via media” (a middle
path) between Hartshorne and Aquinas (Cobb & Gamwell 1984, 78f).
Hartshorne responded to both Clarke and Alston (Sia 1990, 269f; Cobb
& Gamwell 1984, 98f). In both replies he emphasizes, among other
things, what he takes to be arbitrary divisions among contingency,
potentiality, and change in their theories. To admit real relations in
God is to admit contingency in God. To admit this, but to retain the
concept of the non-temporality of deity, requires belief in
contingencies eternally fixed in the being of God. The ordinary sense
of “W is contingent” is “W could
have been otherwise,” which presupposes that the future was once
open with respect to W. Since there is no future in eternity,
to speak of contingency in eternity is to lose one’s anchor in
ordinary language which is saturated with temporal
reference. Likewise, the concept of an eternal “now” has
lost all moorings with experience where the present is invariably
nested between past and future. Hartshorne also maintains that there
are forms of value—specifically, aesthetic values—that do
not admit of a maximum.  It may be no more meaningful to speak of
greatest possible aesthetic value than it is to speak of a greatest
positive integer (Hartshorne 1970, 38 and 310; cf. Whitehead 1978,
111). If this is the case, and if the creatures contribute to the
aesthetic value of the world, then there must be respects in which, as
the aesthetic value of the world increases, God increases with it. We
have already touched upon this aspect of process theism which
Hartshorne refers to as God’s relative perfection (R-perfection).
Openness or free will theists are closer to process theism than the
Neo-Thomists or than Alston. They concur with process theists that God
cannot determine a creature’s decisions without depriving it of its
freedom. They also accept the process view of the nature of time; thus,
for God to be influenced by the creatures means that in some respects
the future is yet to be determined and God knows it as such. This
provides for a straightforward concept of God responding to the
creatures and for an interpretive scheme for the dominant Scriptural
motif that God is in dynamic interaction with people (in answering
prayer, for example). On the other hand, it is this aspect of process
theism which seems most disturbing to more traditionally minded
Evangelicals, for the lack of knowledge of a detailed future
compromises or at least complicates the doctrine of divine providence.
How, they ask, can history be the working out of a divine plan if the
future is uncertain for God (cf. Hall and Sanders, 2003). Open theists
believe that they can mitigate this criticism by not following process
theism in the denial of creation ex nihilo. Open theists like
William Hasker and John Sanders can speak of God as “a
risk-taker,” but they insist that God can still perform miracles
and guarantee the ultimate triumph of good over evil (Pinnock, et al.,
1994, 151; Sanders 1998).
To speak of open theism as a school of thought distinct from process
theism is ironic since God’s openness to creaturely influence is
precisely the shared content of their views. Hartshorne referred to
“the openness of God” in 1963, more than thirty years
before the openness controversy erupted (Hartshorne 1987, 92). In any
event, these controversies began too late for Hartshorne to respond to
them. It is noteworthy, however, that he was instrumental in bringing a
little known forerunner of free will theism, Jules Lequyer [or
Lequier], to the attention of philosophers (Hartshorne & Reese
2000, 227–230). Because of the dominance historically of
classical theism, Hartshorne viewed free will theists more as allies
than foes, although he was fully aware of his differences from them and
was not without arguments against those aspects of their views with
which he disagreed (Viney 1998, 214–230). A vigorous dialogue between process
theists and free will theists is on-going (Cobb and Pinnock
2000; Ramal 2010, part II).
The most contentious issue is creation ex nihilo. Whitehead
and Hartshorne share a commitment to the idea that God is the supreme
creative power among many lesser creators. Hartshorne is adamant that
nothing is gained by endowing God with the ability to create
non-creative actualities or to refrain from creating altogether.
Nevertheless, process theists are criticized for failing to consider
the alternative that God, the sole origin of creative power, graciously
shares that power with others. Lequyer speaks of “God, who
created me creator of myself”—words that Hartshorne often
quotes with approval (Lequier 1952, 70; Hartshorne 1970, xi). Lequyer’s
view is similar to what Nelson Pike calls “over-power,” the
power to “completely determine which, if any, powers are
possessed by agents other than oneself” (Pike 1983, 19). Pike
avers that over-power is precisely what most classical theists ascribe
to deity. Process theists generally disagree (cf. Griffin 1991, 67–68).
For example, Aquinas views God as having the ability to determine the
free decisions of others, but this ability is not entailed by
over-power, although Pike sometimes defines over-power in these terms
(Pike 1982, 151). If God has over-power in the sense of being able to
determine the extent to which others can make free decisions and
execute them, it does not follow that God can also determine a
creature’s free decisions. The latter claim is much stronger, and it is
the one that process theists attribute to most classical theists.
The process God has what might be called a second cousin to
over-power. As we have seen, in process theism, God is responsible for
the laws of nature and these laws determine the limits of non-divine
creativity. Whitehead and Hartshorne deny, however, that God could
create actual entities devoid of creative activity. Moreover,
developmental and evolutionary categories are central to their
thinking. It is contrary to process philosophy to imagine God with the
ability to create a fully grown man or woman who did not grow to
adulthood from having been a child. One’s being actual is
inseparable from one’s having become actual (Hartshorne 1941,
233–234). Hartshorne would say that this is also true of God’s actual
states, though not of God’s existence. These qualifications
notwithstanding, one philosopher working within the process tradition
advocates revisions in process theism that would move it in the
direction that the critics suggest.  Rem Edwards speaks of divine
self-limitation in creating the creatures.  For Edwards, God could
create a universe of uncreative beings but chooses not to. He thinks
that God could “work an occasional miracle or two.”
Edwards acknowledges that, from the standpoint of
“orthodox” process thought, these ideas are “process
heresy,” but he prefers revising process theism in these ways in
order to avoid the charge, which he regards as legitimate, that there
is a “divine power-deficit” in process theism that makes
its outlook “religiously intolerable” (Edwards 2001,
256).
The claim that deity sharing its creative power is an instance of
self-limitation can perhaps be clarified and placed more in the spirit
of process theism by referring to it as divine self-augmentation. A
self-imposed handicap is one that prevents one from achieving a goal or
performing a task that one could accomplish without the limitation. As
Inbody notes, any divine self-limitation can be
“self-unlimited” (Inbody 1997, 149). For example, a
governor on a truck can be designed to inhibit the velocity it could
attain without the governor. In creating other creators, however, the
deity imposes no limits on what it could achieve without them. To be
sure, God could have unerring knowledge of a determinate future if the
creatures had no freedom, but this would not be knowledge of a future
with free creatures in it. To imagine a limitation in this case would
require that God could know the future decisions of free creatures, but
chooses instead to put on a blindfold, so to speak. On the other hand,
the existence of non-divine creators opens opportunities for
cooperative effort (and conflict) that would be impossible without
them. One cannot use persuasion on completely unfree beings. Thus, in
creating other creators, other beings with some degree of freedom, God
would be perfecting the divine power and the uses to which it can be
put.
Edwards also affirms a version of the doctrine of creation ex
nihilo and believes that this is compatible with process theism.
Inspired by developments in speculative cosmology among
astrophysicists—which he insists is really
metaphysics—Edwards asks whether our universe may not be one of
many actual universes existing within an infinite Superspacetime. This
super matrix of co-existing but independent universes could be
interpreted by process theism as the divine body, much as Hartshorne
views our universe as God’s body. Edwards maintains that these ideas
allow for a concept of creation ex nihilo. Within the divine
Superspacetime, God can create universes from no pre-existing
material.  Thus, it is not necessary to conceive our own universe as
created from the dying embers of a previous cosmic epoch. The initial
singularity of our universe could represent an absolute
beginning. This does not mean that one must jettison the claims of
process theism that God is necessarily social, embodied, and
creative. In Edwards’ words:
Edwards notes that his suggestions are not as far removed from the
metaphysics of Whitehead and Hartshorne as one might suppose. Whitehead
speaks of cosmic epochs and Hartshorne argues that this involves a time
beyond what is available to physics that connects various cosmic epochs
(Hartshorne 1970, 53–54). Edwards views himself as amending
Hartshorne’s idea to include super space as well as super time.
Edwards’ treatment of creation ex nihilo retains the
essential meaning of the idea—creation from no pre-existing
material—but it also suggests both less and more than the
concept as it was expressed in classical theism. It suggests less in
the sense that God’s creative act in traditional theism takes place in
eternity. Superspacetime differs from the Boethian idea of eternity in
at least this much: it is complex whereas eternity has no parts.
Edwards also wishes to avoid the deterministic connotations of the
traditional idea of creation. To create another creator is not
to create that creator’s decisions; this is one reason Aquinas denies
that God creates other creators, for he regards God as creating, with
us, the decisions we make in such a way that God’s activity is a
sufficient explanation of our decisions (although he denies, contrary
to the charge of process theism, that this deprives us of our freedom).
Finally, Edwards imports more into the idea of creation ex
nihilo than was traditionally in the doctrine. As we noted in the
opening section, the idea that the universe had a first temporal moment
is not to be identified with creation ex nihilo since,
according to traditional theism, God could have created a temporally
infinite universe ex nihilo.
Edwards’ revisions of process theism are made largely, though not
exclusively, in light of criticisms from those who do not share his
commitment to process metaphysics. Lewis Ford revises process theism in
a very different direction, mostly in response to difficulties within
process metaphysics that he finds insurmountable. We have already seen
that in Whitehead’s metaphysics, the way that one actual entity
influences another is by means of prehensions. According to Ford, an
additional mode of influence must be posited, for one must account for
an actual entity’s ability to prehend. This ability to prehend
is precisely its portion of creativity. Ford remains within the
parameters of process metaphysics by denying that the entity’s
allotment of creativity has its source outside of time in an eternal
being. This leaves only three possible sources for the entity’s
creativity, the past, the present, or the future. Ford maintains that
past actual entities, because they are past, are devoid of any inner
creativity—thus, they cannot be the source of an actual
entity’s creativity. Nor can creativity simply “well up”
from within the present. It is precisely an actual occasion’s
present creativity that needs explanation, and it cannot pull
itself up by its own bootstraps, so to speak. Ford argues, by
elimination, that a future creativity must be the source of an
occasion’s ability to prehend.
In process metaphysics, the future is infinite, indeterminate, and
its possibilities for actualization are inexhaustible. Ford identifies
God with the future so conceived, but with one important departure from
standard accounts in process thought. According to Ford, God is the
activity of the future. This is contrary to the views of Whitehead
and Hartshorne for whom the future is the arena of possibility awaiting
decision. Creative activity is confined to the present actual entity
(called its concrescence) and to its effects on subsequent actual
entities (called transitional creativity) (Whitehead 1978, 211). In
Ford’s view, however, the future is a soundless depth of creativity
that endlessly “pluralizes itself into the many finite regions of
the present” (Ford 2000, 248). This is a process whereby divine
future activity is “infused” into the present actual
occasion (Ibid., 253). In Ford’s view, present activity makes the
past in the sense that what is done today adds to what will be the
accomplished past of tomorrow. The present is not made by the past but
by the divine activity of the future.
Because the divine is indeterminate, it cannot be an object of an
actual entity’s prehensions. This is dangerously close to saying that
God cannot be known, except that Ford understands God to fill a
definite role in his metaphysics, to wit, the infusion of creativity
into the present, providing for an immediacy of the divine presence in
all actualities. Ford also recognizes the difficulty that his view
poses for God’s knowledge of the past, and hence for divine
omniscience. The physical prehensions of actual occasions are not only
the means whereby the present takes account of the past, but they are
also the means whereby the past persists into the present. As
Hartshorne notes, Whitehead’s concept of prehension brings efficient
causation and perception under a single category (Hartshorne 1984b,
chapter 9). If the past were to persist into the future so as to impart
knowledge to God, it would co-opt the present’s function of preserving
the past. In order to avoid the idea that God is ignorant of the past,
Ford posits a kind of knowledge of the past that abstracts from
efficient causation. In the interstices separating the death of the
past moment and the birth of the present moment, “God immediately
perceives the recently emergent past and retains that memory
forever” (Ford 2000, 284). Since divine memory, on Ford’s
account, abstracts from efficient causal relations, it is clear that it
records sequences and correlations of events; it is a fair question
whether it also contains information about causal chains.
Ford recognizes that his revisions of process theism will strike
some thinkers as contrary to the metaphysics that first inspired it. He
correctly observes, “The notion of an active future may be
regarded as oxymoronic, even as bizarre, but it is certainly
unique” (Ford 2000, 316). It is indeed unique; it bears a
resemblance to the Thomistic doctrine of participated being, albeit
tailored to the categories of process philosophy, as modified in
various ways by Ford. In Thomism, the creatures can exist only by
participating in and channeling the infinite creativity of God. In
Ford’s revised process theism, non-divine actual entities can exist
only by borrowing the influx of future divine activity into the
present. The parallel with Thomism breaks down insofar as Ford denies
that God’s activity explains what the actual entities do with their
portion of creativity. Ford can affirm the freedom of the creatures
vis-a-vis God’s activity since deity does not function as a
deterministic efficient cause as it does in Thomism and other forms of
traditional theism. In Whitehead’s and Hartshorne’s theism, there is an
efficient causal dimension to God’s creativity, but it is not
deterministic. We have already noted that the process God’s fixing of
the laws of nature is a form of efficient causation, but Whitehead and
Hartshorne agree with most current scientific thinking that those laws
are stochastic.
Our task has been to explain the concept of process theism, not to
argue that the God of process theism exists. Nevertheless, a few words
are in order about the approaches that process theists take to
justifying belief in the existence of God. We noted in opening that
process theism does not privilege claims to special insight or
revealed truth (cf. Keller 2007, chapter 6). This is not to say that
some theologians have not found process thought congenial to their
interests (e.g., Ogden 1963; Cobb 1965; Griffin 1973). Whitehead and
Hartshorne did not view themselves as apologists for a particular
faith, but neither did they simply dismiss religious experiences as
uninformative. Whitehead warns against narrowness in the selection of
evidence. He says, “Philosophy may not neglect the
multifariousness of the world—the fairies dance, and Christ is
nailed to the cross” (Whitehead 1978, 338).  They add, however,
that the claims that religious people make, individually (as in the
case of mystics) or collectively (as in the case of religious
organizations), are subject to human fallibility. There may be a God
who is infallible but human beings are not, and every putative
revelation is sifted through an imperfect human filter (Hartshorne
1984a, 41). As far as justifying religious belief is concerned,
Whitehead and Hartshorne try to navigate between appeals to blind
faith and knock-down proof. In metaphysics, says Whitehead, “The
proper test is not that of finality, but of progress” (Whitehead
1978, 14).
If process theism is not based on revelation, neither is it based on
naïve appeals to science, including the social sciences. It is no
more characteristic of process thought to give a
“scientific” argument for the existence of God than to
give a reductionistic account of religious belief by means of a theory
in sociology or psychology. As far as Whitehead and Hartshorne are
concerned, the working assumptions of the sciences are no more or less
open to question and clarification than the working assumptions of religion. Process thought
teaches a modest skepticism about the competencies of science that is
arguably in the spirit of science itself. Indeed, the theory of actual
entities and their prehensions is Whitehead’s alternative to the
metaphysical worldview that developed as a result of the dramatic
successes of early modern science—Whitehead calls it
“scientific materialism.” The theory of actual entities is
a response to the idea that the “stuff” of which the world
is made is devoid of mind-like qualities—Whitehead refers to
this as “vacuous actuality.” The theory of prehensions is
a response to the idea that bits of matter can exist at definite
places and times without any essential reference to other places and
times—Whitehead refers to this as “simple location.”
The fact is that Whitehead wrote relatively little about God and a
great deal about how his philosophy of organism resolves problems of
metaphysics and epistemology inherited from a prior age.
Process theism is not based on religious doctrine or theology and it
is not a scientific theory; it is a product of metaphysics, or what
Whitehead calls “speculative philosophy.” It is, however,
metaphysics “in a new key,” to borrow a phrase from Susanne
Langer. Whitehead says that, “Speculative philosophy is the
endeavour to frame a coherent, logical, necessary system of general
ideas in terms of which every element of our experience can be
interpreted” (Whitehead 1978, 3). Metaphysics, so defined, is an
audacious enterprise, for experience is open-ended and every claim to
knowledge is perspectival and conditioned. If metaphysicians strive for
a comprehensive vision of things, they must continually remind
themselves that there is no standpoint within the world from which to
speak confidently for eternity. Whitehead and Hartshorne reject the
idea that metaphysics proceeds best by deducing theorems from
self-evident axioms. To be sure, inferences must be made from the
categories of one’s metaphysics, but it is the categories themselves
that are continually on trial. The court in which metaphysical
proposals are judged is the community of philosophers, stretching
through history and into the future. Whitehead and Hartshorne, heavily
influenced by Plato, practice philosophy as a dialogue with great
minds, past and present. Hartshorne, taking a page from Karl Popper,
says that, “Objectivity is not in the individual thinker but in
the process of mutual correction and inspiration” (Hartshorne
1962, ix).
When it comes to the “God question” Whitehead says that
he is not offering proofs. “There is merely the confrontation of
the theoretic system with a certain rendering of the facts”
(Whitehead 1978, 343). Having established to his satisfaction an
alternative to scientific materialism—that is, the philosophy
of organism—he asks whether that philosophy’s categories
require reference to God. Ford suggests that Whitehead was surprised to
find that they do, for he began his reflections on the philosophy of
nature as an agnostic (Ford 1977, 27). In keeping with his sensitivity
to the history of philosophy, Whitehead characterizes his discussion as
adding another speaker to David Hume’s Dialogues Concerning Natural
Religion. If Whitehead has an “argument” for the
existence of God it is implicit in the dual attempt (1) to show the
reasonableness of process metaphysics and (2) to show the conceptual
necessity of God for its overall coherence. Rudolf Carnap says that it
is one thing to ask what one’s metaphysics commit one to and it is
something else to ask what commits one to one’s metaphysics. Whitehead
asks both questions.
Ford rightly says that, in Whitehead’s writings, the problem and
nature of God is nowhere explored for its own sake (Ford 1970,
393). Moreover, during the period when he was introducing the concept
of God into his metaphysics, beginning in 1925, the very concept of
God was in flux. For these reasons, there is an inherent flexibility
in reconstructing arguments for God’s existence from Whitehead’s work,
and this is reflected in the critical literature. Hartshorne
identified six arguments implicit in Whitehead’s metaphysics
(Hartshorne 1972, 78–88), but others find fewer (Sherburne 1971) or
more (Griffin 2001a, chapter 5). Ford attempted to derive the
existence of God analytically, as a theorem from the set of axioms in
Whitehead’s categoreal scheme in Process and Reality; his
much abbreviated version of Whitehead’s reasoning is this:
“Actual entities either belong to God or to the World. Given the
World, God must exist. Given God, the World must exist. Since one or
the other must exist, both must” (Ford 1970,
393). Interestingly, the God to which Ford’s reconstructed argument
concludes is a single non-temporal actual entity, and no mention is
made of developments in Whitehead’s idea of God after Process and
Reality.
More traditional forms of reasoning can also be found in
Whitehead. There cannot, to be sure, be a cosmological argument in the
classical sense for Whitehead rejects the traditional idea of divine
creativity, but he does see a need to explain the initial phase of
each actual entity. In Whitehead’s view, God customizes the general
potentiality of the universe for each emergent occasion, providing it
with its initial aim. The graded relevance of these potentialities
answers to our sense that there are objectively better and worse
options. A related problem is how the activities of the many
actualities that make up the cosmos happen to obey a common set of
natural laws. Order implies an ordering power; however, all localized
order presupposes cosmic order; thus, order on a cosmic scale requires
a cosmic ordering power. The best candidate for the cosmic ordering
power is God, according to Whitehead (Whitehead 1997, 104)—this
is a type of design argument. Another consideration is that the realm
of possibility in terms of which cosmic order is conceived is akin to
Plato’s Forms. In Whitehead’s system, these “eternal
objects” require an ontological ground. The primordial nature of
God serves this function (Whitehead 1978, 46).  Finally, the
consequent nature of God is the explanation of the fixity of
accomplished fact and achieved value. “The truth itself is
nothing else than how the composite natures of the organic actualities
of the world obtain adequate representation in the divine
nature” (Whitehead 1978, 12). This sketch of Whitehead’s
reasoning may suggest that his “arguments” lose their
force when abstracted from his metaphysics. Bowman L. Clarke, however,
produced a formal theistic argument along Whiteheadian lines using the
linguistic framework developed by Nelson Goodman (Clarke 1966,
162–164). In a different vein, Franklin Gamwell argues that the moral
law must be grounded in the divine good, where the divine
good is most parsimoniously conceived in neoclassical terms
(Gamwell 1990). Another process thinker, Derek Malone-France, argues
that the promise of Kant’s transcendental philosophy is best fulfilled
in a Whiteheadian inspired theistic metaphysics (Malone-France
2007). Thus, arguing for the existence of Whitehead’s God, or
something like Whitehead’s God, need not be inextricably tied to
evaluating Whitehead’s metaphysics.
The debate among Whiteheadians over the existence of God is
complicated by the fact that Whitehead’s views rapidly evolved from
the time he began teaching at Harvard in 1924. His view of God is less
a completed philosophical theism than a work in progress that was
left to others to try to complete, and many have tried. It is worthy
of note, however, that an influential group of scholars maintain that
Whitehead was not true to his finer insights when he included God in
his metaphysical system. Donald Sherburne wrote a pivotal article in
1967, revised in 1971, titled “Whitehead without God.”
Sherburne holds that God can be “exorcised” from
Whitehead’s metaphysics by showing that the existence of God is
inconsistent with its categories and by demonstrating that all of the
functions ascribed to deity in the system can be met in other ways.
Donald Crosby and Frederick Ferré (1933–2013), also within the
process fold, hold similar views. Ferré considers theism
“optional” in the sense that the premises of theistic
arguments are subject to competing and equally rational value
commitments (Ferré 2001, 177f). One of the most careful and
persistent critics of process theism is Robert Neville (Neville
1980). Neville does not argue for “Whitehead without God”
so much as “Whitehead without Whitehead’s God.” He
believes that Whitehead’s critique of scientific materialism and his
philosophy of organism are basically correct, but that the ultimate
explanation of the universe is in a deity that wholly transcends it
and creates it ex nihilo (Neville 1968). Griffin forcefully
criticized Neville’s views (Griffin 2007, 186–214) and Neville gave a
spirited response (Neville 2008).
Hartshorne was more in the mainstream of philosophical discussions
about God than was Whitehead. He spoke of proofs for God’s existence
and defended them vigorously, although he ceased calling them
“proofs” when he realized the differences between his
approach and more traditional ones. Hartshorne is best known for his
voluminous writings on the ontological argument—he devotes two
books and numerous articles to the topic (Hartshorne 1962 & 1965a).
Despite his fondness for his revised ontological argument, he never
considered it sufficient unto itself to make the case for God’s
existence. The ontological argument is one strand of a multiple
argument strategy—which Basil Mitchell calls a
“cumulative case”—in which the various elements are
mutually reinforcing.
Hartshorne’s versions of the cosmological, teleological (or design),
moral, epistemic, and aesthetic arguments complete the set that make up
the global argument (Viney 1985).
In Hartshorne’s view, the importance of the ontological argument is
to establish that God could not exist contingently. He calls this
“Anselm’s principle.” If Anselm’s principle is correct then
if it is possible for God to exist, then God necessarily
exists. In Hartshorne’s view, Anselm failed to make a convincing case
for God’s existence because he failed to show that his concept of God
is coherently conceivable. Indeed, Hartshorne believes that matters are
much worse for Anselm since he considers Anselm’s form of theism to be
incoherent, as we have seen. Hartshorne believes that the other
arguments in his own global argument make the case for God’s possible
existence. Contingent beings require a divine necessary being
(cosmological); cosmic order implies a divine cosmic ordering power
(design); reality should be construed as the actual content of divine
knowledge (epistemic); the supreme aim in life is to contribute to the
divine life (moral); and there is a beauty of the world as a whole that
only God can enjoy (aesthetic). The structure of Hartshorne’s argument
is reminiscent of the elaborate case made by John Duns Scotus in De
Primo Principio. Of course, the God whose existence Hartshorne
seeks to establish is one that “the subtle doctor” would
find unacceptable.
Hartshorne presents each of the sub-arguments within his cumulative
case as a list of options from an exhaustive set, with his neoclassical
theistic option rounding out the set. For example, the options in the
design argument are printed as follows (Hartshorne 1970, 281):
The first three options are the atheistic ones and the last one (T)
is Hartshorne’s view. The reason for listing the arguments in this way
is to avoid the pretense of settling important questions by logic
alone. The conclusion of any valid
deductive argument can be rejected provided one is willing to reject
one or more of the premises. In this sense, a valid argument provides
one with options for belief rather than a proof of its conclusion.
Hartshorne denies that one can coerce belief in God with arguments such
as this. Moreover, he acknowledges that his own choice for neoclassical
theism is not without its difficulties. He maintains, therefore, that
one should employ the “principle of least paradox” in
assessing the options. Since no metaphysical position is without its
problems, it will not do to argue for one’s own view by finding the
problems in the views of others. “One must decide which paradoxes
are the really fatal ones, in comparison with those of contending
positions” (Hartshorne 1970, 88).
Hartshorne presents his theistic arguments as a priori, not
in the sense that they are conclusive demonstrations, but in the sense
that they aim at a conclusion about what is true in all possible states
of affairs. In this he is true to Whitehead’s metaphysical project of
finding categories that are universal and necessary. He insists that
none of the conclusions of his arguments are empirical. A proposition
is empirical, in Popper’s sense, if it is falsifiable by some
conceivable experience. If Anselm’s principle is correct then either
God exists without the possibility of not existing or God’s existence
is impossible. Thus, if God exists, then no conceivable experience
could falsify the statement that God exists. For this reason,
Hartshorne finds all empirical arguments—and hence, all
scientifically based arguments—for God’s existence to be
fatally flawed since they must conclude to that which is
not God, that is, to that which exists contingently. Hartshorne also
points out that none of his arguments tell us anything concrete about
God. True to his distinction between existence and actuality,
Hartshorne maintains that the arguments concern that which is most
abstract about deity, its existence and character. This is why
Hartshorne claimed to know so very little about God, even though he
wrote so many volumes on the subject (Hartshorne & Viney 2001,
46).
After his ninetieth birthday, Hartshorne emphasized a somewhat
different approach in arguing for God’s existence that incorporates his
ideas about dual transcendence (Hartshorne 1993; Hartshorne 2011b). He notes that
from a purely formal point of view, any pair of metaphysical contraries
may apply to God or to the world. For example, either God is in
different respects necessary and contingent (NC), wholly necessary (N),
wholly contingent (C), or neither necessary nor contingent (O). The
same is true of the world: necessary and contingent (nc), wholly
necessary (n), wholly contingent (c), or neither necessary nor
contingent (o). This yields sixteen formal options which Hartshorne
arranges in a four by four matrix. Historically significant forms of
theism can be found on the matrix—classical theism, for
example, is N.c and free will theism is NC.c. Only one of the sixteen
options can be true, so Hartshorne develops criteria for judging the
various possibilities. For example, if the contrast itself should be
preserved, then options like N.n, C.c, and O.o are unacceptable. Of
course, Hartshorne’s conclusion is that NC.nc is the true option.
Arguably, the value of these matrices is as much in mapping concepts of
God and the world as it is in arguing for a particular option, for they
allow a more detailed idea of the views that contradict one’s own.
Hartshorne maintains that one reason classical theism remained
unchallenged for so long was because philosophers had not considered
all of the options (Hartshorne 1997, ch. 5). If any two matrices
are combined, the number of formal options jumps to 256. If we
generalize for any number of pairs n, then the number of
concepts of God and the world is 16n.
We have already mentioned others within the process tradition who have
made the case for process theism: Clarke, Gamwell, and
Malone-France. Schubert Ogden (1963) and David Ray Griffin (2001a and
2016) should be added to the list. Griffin explicitly employs a
cumulative case involving eight strands; his argument is indebted to
both Whitehead and Hartshorne but includes his own distinctive
contributions. Having found the alternatives to process theism
unsatisfactory, Griffin maintains that “process
philosophy’s naturalistic theism is overwhelmingly more
probable than the truth of atheism” (2001a, 203). Also of note
is that Griffin is one of the few process philosophers to have
addressed the arguments in the literature of the new atheism
(although, see Viney and Shields forthcoming, chapter 7).
With Hartshorne, as with Whitehead, what is at stake in theistic
arguments is less a matter of the soundness of a particular piece of
reasoning than the assessment of an entire metaphysical system. Thus,
the sketch given here does not begin to do justice to their arguments.
Nevertheless, the development and defense of a concept of God that is
fully engaged in temporal processes is perhaps the central pillar and
the lasting achievement of their reasoning. After all, one of the
selling points of process theism over its rivals has been not only its
theoretical superiority in dealing with theological puzzles but its
adequacy to everyday religious sensibilities. Process theists argue
that the deity of traditional theism is at once too active and too
static. It is too active in the sense that its control of the universe
is absolute, leaving nothing for the creatures to do except to
unwittingly speak the lines and play the parts decided for them in
eternity. It is too static in the sense that it lacks potentiality to
change, to participate in the evolving universe it created, and to be
affected by the triumphs and tragedies of its creatures. In short, it
is a God who acts but is never acted upon and can therefore never
interact. This is summed up in the non-biblical Aristotelian formula
of God as the unmoved mover. Fritz Rothschild describes the God of
Rabbi Abraham Heschel—a God who feels and is felt by the
creatures—as “the Most Moved Mover”
(Heschel 1959, 24). Hartshorne, who greatly admired Heschel, amends
this formula in an attempt to distill the essence of process theism,
“God is the most and best moved mover”
(Hartshorne 1997, 6, 39).