The history of process philosophy extends far into antiquity, both in
Eastern and Western thought. In the Western tradition it is the Greek
theoretician Heraclitus of Ephesus (born ca. 560 B.C.E.) who is
commonly recognized as the founder of the process approach. The few
remaining fragments of Heraclitus’ doctrine are often
interpreted as championing a philosophy of ubiquitous and radical
flux, epitomized in the slogan panta rhei (“everything
flows”). But Heraclitus’ claims are more sophisticated. To
be sure, the fragments contain an unambiguous commitment to ubiquitous
dynamicity: “this world-order … is … an ever
living fire...” (Fr. 217, Kirk-Raven-Schofield). Whatever exists
is a transformation of this cosmic fire, turning into apparently
stable forms of matter such as sea and earth (Fr. 218), but all the
while remaining present in these apparent stabilities (Fr. 204).
Cosmic fire is the source of change of all observable cosmological and
natural processes. Moreover, Heraclitus also postulates that all
observable changes result from a “strife” of opposing
forces to overcome each other, thus creating transformative power as
the ruling condition of existence: “war is the father of all and
king of all” (Fr. 212). However, Heraclitus’ reputation as
the great proponent of radical flux (alteration at every
instant) may be mainly due to the influence of his early commentators:
Plato, Aristotle, Melissus, and Theophrastus. For one must not
overlook that in the fragments we have from Heraclitus dynamicity is
tied inextricably to balance or “measure” (Kirk 1951).
While fire is postulated as an underlying pervasive cosmic factor that
is creative and self-moving, the changes produced by fire happen in a
regulated, measured way. Fire is “kindling in measures and going
out in measures” (Fr. 217) and “all things are an equal
exchange for fire and fire for all things, as goods are for gold and
gold for goods” (Fr. 219). Furthermore the opposing forces,
which are manifestations of fire, form unities of cyclical
alternation—“day night, winter summer, war peace, satiety
hunger unity”(Fr. 204)—that proceed within the limits of a
quantitative measure (metron) reinforced by a
“law” of nature (Fr. 226). The unity of opposites thus
creates an overall balance of reciprocity by cyclical transitions
between extremes—“these things change places and are
those, and those change places again and are these” (Fr.202). The
“same rivers” are constituted by the regular flow patterns
of “different and different waters” which “scatter
and…gather…come together and flow away…approach
and depart” (Fr. 214). Moreover, the unity of opposites also
produces the dynamic arrest we know from “the bow or the
lyre” (Fr. 209), i.e., the motionless dynamic presence resulting
from the tension of a ‘backstretched connection’
(palintonos harmoniē) pulling equally into two opposite
directions. In short, Heraclitus articulated three fundamental
insights that became seminal in the history of Western process
philosophy, despite the somewhat tendentious portrait of his thought
in Greek antiquity. First, Heraclitus assigned to process or
dynamicity the role of an explanatory feature, not only of a feature
of nature to be explained. Second, he suggested that processes form
organizational units and occur in a quantitatively measurable and
ordered fashion. Third, he contrasted dynamic transitions or
alterations with dynamic permanence, and thus for the first time
identifies, and differentiates between, two basic
‘Gestalts’ or forms of dynamicity. 
The direct counter-model to Heraclitus’ explanation of natural
changes was the atomism of Leucippus, Democritus, and Epicurus, who
viewed matter as constituted by inert material atoms with permanent
properties (e.g., weight) and took natural developments to be the
macroscopic effects of atoms colliding and changing their spatial
positions. Aristotle complained that the source of motion for these
collisions remained unexplained and developed a philosophy of nature
that includes a coherent account of the source of motion in natural
occurrences, allowing also for explanations in terms of self-realizing
and self-maintaining structural or formal factors. In
Aristotle’s view an item in nature persists by the active
exercise of a collection of capacities, a self-maintaining internal
process organization (physis, or more generally
morphē) that realizes a characteristic sort of
functioning; by means of these characteristic types of functioning we
sort entities into natural kinds. These kind-specific capacities must
be realized within a matter or medium (hylē) that
supports the relevant process organizations but that also harbors
counteracting, disintegrative tendencies, due to the fact that the
elemental components of matter (fire, water, earth, or air) actively
strive towards their “natural place” further up or down.
If Aristotle indeed took these active elemental tendencies as
fundamental and allowed for elemental transformations as changes
per se without an underlying substratum or prime matter (as
argued in Gill 1989), he can be counted as a process philosopher. But
Aristotle also supplied in his characterization of substance
(ousia) those aspects that subsequent history selected to
form the basic tenets of the paradigm of ‘substance
metaphysics.’ In addition, substance-metaphysics could also draw
on Aristotle’s classification of changes (kineseis)
into generation, destruction, alteration, and locomotion, since this
classification rests on a sophisticated doctrine of
“potential” vs. “actual” features that are all
attributed to a static subject of change. Aristotle’s
distinction between kinesis and energeia, on the
other hand, must again be counted as an important contribution to
process thought. Changes such as building a house or
learning lead to an end (telos) that lies
“beyond,” and are incomplete as long as the end is not
reached—“someone who is building a house, has not built
it” (Metaphysics Theta 6). In contrast, activities such
as seeing or living well are ends in themselves and
complete at any moment for as long as they last—“he who is
seeing has seen.” Aristotle’s distinction between changes
and activities is significant in its own right, but even more seminal
for present-day process philosophy, since it is the first attempt to
classify types of occurrences in terms of logical and linguistic
features of associated expressions (see section 3 below). 
The history of Western metaphysics since Aristotle was mainly focused
on elaborating various versions of substance metaphysics—in
fact, as one might say with Hegel, “the history of [Western]
metaphysics is the tendency towards substance.” However,
interspersed in this history of substance metaphysics are pockets of
process thought, partly as supplementary elements to an otherwise
substance-geared theory, and partly as independent
process-philosophical explorations. For example, the neo-Platonic
philosopher Plotinus (204–270) introduced the thought that the
dynamicity of being is the “emanation of the divine,” an
idea that was later enriched by the Renaissance philosopher Francesco
Patrizzi (1529–1597) with mereological descriptions of the
diffusion of processes in order to develop a “metaphysics of
light.” G. W. Leibniz (1646–1716) developed a
fully-fledged process-based metaphysics, postulating as basic
individuals so-called “monads.” Monads are ordered
sequences of states of affairs consisting of the co-exemplification of
properties during some period of time. But monads are not static: they
are endowed with an inherent “active force” that engenders
the transitions between states. Moreover, since Leibniz took temporal
relations to be “founded” in the properties of monads,
states of monads are per se not temporally
 discrete.[1]
A special branch of process thought opened up in late 18th and early
19th century German Idealism, when Johann G. Fichte, Friedrich W. J.
Schelling, and Georg W. F. Hegel responded to Immanuel Kant’s
system of a transcendental idealism. All three of these thinkers
alerted to the processual nature of the “transcendental
subject,” and aimed to overcome Kant’s incongruous
postulate of unknowable “things in themselves” by focusing
on the process by which the world of knowable appearances, including
reflective reasoning, is generated—this process, or so the
argument goes, is the most promising candidate for reality in itself.
Hegel provided the most comprehensive and detailed elaboration of this
basic idea. He postulated that reality is the self-unfolding of
dynamic structures or templates (“Begriffe”); among these
templates external contrasts arise, which trigger self-modifications
of the templates into more differentiated versions; these in turn
create further external contrasts. The result is an increasingly
interrelated web of dynamic dependencies, and the “movement of
reflection” that drives the interrelated differentiations of the
templates in the end reaches a dynamic fixed point. According to
Hegel’s dynamic structuralism, self-unfolding reality
differentiates itself into mental, natural, socio-cultural, and
institutional processes, and, in fact, over time develops any possible
differentiation, so that in the end reality occurs as the totality of
all possible forms of mutual conditioning. Hegel argued that this
overall “movement” of gradual self-determination by
internal and external differentiation drives all actual and possible
developments according to its inner necessity—reality is
“reason” articulating itself as and within the world.
Hegel called this movement “dialectics” and his
philosophical system was an attempt to work out the
‘logic’ underlying the total dialectical development of
reality. Schelling claimed that Hegelian dialectics provides, at best,
a description of the development of constraining conditions on
reality’s self-unfolding. But, Schelling argued, the productive
dynamicity of the process that is being constrained is neither
included nor explained in Hegel’s system, and correctly so,
since the latter is necessarily transcendent to conscious human
thought. From the perspective of contemporary process ontology, the
development of German Idealism between 1790 and 1850 in the debate
between Fichte, Hegel, and Schelling displays in instructive ways the
limitations of a process metaphysics that puts the occurrence type of
productions center-stage and, in particular, understands
cognition as a production: as a development with a product or result.
As pictures are the products of paintings, mental representations
(thoughts, concepts) were taken to be the quasi-objects that result
from the productive developmental occurrences of perceiving and
thinking. When we conceive of an occurrence as a production, we
separate conceptually between the product and the process generating
the product. Thus, productions are precisely the type of occurrences
that prevent us from conceiving the dynamic presence of reality in
itself as “process and result rolled into one,” as Hegel
envisaged. The metaphilosophical debate between Fichte, Hegel, and
Schelling, which deeply influenced the further development of
‘continental’ philosophy from Nietzsche to Heidegger to
Derrida and onwards, can be viewed as ensuing from the assumption that
cognitions are productions of sorts—if cognitions had been
assigned another occurrence type, this specific metaphilosophical
debate could not have got off the ground. 
Hegel assumed that the process of reality follows certain principles
that can be fathomed by philosophical inquiry. This thesis is the
hallmark of speculative process metaphysics, which has a
number of adherents also among later process philosophers but has been
championed most explicitly by Alfred N.
 Whitehead
 in his “philosophy of organism,” worked out during the
early decades of the 20th century. The basic unit of reality in
Whitehead’s system is an event-like entity called “actual
occasion,” which is the procedural integration or
“concrescence” of processes of data transfer
(“prehensions”) into unities that become new data. Each
actual occasion is the growing together of the total available
information of the universe at that time, according to certain
principles, repeating and reinforcing certain patterns (“eternal
objects”) and thereby creating new ones. Whitehead’s
process metaphysics is arguably the most comprehensive descriptive
metaphysical framework we have to date—as Whitehead’s
followers, past and present, have shown, not only can it be used for
the interpretation of familiar domains of philosophical concern, but
it can also provide illuminating descriptions for scientific domains
where other metaphysical theories have little to offer, such as
discourse pragmatics in linguistic typology, the neuro-psychological
foundations of value judgments, quantum physics, or measurements in
 astrophysics.[2]
 By refurbishing Plotinus’s idea of divinity coming about in
the world’s becoming, Whitehead’s philosophy also provided
a new impetus to the philosophy of religion.
 Charles Hartshorne,
 perhaps the most eminent American philosopher of religion of the
Twentieth century, adopted and expanded Whitehead’s ideas for a
process view of God and developed the position of
 process theism
 in the style of rational speculative process thought. It is important
to note, however, that while the early followers of Whitehead such as
Hartshorne and Paul Weiss embraced the speculative principles of his
philosophy, many present-day Whiteheadians are content to put the
system’s ontological concepts to descriptive use.
Other proponents of speculative process metaphysics between 1850 and
1950, such as Charles S. Peirce, Samuel Alexander, C. Lloyd Morgan,
and Andrew Paul Ushenko, contributed two new motives for process
thought, namely, the philosophical explanation of evolutionary
processes and the philosophical explanation of emergence and
self-organization. However, they also created an image of process
metaphysics that in the eyes of their contemporaries appeared
methodologically problematic. The first step of these
process-philosophical enterprises seemed legitimate
business—surely it was important to identify the limitations of
mechanistic explanations in science. But it was the second step, the
endeavor of drafting purely speculative explanations for the direction
and the origin of emergent evolution, that went against the positivist
temper of the time. Such explanations did not sit well with the
philosophers who defined and shaped the “analytic” method
in postwar Anglo-American philosophy. As they rejected any empirical
claims that would go beyond what was scientifically proven, and
assigned to philosophy the more mundane task of analyzing conceptual
contents (as well as linguistic and social practices, and phenomenal
experiences), they increased the intersubjective verifiability of
philosophical claims. But in the course of this important
methodological revision the ontological categories of process
metaphysics were mostly thrown out wholesale with the bathwater of the
speculative explanations these categories were embedded in.
Nevertheless, twentieth century speculative process
metaphysics is paralleled by an analytic-interpretive strand
in contemporary process thought. This variety of process thought also
proceeds from the theoretical intuition that processuality, in its
various modes, is the primary starting point for a philosophical
description of the world or of reality, but does not speculate about
how reality develops. Here processuality either is a defining trait of
the basic categories postulated for the analysis of common sense and
scientific reasoning, in the style of analytic philosophy; or
processuality is conveyed in the network of metaphors selected for the
interpretation of human experience and the conditions of human
existence, in the style of so-called ‘continental’
philosophy. Often contributions to analytic-interpretive processism
are also placed somewhere in the middle between the poles of analytic
versus continental methods in contemporary philosophy. The following
examples will illustrate this methodological openness of
non-speculative contemporary process philosophy.
Based on their analyses of phenomenal experience, the investigations
of the “reflex arc” that were coming out of the psychology
laboratory, and an analysis of human social praxis, William James and
John Dewey developed a process-based pragmatist metaphysics.
James’ process-based account of the self loomed less large for
the history of process philosophy than Dewey’s more
comprehensive view. Dewey holds that all existents are events whose
characters we determine by giving them meaning in our interaction. For
Dewey meanings are not abstract or psychic objects but aspects of
human cooperative behavior—in our interactions with the world
we create significances and thus determine what kind of situation
occurs. Working from studies of social interaction, George Herbert
Mead added to process-based pragmatism the thesis that mind emerges
from social communicative actions. On the side of
‘continental’ philosophy, Henri Bergson arrived at a
process metaphysics again based on an investigation of phenomenal
experience, like James and Dewey. But while Dewey and other
pragmatists put the process-character of being partly into the hand of
human agents and their practical and theoretical interpretations of an
ongoing situation, Bergson argued that the process-character of being
is precisely out of our cognitive reach, at least in so far as we try
to conceptualize what we experience. As long as we understand
conscious experience as a subject-object relation, Bergson pointed
out, we merely follow the theoretical habits in which we have been
conditioned by the substance-metaphysical tradition. However, when we
carefully attend to what we take in during conscious experience,
especially our self-experience, without forcing a conceptualization of
that experiential content or the act of experience, we find not a
relation and ready-made relata but an interactivity—an ongoing
interfacing out of which world and self arise in our
conceptualizations. In immediate, non-conceptualized experience we
grasp the dynamicity of this interfacing as becoming or the flow of
duration (“durée”), but this felt dynamic content
of our experience transcends what we can conceptually articulate. As
soon as we try to conceptualize what we have grasped in
“intuition” we turn the continuous complex flow of
experience into a sequence of discrete units, into pluralities of
states of objects at locations that engender Zeno’s paradoxes of
motion, and we transform our entangled being with the world into the
ever puzzling opposition of a subject and an object.
Martin Heidegger’s early and late philosophy also presents an
analytic-interpretive contribution to process philosophy, without
speculative formulations of metaphysical ‘laws of
development,’ but with a view to the metaphilosophical and
practical implications of process metaphysics. In Sein und
Zeit (1927) Heidegger presents what could be called an
‘adverbial model’ of process metaphysics; based on an
analysis of human existence (“Dasein”) Heidegger shows
that what the metaphysical tradition understood as entities or factors
standing in relational constellations—e.g., space, world, self,
others, possibility, matter, function, meaning, time—can be
viewed as ‘adverbial modifications’ of Dasein, as modes
and ways in which Dasein occurs, while Dasein itself is the
interactivity of “disclosure” or ‘taking as.’
Since Heidegger’s ‘taking as’ is an understanding
that is ineradicably practical, his early philosophy bears certain
affinities to the pragmatist tendency in twentieth century American
process thought. In Heidegger’s later work, however, human
understanding is no longer the dynamic ‘locus’ but more a
dimension of the process of being (“clearing”).
While many twentieth century American process thinkers were influenced
by Whitehead, some turned elsewhere or went their own ways. For
example, W. H. Sheldon championed a largely dialectical view of the
dynamic nature of reality with process as a principle of conflict
resolution. Wilfrid Sellars, one of the great figures in post-war
analytical philosophy, worked out what appears to be the first
consistently nominalist and naturalist system ever developed in the
history of Western philosophy; this is often overlooked, however,
since the system relies on a process ontology that Sellars only
briefly sketched but never elaborated. Naturalism implies a nominalist
account of properties, Sellars argued, which in turn can only succeed
if we take qualia to be aspects of processes—by categorizing
blue as sensing-blue-ly, we can make better sense of
how physical processes engender sensory contents (Sellars 1981). With
the envisaged process-based solution to the body-sensory problem,
which in many ways anticipates current ideas of “embodied
cognition,” Sellars could further suggest a new process-based
re-interpretation of intentionality. Any kind of content, Sellars
argued, from the lowliest sensory content in bacteria to the
norm-governed contents of conceptual experience to the contents of
scientific theories, is nothing else but a way of
functioning. Taking over from Sellars the idea that content
is function, present-day functionalist theories of mind and cognition
typically fail to acknowledge Sellars and thereby miss the decisive
element for a successful functionalist ‘reduction’ of
intentionality and the mental, namely, that the reductive basis,
functions, are not static input-output tables but ongoing processes in
natural systems that realize, in this ongoingness, normative
socio-cultural practices (Seibt 2016). Recently American process
metaphysics gained another important voice in Nicholas Rescher who,
like Sellars, consistently pursued a systematic approach in
philosophy. Rescher made important contributions to all
philosophical disciplines; originally these were framed as components
of a system of “methodological pragmatism” and
“pragmatic idealism”. In the mid-1990s, however, Rescher
developed a process metaphysical embedding for his system, using
familiar philosophical terminology, and thus presented the first
systematic overview of the explanatory potential of a non-Whiteheadian
process metaphysics that forfeits technical expenditure and operates
with a notion of process that is much closer to our common-sense
understanding of developments. 
Generally speaking, current Western process philosophy has abandoned
all speculative aspirations and develops the descriptive,
analytic-interpretive strand of process thought (the exception might
be the use of process metaphysics in areas of philosophy of physics
where physics itself is speculative, see footnote 17). While interest
in processism most recently has increased in analytic philosophy of
science, of mind, and of action, process thought is currently also
used to highlight productive affinities between the continental and
analytical trajectories of twentieth century metaphilosophical
criticism of traditional metaphysics. Such
analytic-continental cross-overs enabled by attention to process can
also be observed in philosophy of cognition and philosophy of
technology. Another more encompassing exploration across borders, a
detailed historical and systematic comparison between Western and
Eastern process philosophy (e.g.,
 Daoism)
 is an important task yet to be undertaken.
As may have become clear from the brief review of historical
contributions to (Western) process philosophy in section 1, process
philosophy is a complex and highly diversified field that is not tied
to any school, method, position, or even paradigmatic notion of
process. Some process philosophers (e.g. Whitehead) took organismic
processes as their central model for a concept of occurrences that
generate the internal and external coherence of an entity. Others
(e.g. James) chose as their canonical illustrations individual
psychological processes, or (e.g. Alexander) took evolutionary
development as paradigmatic. Some process philosophers (e.g. Whitehead
and Morgan) articulated their approach in the form of an axiomatic
theory and in close relation to science, while others (e.g. Bergson)
worked from an almost mystical sort of sympathetic apprehension of
reality and insisted that process metaphysics could, if at all, only
be expressed by means of a highly metaphorical use of language. Some
processists (e.g., Roger Boscovich) championed a materialist position,
while others endorsed idealism (e.g., Leibniz and Hegel). The
historical overview in the preceding section also displays that the
tools of process philosophy are not tied to any specific method of
philosophical inquiry, giving present-day process philosophers a broad
spectrum of approaches with which to build their theories: by
conceptual analysis (via informal and formal reconstructions of
conceptual contents); by the integrative interpretation of scientific
results; or by phenomenological investigations. Similarly, while
compatibility with recent results of science is for many process
philosophers a privileged methodological constraint, others take
science to be merely an aspect of the more comprehensive philosophical
datum of cultural praxis.
In short, process philosophy is best understood as a paradigm of
philosophy characterized by a set of fundamental assumptions. For
example, process philosophers assume that the only primary or basic
ontological categories should be terms for occurring
entities, and that certain formal theories—for example, set
theory—are ill-suited of themselves, without modifications, to
express the dynamic relationships among occurrences. Or again, process
thinkers hold that philosophical research may legitimately address
‘creative’ phenomena that cannot be described as
modifications of permanent units, such as phenomena of emergence or
self-organization. What unifies contemporary process-philosophical
research more than any other aspect, however, is its metaphilosophical
aim to revise long-standing theoretical habits. Given its current role
as a rival to the dominant substance-geared paradigm of Western
metaphysics, process philosophy has the overarching task of
establishing the following three claims:
Contributions to current process-philosophical research typically
focus on (aspects of) only one of these three components of a theory
 revision.[3]
 More often than not, however, the larger purpose of the contribution
remains implicit, which is one of the reasons why contemporary process
philosophy, especially non-Whiteheadian process thought, does not
clearly stand out as a unified effort at theory revision. Process
philosophy currently presents itself as an internally diversified,
geographically and disciplinarily distributed phenomenon of innovative
thought in Western philosophy. Accordingly, there are significant
differences in how process philosophers approach claims (1)–(3).
In the following the focus will be on arguments for claims
(1)–(3) within contemporary analytical process philosophy. The
reader should thus keep in mind that the pointers set in the following
sections are partially representative at best and need to be
supplemented by introductions to, e.g., contemporary
 Whiteheadian
 process thought and French process thought
 (Gilles Deleuze,
 Alain Badiou). In addition, pointers to process-philosophical
contributions to the philosophy of religion are all but omitted, since
extensive and in-depth treatments are provided in the entries on
 Charles Hartshorne
 and
 process theism.
 
In order to support (Claim 1), two strategies have been pursued. The
first strategy is to argue that the core assumptions of the substance
paradigm—especially the focus on discrete, countable, static
individuals and the neglect of dynamic aspects—simply reflect
the cognitive dispositions that are typical for the speakers of the
languages in which Western metaphysics were mainly developed, such as
Ancient Greek, Latin, German, and
 English.[4]
 The second strategy is to select a well-known argument for the
necessity of substance-based metaphysics and to show that it involves
a petitio principii. For example, consider Peter F.
Strawson’s widely accepted argument against the very possibility
of process
 metaphysics.[5]
 Strawson’s argument can be reconstructed as follows:
If this line of reasoning were correct, the substance paradigm would
be indispensable, and (Claim 1) above would be false. For it is clear
that any viable metaphysical theory must have room for identifiable
individuals that can be located in space and time. However, step (4)
in Strawson’s argument begs the question on two counts.
All of the conditions that Strawson requires in step (3) (diversity,
richness, stability, and endurance or transtemporal sameness) are
fulfilled as much by the entities that we conceptualize as
physical processes as by entities that “are or possess
bodies.” Furthermore, the entities we conceptualize as processes
are physically realized without being literally embodied, and for some
of them it holds that we can point at them and distinguish them
(“this trickle versus that trickle”) and re-identify them
(“the trickle was gone for a minute, but then it came
again”). In nature’s spatio-temporal framework we
distinguish and re-identify both things and processes. That
Strawson’s argument could have appeared plausible is perhaps due
to the fact that his illustrations for processes are sounds and
explosions, which are not, like many other physical processes, lasting
occurrences with determinate location (such as fires, tornadoes, or
waterfalls). The initial plausibility of step (4) may also derive from
a core assumption of the substance paradigm, namely, the thesis that
all processes can be ontologically understood as modifications of
substances. On this reductionist view, all processes are
‘owned’ and we identify them via their owner: the murder
of Cæsar, the construction of the forbidden
city, etc. But the fact that these processes involve certain things
and persons is merely one of the aspects that an ontological
interpretation of processes should capture, and not a decisive one,
since many processes (e.g., tornadoes, lightening bolts, today’s
rush-hour in New York) lack a proper ‘subject’
altogether.
Even more important is the second question-begging element involved in
step (4) of Strawson’s argument, for it displays the theoretical
bias of the substance paradigm at a more fundamental level. Strawson
sets up conditions for the ontological category or entity type that
can constitute a space-time framework and claims in step (4) (i) that
“things that are or possess bodies” can fulfill these
conditions, and (ii) that therefore such things are
“basic particulars.” In this way Strawson turns a common
sense concept, viz. “material thing,” into a basic
ontological category without asking whether it is possible that what
we common-sensically call a ‘thing’ might not also
ontologically be interpreted in terms of a category from process
metaphysics (e.g., as a bundle of activities or, in a Whiteheadian
fashion, as ongoing pattern of events). Strawson elsewhere rejects
such an interpretation as “revisionary metaphysics” while
metaphysics based on material things or substances is
“descriptive,” but these adjectives are themselves in need
of a convincing justification—as long as an ontological
category fully captures the inferential content of a common sense
concept, it is as descriptive as any other.
In short, then, Strawson’s argument fails on two counts. It is
simply not the case that material things are the indispensable basis
for a framework of knowable, uniquely located, re-identifiable items.
Physical processes of a suitable sort can accomplish this task as
well. Moreover, even if material things were the only candidates for
epistemically reidentifiable items, it still would be an open question
how we should interpret things ontologically. To be sure, the rebuttal
of Strawson’s argument does not suffice to establish (Claim 1),
but it keeps process philosophy in the running.
The best way to show that the core assumptions of the substance
paradigm can be dispensed with is surely just to do it. For process
philosophy, as for any attempt at theory revision, the proof of the
pudding is in the eating. Since Whitehead’s process metaphysics
is terminologically somewhat difficult to digest at first try,
contemporary processists increasingly take non-Whiteheadian routes
into process philosophy and proceed from linguistic ruminations and a
critical review of the traditional philosophical menu. 
This latter strand of contemporary analytical process philosophy
begins with Zeno Vendler’s (1957) and Anthony Kenny’s
(1963) cognate classifications of “action types” in terms
of “action verbs” (both of these classifications are,
via Gilbert Ryle’s observations about
“‘try’ verbs” and “‘got it’
verbs,” inspired by Aristotle’s distinction between
‘coming about’ (kinesis) and ‘going
on’ (energeia)). Vendler and Kenny argued that actions
can be sorted into various types according to certain logical and
linguistic features of verbs denoting these actions. Vendler, for
example, operated with a fourfold classification, distinguishing among
“states, activities, accomplishments, and achievements,”
using as criterial conditions (e.g.) whether the verb that expresses
the occurrence type in question needs the progressive in present
tense, whether it can be combined with the verb “finish,”
or whether it applies an any moment of a temporal interval at which it
applies. Certain problems with Vendler’s and Kenny’s
classifications were first noted by Henk Verkuyl (1972) and Alexander
Mourelatos (1978), who pointed out that the distinctions that Vendler
and Kenny tried to capture are not a matter of the lexical semantics
of “action verbs” but ultimately of the semantics of
entire sentences. This renders the classificatory task much more
complex than Vendler and Kenny envisaged, and during the last three
decades the linguistic discussion has produced (under the keywords
“Aktionsart,” “verbal aspect,” and
“aspectuality”) a plethora of theories about the many
different ways in which natural languages express the dynamic aspects
of a situation and, although themselves not process-based theories,
provide essential data for process-ontology.
Mourelatos also showed that the logical criteria of Vendler’s
and Kenny’s classifications actually function in two ways: they
can be used to distinguish various types of occurrences such as
processes and events, but they also highlight inferential analogies
between processes and stuffs on the one hand, and events and things on
the other hand. Taking up this clue, analytical process ontologists
have offered various criteria sets for the classification of
occurrences and their relationships to other
 categories,[6]
 although there is so far no consensus about the details of these
classificatory set-ups, and there are disagreements as well about
which formal theory, if any, should be employed to formulate the
relevant logical distinctions, and which dynamic category or
categories should be basic and which derived. Most, but not all,
analytical process ontologists agree that ‘activity-like,’
non-developmental processes or ‘goings-on’ should be
distinguished from ‘accomplishment-like,’ developmental
processes or ‘comings-about.’ Some analytical processists
characterize processes (or which ever label is used for the basic
category) as dynamic individuals that are concrete particulars. By
contrast, elaborating on Mourelatos’ insights, Seibt has worked
out a monocategoreal ontology (“General Process Theory”)
based on a conception of processes as non-particular individuals,
which, like stuffs, are individuated in terms of their actual or
typical functioning alone, exist by permeating spacetime, and
can literally recur in space and
 time.[7]
 However, both particularist and non-particularist interpretations
agree that processes cannot be individuated in terms of their
spacetime location alone and cannot be identified with materially
filled space-time regions, thus parting company with
“four-dimensionalism,” (a position in contemporary
ontology that is occasionally misunderstood as a process-based
approach). Furthermore, while processists agree that processes combine
and that they exhibit common features, there is disagreement on how to
articulate such process combinations (e.g., by a special mereology)
and whether the shared patterns of processes belong into a different
category (as Whitehead suggested) or are themselves processes as
well.
In short, analytical process philosophy has worked out concepts and
theories of its own, however pedestrian and patchwork, as an
alternative to Whitehead’s sophisticated system of categories,
and there is a multitude of approaches within analytical process
ontology. Despite all differences in constructive detail, however,
Whiteheadian and non-Whiteheadian process philosophy both recommend
themselves as gateways to renovating philosophical discourse. Here are
just a few of the topics where processists promise philosophical
advance. 
(i) Beginning with a familiar Whiteheadian move, the rejection of the
traditional “bifurcation of nature” into a physical and a
mental domain, the process approach opens up new ways of looking at a
wide variety of issues. Whiteheadians argue that the traditional
mind-body problem dissolves if all basic constituents of reality are
short-lived processes of information transfer that exhibit both
‘mental’ and ‘physical’ aspects in different
accentuations according to context. Quite independently of
Whitehead’s philosophy and commitments to panpsychism, a number
of analytical philosophers have argued that the present-day debate in
philosophy of mind and philosophy of action has been hampered by an
ontology that is focused on upshots (states, and state-like events)
and promote a theoretical ‘Gestalt’ switch in the
metaphysics of experience and agency (Stout 2017). Helen Steward
(1997, 2012) criticizes the standard conception of perception and
agency as a causal sequence of states, some of which are physical and
some mental; in order to make room for agentive freedom within the
natural world Steward proposes that we view agency as a special form
of downward causation, taking our bearings from the hierarchical
systems of functioning in biological organisms (2017). Others have
pointed out that our common sense (teleological) explanations of
actions commit us to ongoing occurrences (Stout 1996) or that we can
best make sense of the unity of our experience if we take processes to
be the objects of our experiences rather than states or things
(Soteriou
 2013).[8]
(ii) Similarly, as non-Whiteheadian analytical processists have
pointed out, process metaphysics reconfigures the traditional problem
of universals since it abandons the substance-metaphysical principle
that concrete entities are fully determinate while general or
indeterminate entities are abstract (i.e., they must not be, undergo,
or initiate
 changes).[9]
(iii) Processists also have offered novel approaches to the problem of
persistence, either by taking persistent entities to be
“enduring” patterns of processes (Whitehead), or by
questioning the idea that “perdurance” vs.
“endurance” accounts of persistence form a theoretically
necessary exclusive
 dichotomy.[10]
(iv) The dichotomy of ‘fact’ and ‘norm,’ some
processists argue, is another traditional “bifurcation”
that can be bridged. Some natural processes realize a certain form of
low-degree normativity. In some process organizations (e.g.,
far-from-equilibrium systems) each component process presupposes every
other for its own occurrence; in the context of these particular
process organizations the dependence amongst the single processes is
not merely a matter of linear causation but constrained by the
simultaneous interactions of the entire system, ensuring that each
process is ‘functional for’ the occurrence of the
 system.[11]
(v) Finally, the process approach also makes a difference in the realm
of philosophy of religion. While the opposition between
“immanence” and “transcendence” traditionally
is taken to amount to an exclusive alternative, whether in application
to universals or to God, the tools of process metaphysics allow us to
pursue a third option that exploits the explanatory grammar of the
‘mode.’ We often consider the mode or way in which a
process, or collection of processes, occurs as a separate kind of
process (compare, e.g., scratching a violin string with a bow vs.
playing a tone on the violin, or free market economy vs. planned
economy). Processes that are modifications of other processes are both
immanent in the sense that they affect (by constraining and enabling)
how the modified processes occur, but are transcendent in the sense
that they are multiply realizable, that is, they are not themselves
dependent on the particular spatio-temporal occurrences of the
processes that realize
 them.[12]
In addition, there is a host of other contemporary issues where
attention to processes generates novel answers that advance our
understanding of the familiar questions of philosophy in important
ways, even without challenging some central, defining, dichotomy.
Cases in point are the ‘process account of causation’
(Salmon 1984,
 1997)[13]
 or N. Rescher’s processist analysis of knowledge. Offering
detailed reconstructions of the procedures of knowledge production,
Rescher argues that rational inquiry, including science, is the
process of creating coherent theories that systematize what we have
established as data with increasing complexity (Rescher 1982). That
this method of inquiry can yield (temporary) truths is justified by
its practical success, but the method is essentially (a) interminable
and (b) progressive, since: (a1) each knowledge claim contains
presuppositions that raise new questions; (a2) reality is
“cognitively inexhaustible”; and (b) since the increasing
complexification of scientific knowledge can count as cognitive
progress, even though such progress may not be discernible as
cumulative or linear advance (Rescher 1977, 1978, 1984). For claims
(a2) and (b) Rescher supplies process-metaphysical underpinnings,
endorsing a view of nature as continuously evolving and a view of
evolution as directed towards increasing complexity (Rescher 1996,
2006 ch. 10, and 2012; see also below section 6).
Perhaps the clearest example for the progress that a processist
approach can bring to longstanding tasks of philosophy is in the
theory of selfhood and personhood. Whatever cultural notions of
‘person’ and ‘self’ we may have acquired, our
immediate self-awareness reveals us to ourselves as engaged in doings
and undergoings. What we find ourselves to be doing and undergoing we
understand as belonging to a space of possible occurrences. We notice
patterns in what might possibly be going on with us, and some of these
patterns we use to identify ourselves: in terms of our talents,
skills, capabilities, traits, dispositions, habits, inclinations, and
tendencies to action and inaction. It is integral to your
self-awareness at this moment that your reading is yours, the
reading of a self that is the same over time. But the sameness of this
self we experience not as the sameness of a time-invariant thing but
as the sameness of an ‘operation’ of integration—an
ongoing unification of experienced patterns in ways that enable a
first-person perspective. Some process philosophers have taken the
experience of dynamic sameness in self-experience as the basis for
constructing a process-metaphysical account of personhood that defines
the core self as a unified manifold of actions and capacities,
tendencies, and dispositions to (physical or psychical) actions (see
e.g. Rescher 1996 ch.6). In this way they preserve a concept of
personhood that renders the self or ego experientially accessible. The
unity of a person is a unity of experience—the coalescence of
all of one’s diverse micro-experiences as part of one unified
macro-process. Importantly, processists do not equate the
cross-temporal unity of a person-process with a sequence of momentary
total states of consciousness, as neo-Humean accounts currently
postulate; rather, it is the sort of unity of process that links each
minute’s happenings into a single overall journey. From the
process point of view a self just is the complex process
composed of various physical interactions, experiences, feelings,
moods, and actions in their systemic interrelationship. The whole
individual person is continuously ‘in the making’ or being
constituted, yet it also continuously influences which components
(e.g., experiences, feelings, actions) enter into the constitution of
the whole and in which ways these components occur. Such circular
dependencies between a whole and its parts cannot be accommodated
within a theory of individuals that is committed to the basic
constructional principles of the substance paradigm, especially the
claim that concrete individuals are fully determinate. Relationships
of mutual constitution are legitimate theoretical tools within process
ontologies where entangled recursive definitions are not in conflict
with basic tenets about individual entities. By extending the dynamic
dependencies among the component processes of a self to include
aspects of the person’s physical and social context, a process
account of persons can formulate in a differentiated and
scientifically informed fashion various claims about the formative
role of our
 environments.[14]
Harking back to (Claim 2) and (Claim 3) above, extant process-geared
treatments of familiar topics surely provide considerable support for
the claim that process philosophy is viable (Claim 2). But in the eyes
of many processists (Claim 3) matters most—as the next section
will sketch, currently it may be process philosophy’s primary
asset that it enables us to articulate and address important new
questions raised by modern science.
The relationship to science and technology appears to mark a
distinctive difference between continental process philosophy
(Heidegger, Deleuze, Badiou) on the one hand, and, on the other hand,
early American process philosophy (Peirce, James, Dewey, Whitehead,
Mead) as well as current analytical process thought. While the former
develops a critical point of view to reflect on the enterprises of
science and technology as cultural objects, the latter aligns its
investigations with the aims and spirit of science and technology. In
fact, the early phase of process philosophy in America was mainly
motivated by an effort to come to terms with the far-reaching
philosophical implications of the Darwinian theory of evolution. For
these early American process thinkers evolution was an emblematic and
paradigmatic process—it seemed to provide a clear template for
understanding how novelty and innovation come into both the human
world and the world of nature. The evolutionary framework calls for a
new metaphysics, the American pragmatists argued, which could
articulate the pervasive role of process and of the passage of time.
Was there a vehicle or substance that could ‘carry’
physical, biological, and cosmic evolution? If neither individuals nor
types (species) of things are time-invariant, a new account of being
was needed that had room for the emergence of novelty in nature, and
could convey a sense of human existence as both “precarious and
stable” (Dewey). The idea that evolution was a fact that
philosophy had to accommodate explains many of the elements of early
American process thought, in particular the understanding of
dynamicity as a force of creating novelty, as well as the need to take
a stance on the question whether the overall process of reality is
directed or blind—which ultimately split the group (see section
6).
Present-day contributions to analytical process philosophy are no
longer driven by an attempt of making sense of evolution. However,
they are often still motivated by the view that there are certain
results in science that philosophy simply must come to grips with, and
if that involves a fundamental revision of the standard tools of
philosophy, then this is an area upon which philosophy must focus,
following in the train of science. Researchers in the philosophy of
biology and in the philosophy of chemistry have argued that
process-based or process-geared approaches yield better ontological
descriptions of these domains, i.e., better capture the inferential
content of the basic concepts of biology and
 chemistry.[15]
 The case of biology provides particularly strong empirical
motivations for a ‘process turn,’ as witnessed by a recent
collection of research in philosophy of biology that deserves special
attention since most of its contributors do not proceed from but
arrive at process-ontological theses (Nicholson and Dupré
forthcoming). As the editors point out, metabolism, lifecycles, and ecological interdependencies, i.e.
types of dynamic phenomena that occur both at the level of cell biology
as well as at the level of multicellular organism, present three
classes of phenomena that in
different ways dismantle substance-ontological presumptions; these
phenomena call for an ontology that treats transtemporal sameness as a
time-scale dependent feature of process systems and models organisms
no longer as independent and comparatively discrete substance but as a
complex network of internal and external
 interactions.[16]
But there are other domains and topics of science that, as processists
stress, directly imply a process-based metaphysics. For, on
the one hand, it appears that the conceptual contents of the relevant
scientific terms cannot, without problematic distortions, be analyzed
in terms of the categories of substance metaphysics. On the other
hand, the researchers working in these areas have already adopted a
largely processist perspective in their informal glosses of
mathematical descriptions and in their heuristic approach to the
domain. Among the various cases in point for either one or both of
these claims are (i) quantum physics, (ii) self-organization, and,
most recently, (iii) embodied cognition.
(i) Quantum-physical processes: When Whitehead turned from
mathematics to philosophy, he was quite aware that recent developments
in physics (the demise of classical atomism in the face of quantum
theory and relativity theory) had thrown out our old common-sense
vision of the order of the universe. Quantum physics brought on the
dematerialization of physical matter—matter in the small could
no longer be conceptualized as a Rutherfordian planetary system of
particle-like objects. The entities described by the mathematical
formalism seemed to fit the picture of a collection of fluctuating
processes organized into apparently stable structures by statistical
regularities—i.e., by regularities of comportment at the level
of aggregate phenomena. During the early decades of the twentieth
century process philosophers were excited by the evidence that physics
had turned the tables on the core refuge of substance metaphysics:
classical atomism. Instead of very small things (atoms)
combining to produce standard processes (avalanches, snowstorms)
modern physics seemed to suggest that very small processes (quantum
phenomena) combine to produce standard things (ordinary macro-objects)
as a result of an as yet not understood modus operandi that
could, nevertheless, be mathematically described. So-called enduring
“things” in this picture would come about through the
emergence of stabilities in statistical fluctuations, as a stability
wave in a surging sea of process, metaphorically speaking.
Contemporary quantum physics has produced a more diversified theory
landscape, and it is an open question whether we have moved beyond the
point where Whitehead’s metaphysical transposition of the field
concept is still pertinent, or could be adjusted to interpret also one
of the currently competing
 theories.[17]
 However, very generally speaking, there are at least four basic
aspects of our current views of the quantum-physical domain that seem
to favor a process metaphysics, whether Whiteheadian or
non-Whiteheadian. First, as the so-called ‘problem of identical
particles’ indicates, in the microphysical domain individuation
and countability fall asunder, which calls for an ontology of
‘subject-less’ processes that are the features by
which we individuate quantum-physical entities, but occur in countable
units only relative to interaction context. Second, if spacetime is
quantized and emergent, metaphysics cannot operate with basic entities
that are individuated in terms of their spacetime locations. Third,
the “measurement problem” presents a particular difficulty
for substance metaphysics, since the latter rests on the assumption
that all individuals are fully determinate independently of their
interaction context. In contrast, process metaphysics endorses the
principle that ‘interaction is determination.’ Fourth,
quantum entanglement (e.g., in EPR-Bohm systems) seems a clear-cut
example of ontic emergence that substance metaphysics cannot
accommodate; while some systems properties (e.g., weight) can be
construed as resulting directly from the causal properties of the
elements of a collection of persistent substrata, the correlations
that measurements on entangled quantum entities display cannot be
interpreted in this fashion since the properties of the components of
the system do not exist independently of the measurement performed.
The measured correlations thus are properties of an interaction and
not of any substance.
Interestingly, via the unlikely subject of the ontology of quantum
physics, new points of contact have opened up between analytical and
interpretive process thought in Karen Barad’s metaphysics of
“agential realism” (Barad 2007). Grounded in a detailed
scholarly interpretation of the philosophy of Niels Bohr, Barad views
reality as the entanglement of natural and
social“agencies” the distinctness of which emerges in the
specific “intra-actions” produced by specific physical
set-ups (experiments); the continuous “intra-activity” of
reality, Barad argues, calls for a non-essentialist, performatist
understanding of meaning and values.
(ii) Self-organization: Process metaphysics has traditionally
been motivated by the fact that it seems to give the best explanation
of the phenomena of emergence, originally understood as an integral
feature of evolution. Since the development of scientific theories of
“self-organization,” “chaos,” and
“complexity” have begun to alter our understanding of
evolutionary change, there is a new need for a metaphysics that can
accommodate all sorts of phenomena where dynamic organizations exert
causal constraints. While older, speculative, process metaphysics
embraced the idea of purposes and creativity in nature, and allowed
for the explanatory category of a ‘self-realizing’ or
‘self-engendering’ entity (in various terminological
guises), present-day analytical processists confine themselves to
arguing that “downward causation” becomes perfectly
intelligible once physicalism has been divorced from the assumptions
of the substance paradigm, and most especially from the principle that
causal powers cannot be attributed to dynamic
 organizations.[18]
(iii) Embodied cognition: The turn to “embodied
cognition” in cognitive science provides another strong
motivation for the turn to process in metaphysics. The standard model
of cognition as the computation of symbolic representations fits well
with the assumptions of substance metaphysics and suggested a pleasing
analogy to classical atomism: mental operations effect relational
change of cognitive atoms. But the first rivals to the standard model,
connectionism and the so-called “Dynamic Hypothesis” (Tim
Van Gelder), were constructed along largely process-ontological lines,
replacing the classical conception of cognitions as discrete abstract
objects that represent concrete things outside the head with a dynamic
conception of cognitions as modes of functionings of a neural net or
of process organizations. Recent results in embodied cognition
research seem to tip the balance further into the direction of a
process-based philosophy of mind, since they suggest that the bodily
interaction of an organism plays a constitutive role in cognition.
Some proponents of embodied cognition or “interactivism”
insist that the new focus on organism-environment interactions makes
any talk about representations obsolete, while others argue for a
naturalist account of information, emergent representational processes, or emergent
 normativity.[19]
 A key notion for the ‘embodiment thesis’ is the concept
of “structural coupling,” a phase in the contemporaneous
development of two systems (e.g., organism and environment) where
mutual dynamic dependencies unfold across system boundaries. Critics
argue that the embodiment thesis might only hold for some form of
cognition, but whatever the scope of the thesis might be, the fact
remains that a more detailed description of the notion of structural
coupling requires a process-ontological framework.
Process philosophers share the view that being is dynamic or that
there are no concrete static entities; however, as stressed throughout
this entry, there are also profound differences in the way process
philosophers work out this basic intuition in their descriptions of
the structure of reality and our understanding of it. Which of the
competing approaches to process philosophy can count as the currently
most promising? If processist theories recommend themselves in terms
of their explanatory force, as offering new solutions to old problems
(section 3), or better conceptual resources for new tasks (section 4),
then surely explanatory force should also be the standard for
evaluating processist theories. But while cross-paradigm explanatory
advantages in the sense of sections 3 and 4 can be gauged more
straightforwardly, this becomes rather more difficult at the level of
intra-paradigm comparisons. Does the wide scope of Whitehead’s
philosophy of organism outweigh the fact that all explanatory
technical terms are dissociated from the rest of philosophical
discourse? Or again, is the explanatory force of a formal axiomatic
process ontology greater than a process metaphysics formulated with
the means of common sense terms whose meanings are carefully
gerrymandered, or one that operates with a network of metaphors and
relies on the reader’s hermeneutic response? Here, at the
intra-paradigm level, all the far-reaching methodological questions
aries that surround philosophical explanation in general. Setting
these larger questions aside, and focusing just on processist work in
the style of analytic philosophy, the explanatory force of a
processist theory may depend on how well it addresses the following
challenges.
The first challenge is to define the notion of dynamicity itself. If
the individuals of a processist theory are ‘dynamic’
rather than ‘static,’ how can we make sense of this new
category feature? Some processists say that a process or dynamic
entity is denoted by an English sentence in the progressive, 
or—less closely tied to the peculiarities of English 
grammar—by sentences licensing certain inferential patterns of
aspectual meaning (see footnote 6). In both cases the definitional
task is thus deferred to linguistic theories of aspect; these
theories, however, take the term ‘dynamic’ to be
understood. Alternatively, one might return to Aristotle and define
dynamicity as the actualization of a potency or capacity; this,
however, saddles the theory with further primitive terms (but see
Eastman et al. 2016). Finally, following the strategies of German
Idealism, one might try to exploit the semantics of self-referential
propositions to convey ‘presence without availability’ as
the hallmark of dynamic being. Should process ontologies thus abandon
the idea of an explicit definition of dynamicity and settle for a
systematic elucidation (along the lines of axiomatic definition)?
The second challenge is to state precisely how processes relate to
space and time. Do processes in some fashion constitute space and
time, as Whitehead postulated? Or are they occupiers of spatiotemporal
regions like perduring entities, just not static (and thus, for
example, providing better support for presentist accounts of time than
classical substances)? Upon a closer look, the distinction between
“perdurance” and “endurance” (Mark Johnston,
David Lewis), which is commonly (though perhaps not quite correctly)
linked to W.E. Johnson’s distinction between occurrents and
continuants, sits badly with a process ontology. For
‘activity-like’ processes (e.g., snowing) somehow seem to
take time just as perduring entities do, yet are “wholly
present” at every time at which they exist, just like enduring
entities or continuants. Several authors thus have pointed out that
processes behave like
 continuants.[20]
 As mentioned above in section 3, this opens up a new solution path
for the problem of persistence, but it also calls for a clear account
of how ongoing developmental and activity-like processes are situated
in time and space, and how they relate to extended temporal and
spatial
 regions.[21]
The third challenge consists in describing the different ways in which
processes relate to each other and especially, how they combine. Since
process combinations may engender emergent processes, and also in
other regards do not abide by the laws of Boolean algebra, neither set
theory not classical extensional mereology can be used as formal
frameworks ontologically to describe and classify different types of
process combinations. Moreover, since the parthood relation on
processes is not transitive, at least when processes are not
identified with extended spatiotemporal regions, further deviations
from the classical axiomatization of the parthood relations are
necessary to formalize a mereology on processes (Seibt 2015a).
Furthermore, as illustrated by the process-philosophical account of
personhood sketched above in section 3, it is a particular asset of
process theories that they can draw on dynamic structure with complex
feedback loops and wholes whose functioning both conditions and is
conditioned by their parts. 
The fourth challenge is more fundamental. If any of the basic
theoretical terms of the many process philosophies, past and present,
are to have explanatory value at all, there must be a way to tie the
process philosopher’s basic intuition to ordinary experience.
After all, the purpose of philosophy is to enhance human
understanding, and the core concepts of philosophical explanations
must in some fashion be anchored in what we intuitively understand
from everyday experience. In fact, some process philosophers (e.g.,
Whitehead) argue that the traditional notion of substance (a
time-invariant, necessarily uniquely located particular) precisely
lacks any experiential grounding. On the other hand, substance
ontology has been capitalizing on the fact that the canonical
illustrations of substances, things or living things, loom large in
our practical interactions. The explanatory force of a process
ontology thus will depend on whether it is possible to identify a
similarly salient canonical illustration for whatever technical notion
of process is postulated as basic category. Some process approaches
use self-experience as anchoring canonical illustration for postulated
technical notions of dynamic sameness and unity, but one might worry
that this model is all too complex.
As emphasized throughout, process philosophy is a complex and highly
diversified field that is difficult to describe in more than general
and disjunctive terms. In conclusion this section will highlight a
topic on which contemporary process philosophers are fundamentally
divided, to the extent that one group believes that the entire issue
is ill-conceived.
As Rescher (1996, ch. 5) points out, processists fall into two
principal camps. On the one side is the teleological (and often
theological) wing that sees nature’s processuality as a matter
of teleological directedness towards a positive destination. On the
other side is the naturalistic (and generally secularist) wing that
sees nature’s processuality as a matter of an inner dynamicity
without any directness or at least without any directedness towards a
specifiable destination. Both agree in according a central role to
inherent dynamicity in nature. But the one (naturalistic) wing sees
this in terms of randomness that leads in arbitrary ways away from the
settled formulations of an established past, while the other
(teleological) wing sees this in terms of a goal-directed
purposiveness preestablished by some value-geared directive force.
The division between secular and theological process philosophy has
its roots in the early phase of contemporary process thought in late
19th and the first half of the 20th century, and centers on two views
of evolutions. For secular, atheological processists evolution
typifies the creative workings of a self-sustaining nature that
fulfills the vision of a certain positivist program, dispensing
altogether with a God function to explain any of the events in or
appertaining to the
 universe.[22]
 For theological processists like Teilhard de Chardin, however,
evolution exhibits God’s handwriting in the book of nature.
Present-day processists, who in the main no longer take Darwinian
evolution as a concept or phenomenon that demands a commitment for or
against theism, are wont to point to possible areas of agreement (see
Rescher ibid.). First, present-day processists point out that both
secular and theological protagonists of process thought can see
evolution not only as a crucial instrument for understanding the role
of intelligence in the world’s scheme of things but also as a
key aspect of the world’s natural development. In addition, both
secular and theological processists can agree that the evolutionary
process provides process philosophy with one of its main models for
how large scale collective processes can inhere in and result from the
operation of numerous small-scale individual processes, thus
accounting for innovation and creativity also on a macro-level scale.
Second, present-day processists draw attention to the fact that early
process thinkers were divided in their assessment of the phenomenon of
evolution, since they failed to draw a division within the phenomenon
of evolution itself. Undoubtedly, human intelligence is based on
teleologically blind natural selection operating with random mutations
to produce the neurophysiological capacities of the human brain.
Cultural evolution, on the other hand, does not share these features
and could well appear as in some sense directed. For example, one
might argue that cultural evolution is generally Teilhardian, in that
it is governed by a rationality-geared selection among purposefully
devised mutational variations. Cognitive evolution involves both
biological and cultural components, superimposing non-random rational
decision-making on biological selection. Our cognitive capacities and
faculties are part of the natural endowment we owe to biological
evolution. But our cognitive methods, procedures, standards, and
techniques are socio-culturally developed resources that evolve
through rationality-geared decision making in the process of cultural
transmission through successive generations. Our cognitive hardware
(mechanisms and capacities) develops through Darwinian natural
selection, but our cognitive software (the methods and procedures by
which we transact our cognitive business) develops in a Teilhardian
process of rationality-geared decision-making that involves purposeful
intelligence-guided variation and selection. In the eyes of
present-day processists—at least those that no longer pursue
speculative process thought—it is for scientific research to
decide whether, and to what extent, the relationship between
biological and cognitive evolution can be understood on the analogy
that ‘biology produces the instrument and culture writes the
music,’ with the instrument constraining the playable music, and
not vice versa (cf. Rescher 1996 ch. 5 and Rescher 2006 ch.
10).
There is a middle ground between strict theological teleology on the
one hand, and, on the other hand, the naturalistic view that there is
no final end that all processes are ultimately directed towards.
According to this third alternative, a ‘soft’ version of
the teleological position, process is progress. For, so goes this line
of reasoning, one can draw a lesson from evolutionary theory about
collective progress despite contingency and mortality at the scale of
the individual organism. In the small – i.e., item by item
– nature’s processes are self-canceling: what arises in
the course of time perishes in the course of time. But nevertheless,
so the argument goes, (i) the overall course of processual change
tends to the development of ever richer, more complex and
sophisticated conditions of occurrence. Moreover, Darwinian
evolutionism suggests (ii) that
… the arrangements which do succeed in establishing
and perpetuating themselves will as a general tendency manage to have
done so because they represent actual improvements in one way or
another. … Accordingly, fruitfulness in the long run
compensates for transiency and mortality at a smaller scale of
occurrence. (Rescher 1996: 102)
These two central premises for soft teleology are quite substantive,
however. Premise (i) presupposes that (iii) there is a general and
comprehensive measure of simplicity or complexity that could be
applied to natural and cultural processes in order to claim an overall
tendency of development towards increased complexity; in particular,
such a measure of complexity should make it possible to offset
decreases of complexity with respect to one parameter by increases in
complexity relative to another parameter. Premise (ii) presupposes
that (iv) species survival can be taken as an indication of some
aspect that meaningfully can be connected to the axiology of progress.
Whether the optimism of the soft teleological position is justified
thus ultimately depends on the tenability of claims (iii) and
(iv).[23] The
fact that the premises for soft teleology have direct implications for
our current debate about transhumanism endows the old question of the
directionality of reality with unexpected practical relevance for the
regulation of artificial intelligence and robotics. 
Process thought constituted a prominent sector of the active
philosophical scene in the USA during the first half of the 20th
century. Apart from the proliferation of books and articles on the
topic, it has achieved considerable institutionalization in the USA
during the years after World War II. Indications of this phenomenon
include the formation of the Society for Process Studies, as
well as the prominence of process philosophizing within the aegis of
the Society for American Philosophy and the American
Metaphysical Society. Another clear token is the journal
Process Studies, published by the Center for Process
Studies in Claremont CA, and founded in 1971 by Lewis S. Ford and
John B. Cobb, Jr., a publication that has become a major vehicle for
article-length discussions in the field. Representatives of process
philosophy occupy influential posts in departments of philosophy and
of religious studies in many of American universities and colleges,
and some half-dozen doctoral dissertations are produced annually in
this field. But contemporary process philosophy is not geographically
confined. In 2002, the publishing house Ontos in Frankfurt, Germany,
launched a book series on “Process Thought”; though taken
over by DeGruyter in 2015, over 25 volumes have appeared. In Europe
the Center for Practical Philosophy at the Université
du Louvain, Belgium, directed by Michel Weber, is a focal point for
research on, and applications of, international process philosophy.
The Bulgarian Academy of Science recently created a Center for
Process Studies for philosophers and computer scientists. The
German Whitehead Society regularly organizes conferences and
summer schools on both Whiteheadian and non-Whiteheadian process
thought. The International Process Network, recently launched
by Mark Dibben at the University of Tasmania, Australia, is a new web
community of international process philosophers of all philosophical
proveniences East and West. Even though process philosophy is not
institutionalized as such everywhere in the global field of
philosophy, it is a research paradigm that currently is in use all
around the world.