For ethical theorists the central task is an explanation of promissory
obligations: How is it that we come to have a moral obligation to do
what we promise we will? The question is particularly difficult
because promissory obligations differ from other sorts of moral
obligations in a number of ways. Unlike paradigmatic moral duties, the
duty not to harm for example, promissory obligations are not owed
equally to everyone, but rather only those we have promised. For this
reason promissory obligations are often categorized as
‘special’ obligations, of a piece with the obligations
owed to family and friends. This feature makes promissory obligations
especially problematic for consequentialist theories of
morality. (cf. the entry on
 special obligations).
Further, promissory obligations are voluntary; we don't have
to make promises, but we must keep them when we do. Moreover,
promissory obligations aren't just contingent upon acts of the
will, like the obligations we might incur by deliberately damaging
someone's property, but (at least it seems on first reflection) they
are immediately created by acts of the will. When I promise to do
something, it seems that by so doing I have created the
obligation to do it. This feature makes promissory obligations a
special puzzle for naturalistic ethical theories that hope to explain
moral obligations without recourse to super-natural entities. The idea
that we simply manufacture promissory obligations by speaking them,
like an incantation, is decidedly mysterious. As Hume acidly remarked
in the Treatise:
The traditional account of promissory obligation (the one Hume is
mocking in the quote above) is a Natural Law view, i.e., one derived
from the various traditions that go under that general title, like the
virtue views of the ancients, those of the medieval theologians, the
early modern rights theorists and beyond.
Representative of the ancient view, for Aristotle promise-keeping is
directly mandated by the virtues, in particular, those of honesty and
justice (as well as liberality in cases of purely gratuitous
promises):
The Roman Jurists like Cicero and Gaius developed this sort of view
further, crucially conceiving of a specific moral duty to keep
promises, and a specific (and for Cicero particularly Roman)
virtue of fidelity to promises (cf. Cicero, De Officiis
I,8) as well as formalizing promissory obligations, by
reference to a specific procedure called the stipulatio or
stipulating:
A verbal obligation is created by question and answer in such form as:
“Do you solemnly promise conveyance? I solemnly promise
conveyance”; “Will you convey?  I will convey”;
“Do you promise? I promise”; “Do you promise on your
honour?  I promise on my honour”; “Do you guarantee on
your honour? I guarantee on my honour”; “Will you do? I
will do” (Gaius, Inst. 3:92, cited in Swain 2013).
And the tradition is also later enlarged by Scholastic theorists,
most importantly Aquinas. (cf. Aquinas, Summa Theologica II, q.88 &
q.110) Aquinas used Aristotelian assumptions and techniques to expand
and detail the theory, deriving from the intentions of the promisor and
the underpinning virtues a ‘natural law’ governing promise
keeping (cf. Gordley 1991: 10ff).
Still later on, important early modern commentators on promising in
the Natural Law tradition such as Locke (Two Treatises On
Government, II–II:14) Reid (Essay on the Active Powers of
Man 2), Grotius (De iure naturae, ii. xi.), Pufendorf
(De iure naturae et gentium, iii. v. 9), Stair
(Institutions of the Laws of Scotland, I. X.1) and others
developed the doctrine in new directions.
For an excellent overview of these issues, see chapter 1 of James
Gordley's The Philosophical Origins of Modern Contract
Doctrine (1991). 
The 17th Century saw the emergence of a new strand of moral
theory, one that employed the notion of a mutual agreement or contract
between the members of a community as a device for grounding moral
principles. This ‘social contract’ movement also produced
new approaches to promissory theory, but we should preface our
discussion of these by distinguishing between two different types of
projects that have historically occupied social contract
theorists.
The first project is an attempt to ground political, legal and other
justice-based obligations in the prior obligation to honor agreements.
In this endeavor, the obligation to honor one's agreements is
assumed independently of any appeal to the social contract, and the aim
is to argue that the sorts of political and legal arrangements that
exist between the citizen and the state are in fact agreements of the
sort that would invoke the obligation. The figure most immediately
associated with this project is Locke, especially in the Two
Treaties on Government (although there is some dissent to this
view, cf. Dunn 1984).
The other project is to make the social contract out to be the
ground of some (or all) moral principles, including (what is salient
for our purposes) the principle mandating that we keep our promises
or agreements. Hobbes' theory is the paradigm here, and he
has a radical one—grounding all moral and political principles in the
same way. Hume and Rawls (among others) offer social contract theories
of more limited scope, as grounding the principles of
‘justice’ alone. Both projects attempt to ground moral
principles in the social contract, but the Lockean one does so by
appealing to the antecedently given obligation to honor agreements,
while the Hobbesian project attempts to explain the duty of fidelity
itself, as one of a piece with other moral principles, in terms of the
social contract. It is these latter sorts of social contract theories
that are our focus here, since they contain the new approaches to
explaining promissory obligation.
Of the latter sort of contract theories, we should further make a
distinction between Contractarians and
Contractualists. Contractarians assume that the rules of
morality must appeal to the rational self interest of all parties to
the contract, and that people will accept them in pursuit of their own
ends. Contractualists claim that the rules of morality are those that
would or could be defensible to all others in the bargaining
arrangement. The two sorts of contract theory have two different
explanations of promissory obligations.
And we should lastly note that there seems to be an obvious
circularity worry for contract theorists in their attempts to explain
promissory obligation—since a contract (or agreement, or pact,
or covenant, etc.) seems to be just the same sort of thing as a
promise, or at least it would seem that they are closely enough related
that one would be barred from using one of them to
‘explain’ the other on pain of vacuity. And indeed, an
objection of this sort has been made to the Rawlsian contractualist
approach (see section 3.4 below). 
But this apparent circularity is
perhaps deceiving. To see why, we first need to distinguish between
actual, flesh-and-blood arrangements, in the law or in society more
generally, that we call ‘contracts’, and the theoretical
apparatus that contract theorists use to ground moral principles, which
is also called (more metaphorically) a ‘contract’.
It's obviously viciously circular to ground promissory
obligations in a contract of the former sort, but not the latter. Of
course, to avoid this sort of circularity, the ‘contract’
invoked by contract theorists can't do its work by appealing to
the fact that one has an obligation one to keep one's word in an
agreement. But there are other, non-circular ways to appeal to the idea
of the contract. Contractarians, for example, appeal to the rationality
(in some utility-maximization sense of that notion) of obeying the
terms of the ‘contract’ (i.e., honoring moral principles),
while Contractualists generally appeal to the
‘reasonableness’ or the ‘fairness’ of the
principles that are manifest in the social contract. Neither approach
suffers from the shallow sort of circularity of just described, that of
assuming the normative force they set out to explain.
Contractarians explain promissory obligations in the same manner as
other moral obligations grounded in the social contract—by
arguing for the rationality (in the utility-maximization sense) of
accepting the rule that we ought to keep our promises. The argument
for the promising rule goes by appeal to the value that the practice
of promising has for us as members of a society. The chief value of
the practice of promising is social coordination and
cooperation—promises (and cognate phenomena like contracts and
agreements) allow people to trust one another, which in turn allows
for all sorts of cooperative benefits, e.g., divisions of labor,
solutions to coordination problems and collective action problems,
exits from prisoners dilemmas, etc. The theory is first offered by
Hobbes (Leviathan xiii–xv).
Hobbes' framework for assessing the rationality of moral rules
assumes that the over-arching goal is to exit the state of nature into
a civil society. In the Hobbesian state of nature, our expansive
natural rights, our over-large appetites and our natural inclination to
dominate result in constant, irresolvable conflict, what Hobbes called
the war of all against all (Lev. xiii: 88–89). Against this
backdrop Hobbes claims that practices that allow us to escape this
condition are ‘Laws of Nature’, i.e., mandates of rational
self-interest, and that keeping promises is one of those practices
(Lev. xv: 100 ff). Hobbes takes promises to be a part of the larger and more
complex system of contract. A contract for Hobbes is a mutual transfer
of rights in things. A covenant is a contract where one of the parties
must perform after the other, and thus promises the first performer his
later performance. Hobbes takes covenants to be the ‘fountain and
original of justice’, and the keeping of covenants is a mandate
of the Law of Nature (Lev. xiv: 100).
Hobbes' picture is complicated by the fact that he
doesn't think that the appreciation of the fact that
promise-keeping is valuable is sufficient to guarantee compliance. He
thinks this because he thinks that people are passionate creatures
whose reason is often overwhelmed by those passions, and because he
conceives of covenants as cases where the promisee puts himself at risk
by trusting the promisor. Such risk is forbidden by the first law of
nature (self defense) unless the promisee has some very good reason to
assume that the promiser won't betray his trust. And since mere
reason isn't enough (ex hypothesi) to make that
guarantee, promisees can't trust promisers. As such, Hobbes
claims that promises made merely on the grounds of trust are not
promises at all (cf. Lev. xiv: 96 & xv: 102). Hobbes'
solution is to ground promissory obligations not directly in the
rationality of keeping promises, but rather in the rational fear of the
sovereign, whose job it is to enforce contracts by punishing renegers.
In this way, Hobbes has an indirect justification of promissory
obligations by appeal to the rationality of promise-keeping:
Rationality mandates the establishment of a sovereign, who will enforce
contracts by threat of punishment. The existence of the plausible
threat from the sovereign in turn makes promise keeping rational. So
promises aren't a way to exit the state of nature,
rather they are a necessary component of civil society made
possible by the exit from the state of nature by the establishment
of a sovereign.
Contractarian ethical theory underwent a revival in the
20th Century, with sophisticated version offered by Jan
Narveson in The Libertarian Idea (1988) and especially by
David Gauthier in his Morals by Agreement (1986). Contemporary
theories, like Gauthier's, differ from traditional Hobbesianism
in significant ways. For example, Gauthier premises the bargaining
position not as an escape from the state of nature, but rather as a
method for achieving an acceptable share of the potential cooperative
surplus. Also, Gauthier proposes that the bargainers are constrained by
a ‘Lockean’ proviso. The proviso forbids bettering
one's bargaining position by worsening the position of other
bargainers. The resultant theory is not dependent on the coercive force
of an absolute political sovereign, and foresees a relatively liberal
social order. But the general thrust of the theory of promissory
obligations remains the same in the later theory—promising is a
rational strategy, and thus promise-keeping is a moral obligation.
A traditional problem for the contractarian approach is that it has
difficulty accounting for cases where the breaking of an individual
promise looks like it would produce more utility for the agent than
keeping the promise. Intuitively it seems that many cases where
keeping a promise would be less than completely advantageous to the
promiser are still cases where the promiser has an obligation to
keep them. Yet if we take it that morality only demands what is
rational to further our interests, then it seems that the
contractarian must say that in such sub-optimal cases, the promiser
has no obligation to keep her promise.
Hobbes, who derided the rhetorical proponent of this problem as a
fool, claims that it is never rational to break a promise
(Lev. xv: 101 ff). Hobbes defends this firstly by
reminding us that on his view, covenants made outside of the reach of a
civil power with the capacity to enforce the contract by punishing the
parties are not covenants at all, and thus all contracting parties have
the reason of the sovereign's potential punishment to keep their
promise. And even in ‘state-of-war’ cases, promise-keeping
is always rational because the state of war requires one to band
together with ‘confederates’ for safety, and having a
reputation as a promise breaker will make such confederacy
impossible.
This leaves only cases where a person feels that they might evade
the sovereign's punishment, and that the benefits they would
receive from so doing outweigh the dangers of being caught and
punished. Hobbes then points out that the correct standard for judging
the rationality of an action is one that rests on the expected returns
of the action, and not the actual ones, and that in cases where promise
breakers eluded detection the action could still be irrational, as the
expected returns were insufficient to justify the risk. The tough cases
for Hobbes are those where breaking a promise would result in the
promise breaker escaping the reach of the sovereign altogether by
becoming a sovereign, i.e., cases of revolution or usurpation. In such
cases, Hobbes argues, promise breaking is still not rational because
gaining a throne by revolution inspires those under the new tyrant to
repeat the process, and unseat him in turn. These moves just
don't seem sufficient to establish the general claim that the
apparent expected return from breaking a promise is never the larger
value, and indeed the general consensus among contemporary scholars is
that Hobbes' reply to the fool is unsatisfying (cf. Hampton
1986:–78-9; Gauthier 1986: 161–162) although there have been
some more recent attempts to rehabilitate the view (cf. Kavka 1995;
Hoekstra 1997).
Contemporary contractarian theory has a different sort of answer to
the problem of the fool, invoking not the threat of the
sovereign's punishment, but the advantage of promise-keeping as a
cooperative endeavor. Gauthier (1986: 164ff), as an example, argues
that promise-keeping is rational even in cases where the net value of
reneging is larger than that of honoring the promise. Gauthier's
reasoning is roughly the following: By constraining their pursuit
of utility maximization in this fashion (always keeping promises
regardless of the local utility value of doing so), agents can
(ceteris paribus) jointly reach solutions to prisoner's
dilemmas that are out of reach for the ‘foolish’
straightforward utility maximizers. What's required to escape a
prisoner's dilemma is a reason for the participants to trust one
another, specifically to trust that the other will do what they
promise, even though it doesn't maximize their utility to do so.
So only a partner who was disposed to keep promises even in cases where
doing so wouldn't maximize his utility (i.e., a non-foolish
promiser) could be relied upon to do his part in a prisoner's
dilemma scenario, and thus only those sorts of promisors could reach
the agreements that constitute these solutions.
The other branch of contract theory, contractualism, grounds
promissory obligations by a similar appeal to the utility and value of
the practice of promising, but in a less direct fashion. For
contractualists, what makes a moral principle valid is its
acceptability to those who are party to the contract, or to the
bargaining situation that establishes it. Thus on such an approach the
utility of the promising convention serves chiefly as a reason for the
contractors to endorse a principle mandating that promises be kept, or
as an argument that the putative contractors would do so. Perhaps the
most influential contractualist theory of promising belongs to
Rawls.
Although Rawls originally defended a Rule Utilitarian theory of
promissory obligation (cf. Two Concepts of Rules, passim,
1955), in A Theory of Justice (1971) he takes promissory
obligations to be a matter of justice, and as such grounded in the
(contractual) theory of justice, rather than in any more general moral
theory. Rawls famously conceives of the principles of justice as the
result of the deliberative choice of a representative group of the
members of the society. The conditions of deliberation are together
called the Original Position (OP), and agents in the OP are constrained
in terms of the information they have, as information Rawls deems
irrelevant to their deliberations on justice is excluded by what he
calls the Veil of Ignorance. Agents in the OP first choose principles
of what Rawls calls the basic structure of society, principles that
determine in broad outline what the just arrangements of the basic
institutions of the society will be, and then go on to choose other
sorts of principles, e.g., principles governing the just conduct of
individuals, as well as those governing justice in international
affairs.
Unlike some contractualists (cf. Scanlon 1998,
 see section 6.2, below) 
Rawls conceives of promises not as
sui generis moral actions, but as essentially institutional
artifacts, and thus promissory obligations as institutional
obligations, grounded in the same manner as all such
obligations. These institutions are comprised of sets of rules that
prescribe and proscribe certain sorts of behavior for the participants
in the institution. The dicta of the rules are the contents of moral
obligations (Rawls 1971: 112). Rawls in turn grounds institutional
obligations in what he calls the principle of fairness. The principle
of fairness is a basic moral principle, chosen by contractors in the
OP. But unlike its more famous Rawlsian cognate the difference
principle, the principle of fairness is an individual principle, one
that applies directly to individuals in the society, as opposed to the
basic institutions of the society themselves. Rawls lays out the
principle of fairness in the following way:
…[A] person is required to do his part as defined by the rules
of an institution when two conditions are met: first the institution
is just (or fair)…and second, one has voluntarily accepted the
benefits of the arrangement or taken advantage of the opportunities it
offers to further their own interests. (1971: 112)
So there are two conditions on an action's being an
institutional obligation in the Rawlsian sense: (1) The institution
whose rule calls for the action is just, and (2) The person has
‘voluntarily accepted the benefits’ of the institution.
Rawls then introduces three theoretical elements to explain promissory
obligations in particular. The first is what he calls the rule of
promising, or the central rule that constitutes the promising
convention: 
[I]f one says the words ‘I promise to do
X’ in the appropriate circumstances, one is to do X, unless
certain excusing conditions obtain.
Rawls doesn't go into the
circumstance and conditions mentioned in the rule in any great detail,
but he does note that a promise must be voluntary and deliberate. He
also notes that a proper rendition of such clauses is necessary to
evaluate whether the institution of promising the rule defines is
just (1971: 346). The second piece of theory Rawls employs is the notion
of a bona fide promise. A bona fide promise is a promise that
arises in accordance with the rule of promising, when the
practice [of promising] it represents is just.
And the third
piece of theory is a moral principle targeted to promises directly,
what Rawls call the Principle of Fidelity. The principle of fidelity
is merely a derivative of the principle of fairness, fashioned
specifically for the institution of promising. And it says simply that
“[B]ona fide promises are to be kept” (1971: 347).
Thus Rawls' explanation for the obligatory force of promises
is roughly: If you make a promise under a just promising institution,
then you are obligated to uphold that institution (and obey its rules)
because to do otherwise would be to ‘free-ride’ on the
institution in a manner forbidden by the principle of fairness.
The most detailed and sustained criticism of the later Rawlsian theory
is found in the work of Michael Robins, especially his Promising,
Intending and Moral Autonomy (1984). One particularly worrisome
problem Robins cites is that the ultimate ground of the principle of
fairness, which is the ground of the obligation not to free ride, and
thus to keep promises, is something like an agreement between the
bargaining parties, and that agreement amounts to a set of promises that
they will abide by these rules. But this means that the convention of
promising is ultimately grounded in the promise we (hypothetically)
make to keep our promise, and that seems blatantly circular (Robins
1984: 127 ff).
The problem with explaining promissory obligations by reference to a
prior promise to keep promises has been noted by commentators like
Prichard (1940: 260) and others. Prichard proposes to ease the
problem by pointing out that the prior agreement isn't exactly an
agreement to keep agreements, but rather an agreement to use the word
‘promise’ in a certain way, but even he sees that this
doesn't solve the deeper puzzle, and he leaves this puzzle
explicitly unanswered
 …what is that something implied in
the existence of agreements which looks very much like an agreement and
yet cannot, strictly speaking, be an agreement? (1940: 265)
Rawls tries to solve Prichard's puzzle by appealing to the
principle of fairness, rather than directly to the ‘general
agreement to keep agreements’, but Robins argues that this move
doesn't stop the regress (Robins 1984: 127 ff). Robins
frames his argument in terms of a dilemma: either the principle of
fairness is sufficiently strong to generate promissory obligations, in
which case it is a principle of tacit consent, and thus the appeal is
circular, or the principle of fairness is weak enough to avoid
circularity, and thus too weak to ground promissory obligations. Robins
argues for the first horn by claiming that in order for the principle
of fairness to generate strong enough obligations against free riding
to explain our obligations to keep promises, we must construe the
‘voluntary’ participation of promisers in the convention to
mean something like explicit acceptance of the arrangement to pay the
costs (obedience to the rules of the convention) in exchange for the
benefits, and this looks like an agreement to keep promises by way of
an agreement to the principle of fairness, which is the circle again.
On the other hand, if we relax the demand of ‘voluntary
participation’ to mean merely passive reception of the effects of
the convention (like the stability and cooperative bounty of society)
then we are like Nozick's radio station listener, apparently
obligated to support the cooperative endeavor merely because we
passively derive some benefit from it (cf. Nozick 1974: 90–5). With
Nozick, Robins claims that such a low standard for ‘voluntary
participation’ necessary to engage the free riding principle
would mean that people weren't, in fact obligated not to free
ride (Robins 1984: 127–131).
Consequentialist views of promissory obligation fall into two broad
camps, corresponding to the difference between act and rule
utilitarianism. Act utilitarians generally explain promissory
obligations as arising from the negative consequences of breaking the
promise, whereas rule utilitarians defend promissory obligations on
the grounds that the rule of promise-keeping is productive of the best
consequences.
Act utilitarians evaluate individual actions in light of the net
utility produced by that action as compared to alternative
actions. The right action is that which promotes the maximum net
utility. On the face of it, this entirely general and comprehensive
maxim leaves no room for considerations of prior promise. The fact
that an agent promised someone something has no direct relevance to an
act consequentialist appraisal of that agent's action at the
time the promise is meant to be kept. If breaking the promise would
promote more utility than keeping it, then the theory seems to mandate
breaking the promise.
This counter-intuitive result has been offered as a criticism of act
utilitarianism since its inception. That act utilitarians have
difficulty in accounting for the force of promises is a touchstone for
critics (cf. Prichard 1940; Ross 1930; Hodgson 1967).
 But act utilitarians do have some resources to accommodate our
moral intuitions about promises, and the sort of theory they employ is
held by more than just utilitarians
 (see Section 5.4, below). The act
utilitarian explanation for promissory obligations is that these
obligations arise from the negative consequences that attend the
breaking of promises, where these negative consequences are, at least
in part, created by the effects of the promise on the promisee,
specifically, the creation in the promisee of the expectation that the
promiser will keep her promise. A sample list of utilitarianism that
have either offered or defended such a view: Bentham (A Comment on
the Commentaries, 1–1–6), Sidgwick (The Methods of Ethics
3–6), Narveson (1967, 1971), Singer (1975), and Ardal (1968, 1976).
 In support of this picture utilitarians argue that promises are
the sorts of things which are generally made because the promisee
wants the thing promised, and so wants to be assured of getting
it. Since a promise is designed to secure his trust, and that trust is
then likely to be the source of much pain if it's disappointed, it's
reasonable to assume that in most cases keeping one's promise will be
productive of better consequences than breaking them, given the
expectations of the promisee. And there are other potential negative
consequences of breaking a promise (e.g., the loss of trust by one's
familiars, the general erosion of trust in the practice of promises)
that utilitarians can add to the negative side of the ledger. For an
astute philosophical survey of Act Utilitarian approaches to promising
see Atiyah (1981: 30–79), also Robins (1984: 140–143) and
Vitek (1993: 61–70).
As mentioned above, the standard critique of the act utilitarian
theory of promissory obligations is that it doesn't accord with
our intuitive judgment that at least some promises that don't
produce the maximum utility still ought to be kept. In claiming that
utilitarianism has unacceptably counter-intuitive results in certain
cases, this argument it is of a piece with most arguments against the
view. One sort of counter-intuitive case that has received some
attention is the so-called ‘Desert Island’ case, where a
promise is made in isolation (on a desert island) to someone who then
dies. The question is whether there is any obligation to keep the
promise, given that the promisee can't have any expectations of
its fulfillment (being dead) and that no-one else can know of the
promise (cf. Nowell-Smith 1956; Narveson 1963: 210; Cargile 1964; 
Narveson 1967: 196–7).
A more sophisticated problem outlined by Hodgson (1967: 38) and
others is that a promising convention is broadly speaking incompatible
with an act utilitarian society. This is so because such a convention
couldn't get established (or couldn't be sustained) if
people were aware that everyone was a consistent utility maximizer of
the act utilitarian sort. If this were the case people would put no
stock in promises, knowing that when the time came to keep the promise,
the promiser would simply apply the utilitarian calculus, without
regard to the fact that he had previously ‘promised’, as
this is what being an act utilitarian means.
Note that the utilitarian cannot reply that we have failed to take
into account the expectations of the promisee in our case, because the
claim is that the promisee has no reason to generate any special
expectations that the promiser will do what she promises, precisely
because he knows the promiser to be an act utilitarian, and
consequently knows that she will do what the utility calculus tells her
is best, without thought of her promise. Of course, the promisee is
free to generate some expectations that the promiser will keep her
promise on the assumption that her promise is indicative of her at
least having the (present) intention to perform the promised act. But,
as Raz (1972), Kolodny and Wallace (2003) and others point out, the
advising of the promisee of one's mere intention to do the
promised act is insufficient ground for the sorts of expectations that
are meant to attend promises.
 More recently there have been some efforts to rehabilitate act
utilitarianism with regards to promissory obligations. Some theorists,
like Michael Smith (1994,2011), propose that sophisticating the theory
with the addition of other values might allow it to accommodate
‘agent-relative’ values like promise keeping (cf. M. Smith
2011: 208–215).
Others, like Alastair Norcross, offer a negative defense, arguing
that the sorts of counter-examples generally adduced to demonstrate the
problem don't survive scrutiny (Norcross 2011: 218). Norcross also
proposes an indirect form of consequentialism, one where the decision
procedure consciously adopted by agents isn't the same as theory
itself. This sort of approach is outlined by Peter Railton (1984).
The sorts of difficulties that promises pose for act utilitarian
theories discussed above are at least in part the motivation for rule
utilitarianism (cf. Rawls 1955 and Brandt 1979: 286–305). Rule
utilitarians change the context of moral evaluation from individual
acts to rules governing actions. The principle of utility is applied to
rules and practices, rather than individual acts, and the best rule or
practice is that produces the best over-all consequences. Some notable
rule utilitarians are Urmson (1953), Brandt (1959, 1979), and Hooker
(2000, 2011).
Of special note here is Rawls' 1955 paper Two Concepts of
Rules, which advanced a rule-utilitarian defense of promissory
obligations and helped to focus the debate on promising
 (see section 6.1 below). By changing the focus
from act to rule, rule utilitarians are better able to explain our
moral intuitions regarding individual cases of promise-keeping. But in
particular, rule utilitarians claim that their theory can make sense
of the origin and maintenance of the practice of promising
itself. Unlike an act utilitarian society, promising and trusting in
promises makes sense in a rule utilitarian society, because promisees
can rest assured that promisors won't do the local utility calculation
to determine whether or not to keep their promises, but rather will
obey the rule of promising.
Since the turn of the century Brad Hooker has offered newer versions
of Brandt-style rule-utilitarianism (he calls it rule-consequentialism)
(2000,2011) with an eye towards solving these sorts of problems.
This work has in turn spawned another chapter in this literature 
(cf. Eggleston 2007; Arneson 2005; Wall 2009; inter alia).
One influential critique of rule utilitarianism comes from David
Lyons 1965 book Forms and Limits of Utilitarianism. In it
Lyons argues that rule utilitarianism collapses to act utilitarianism,
because for any given rule, in the exceptional case where breaking the
rule produces more utility, the rule can always be sophisticated by the
addition of a sub-rule that handles cases like the exception. But the
validity of this process on the utilitarian framework holds for all
cases of exceptions, and so the ‘rules’ will have as many
‘sub-rules’ as there are exceptional cases, which, in the
end, is to abandon the rule and be guided by the principle of utility,
to seek out whatever outcome produces the maximum utility.
Lyons (1965, 182–195) levels a version of this criticism in
terms of promises against Rawls' attempted distinction in Two
Concepts of Rules between ‘rules of thumb’ and
practice rules—either rule utilitarians counsel us to
keep promises where the outcome would be less than optimal or they claim
that the rule of promise keeping admits of exceptions. But if the
exceptions to the rule of promise keeping are all those cases where
keeping a  promise is less than optimal, then the ‘rule’
is no more than a rule of thumb, and the actual principle governing
decisions on promise-keeping is the principle of maximal utility.
It should be noted here however, that Lyon's argument has received
some vigorous criticism. See, e.g., Allan Gibbard (1965) and Holly
Goldman (1974). I am grateful to an anonymous reviewer of this
publication for these citations.
Another problem for the rule utilitarian theory of promissory
obligations is that it seems that utilitarian society couldn't
establish a practice of promising, because prior to the establishment
of the rule, people could have no expectations that promises would be
kept. As such, those receiving the first promises would not be able to
form the expectations necessary to make the rule actually productive of
the best consequences. This is so because the consequential value of
the rule of promise keeping depends on the expectations of promisees.
Such expectations are the grounds of trust, and trust is how promising
generates its benefits (cf. Robins 1984: 142–3). In response, Brandt
argues for what he calls ideal rule utilitarianism, which
makes the frame of reference for rule consideration not the actual
rules available, but the ideal rule, i.e., the rule that would be
optimific (productive of the best possible consequences), were it
employed. There is substantial criticism of this move (cf. Diggs 1970).
Again, an excellent (although now dated) survey of the rule-utilitarian
approach to promising is found in Atiyah (1981: 79–86).
 The above survey divides theories of promissory obligation along
the lines of the underlying moral theory, and this is a useful
taxonomical approach given that promissory obligations are to be
explained as a type of moral obligation. But another way of
classifying these theories found in the literature (cf. R.S. Downie
1985; Atiyah 1981; Vitek 1993; Shiffrin 2008; Owens 2012) makes
reference to the different approaches to promissory obligations in
particular. This sort of taxonomy allows us to see the shape of the
promissory theories more clearly, and allows us to classify objections
as either directed at the promissory theory directly, or at the
underlying moral theory. Most of the objections listed above are
examples of the latter sort of critique. In this section I will
outline some of the former. The promissory taxonomy is also useful for
highlighting philosophical work on particular issues in promissory
theory as well as the work in related disciplines, such as legal
theory, that are germane to one or another theoretical approach.  (See
Vitek 1993: 5ff & 243 fn 40 for discussion of the taxonomy, and
Shiffrin 2008: 482–484 for a discussion of conventionalism in
particular).
The first group of theories we have already seen, in the survey of
later natural law theories—we can call them ‘normative
power’ views.  On these theories, promising is a special sort of
power we have over our normative circumstances, the power to invoke
obligations by promissory utterance. What separates this approach from
the others is the self-contained nature of promises. On normative
power views, promisors obligate themselves directly, by their own
powers, rather than indirectly, either by appeal to a convention or by
engendering expectations in the promisee.
Normative power views grew out of the natural law tradition, and their
patron is perhaps Aquinas, with his focus on the will and its ability
to bind itself. Modern versions begin to appear in the 16th
and 17th Centuries, and some notable early proponents are
Grotius, Locke and Pufendorf, with Reid not far behind.
Initially these views explained the normative power by appeal to the
divine, and this is the sort of view Hume has in mind in the quote
above in section 1. After Hume, the normative
power view waned in popularity, although it never disappeared, and it
always held more sway in legal circles, which were more closely
aligned with the natural law tradition.
This decline was part of a more general trend towards naturalism in
the later modern period, but by the 20 Century naturalistic versions of
normative power views began to appear. Unsurprisingly, naturalistic
normative power views are most popular among legal theorists, e.g.,
H. L. A.
Hart (1955) and Joseph Raz (1972, 1977, 1984, 2012) and Seana Shiffrin
(2008, 2012). But moral philosophers have also adopted them, some
examples being Gary Watson (2004), David Owens (2006, 2008, 2012) and
Connie Rosati (2011)
The new normative power views generally ground the power the same
way other elements of Hohfeldian (1919) systems (e.g., rights and
privileges) have been grounded, by appeal to our interests 
(cf. Feinberg 1970, 1974; Hart 1955; Dworkin 1977). Seana Shiffrin (2008,
2012), for example, grounds the power in the interests we have in
forming intimate relations with others, an approach shared by others
(cf. Kimel 2004).
David Owens (2006, 2008, 2011, 2012), in a novel approach, proposes a
power based in what he calls our ‘authority interest’, or the interest
we have in having a certain practical authority over others, the
authority that being the recipient of a promise gives us. This power is
one of a family of such powers, whose purpose is 
to serve our
interest in being able to shape the normative landscape by declaration,
an interest that takes at least two forms: the authority
interest, which underwrites promissory obligation and the
permissive interest that underwrites the power of
consent. (Owens 2012: 25)
The paradigmatic criticism of the traditional normative power view
is, of course, Hume's. What could possibly explain such a mysterious
power to generate moral obligations at will? The traditional view seems
hopeless for the naturalist, emanating as it does from super-natural
‘rights’ or some similar thing. Of course, one need not embrace
this sort of naturalism here, and many don't. But for those who would,
some further explanation of the source of the power is needed.
As to the naturalistic views, many are of recent enough vintage not
to have garnered much in the way of published criticism, although Neil
MacCormick (1972) does offer some criticisms of Raz's view.
Conventionalist theories share at least two central claims—1)
that promising is essentially a human convention, that is, a rule
based practice or set of practices, and 2) that the practice of
promising is very beneficial to both groups and to individuals who
share the convention, by making trust-based cooperation and
coordination possible.
The task for a conventionalist theory is to use these claims to
explain why it is that we have an obligation to keep our promises.
Conventionalists aim to supply a rationale that extends from general
claims about the coordinative benefits of the promising convention to
the demand that individuals keep their particular promises.
The Godfather of this category is Hume, and contemporary adopters
are contract theorists like Gauthier and Rawls, as well as rule
utilitarians like Brandt, Urmson and Hooker. (Hume's rather complicated
and idiosyncratic view has spawned a small literature itself, see, e.g.,
Pitson 1988; Baier 1992; Gauthier 1992; Cohon 2006 inter
alia)
There is an obvious natural affinity between the two views. The idea
that the value of the maintenance of a convention is the ground of a
moral obligation is exemplified in the view that promissory obligation
arises because of the value of the promising convention (although this
affinity is not universally felt, see Scanlon's theory, below). What's
needed is an explanation of how we get from the value of the convention
to the reification of the obligations it entails.
Contractarians bridge the gap by claiming that individual
participation in (i.e., obedience to the rules of) the promising
convention is rationally mandated. Different contractarians offer
different reasons for this claim. Hobbes thinks that participation is
rational due to the fear of punishment for reneging. Gauthier and
others think that the rational appeal of the coordinative benefits of
promising, specifically its potential for resolving prisoners dilemmas,
is sufficient to make obedience rational (cf. Gauthier 1986: 167).
Rule utilitarians have a very similar approach, although the final
mandate is moral, not rational. On that picture, the promising
convention is composed of rules that are productive of the best
circumstances, and as such deserve obedience not from rational, but
from moral duty (cf. Rawls 1955).
Contractualists bridge the gap either by appealing directly to the
terms of the contract, and claiming that promise-breaking is an
unacceptable breach, as Hooker does, or, in the more complicated case
of the later Rawls of Theory of Justice, by claiming that a
practice of promising that is both just and useful is an institution
that contractors have a duty to uphold, which duty includes the duty
not to ‘free-ride’ on the institution by not obeying its
rules (i.e., making but not keeping promises).
There have been a number of influential critiques of conventionalist
promissory theory as such, as opposed to the particular versions
offered by Rawls. Thomas Scanlon offers two criticisms of this sort,
which he says persuaded him to abandon conventionalism (Scanlon 1999:
297ff). The first is that it requires the presence of a convention
between the parties before promising is possible, and thus rules out
promises between those who lack such a shared convention.
An example of why this is a problem is Scanlon's hypothetical
‘state of nature’ situation, in which two strangers of
different societies meet on opposite sides of a river. Both have lost
their respective hunting weapons to the other bank, and both realize
that the other's weapon is at his feet, and that it is within his
power to return the weapon to the stranger on the opposite bank.
Scanlon argues that these two people can enter into a promissory
arrangement to return the each other's weapons, with its
attendant obligations, despite the fact that they do not share a social
institution of promising, or indeed any social institution at all.
The second criticism is that the conventional view gets the harm of
breaking a promise wrong. On the conventional view, when someone breaks
a promise, they harm the convention of promising as a whole, and by
extension, all those who rely on it. But this clashes with our firm
intuition that a broken promise harms primarily the jilted promisee. In
response to this, it is open to a conventionalist to move towards a
‘hybrid’ theory, one that invokes the convention to explain
the source of the trust of the promisee, but explains the harm done in
breaking a promise (and thus the ground of the obligation to keep one)
as one of betraying that trust as per the expectational view
(see section 5.5, below). This is roughly 
the route that Kolodny and Wallace
(2003) take.
There have also been some more recent criticisms advanced. See, e.g.,
Shiffrin (2008) and David Owens (2006, 2012).
 Another approach to promissory obligations is an appeal to the
expectations that promises create in their promisees. Theories of this
sort generally agree that: 1) Promises are the sorts of things that are
designed to invite the trust of promisee 2) This trust is a valuable
thing, and its betrayal causes harm to promisees. Thus expectational
theorists conclude that the wrong in breaking a promise (and thus the
ground of promissory obligation) is the production of this harm.
As we noted, this approach is traditionally adopted by
consequentialists, particularly act utilitarians, since the betrayal of
trust is precisely a negative consequence of an action that act
utilitarians can countenance on their theory. But in the past 40 years
many theorists with other normative frameworks have also adopted the
view, e.g., F. S. McNeilly (1972) Neil MacCormick (1972), G. E. M. Anscombe
(1981: Ch. 1), P. M. Atiyah (1981: Ch. 6), A. I. Melden (1979:
Ch. II),
Judith Jarvis Thomson (1990: Ch. 12), T. M. Scanlon (1990, 1999: Ch. 7),
Philippa Foot (2001: Ch. 1) and Elinor Mason (2005).
There is a further distinction to be made, between those expectation
theorists that hold that a promisee must have experienced a tangible
harm as the result of a broken promise for a wrong to have been
committed, and those who hold that the mere disappointment is
sufficient. We can call the first group Reliance theories, and the
second Assurance theories.
In the last 20 years, T. M. Scanlon has outlined a comprehensive and
detailed version of expectational promissory theory that has become
widely influential. Scanlon's theory is taxonomically
interesting, in that while he adopts an expectational theory of
promissory obligation, his underlying normative theory is
straightforwardly contractualist. Scanlon proposes that the operative
moral rules are those that no one at the bargaining table could
‘reasonably reject’. Scanlon claims that promissory
obligations derive from another sort of more basic moral obligations,
specifically obligations not to ‘unfairly manipulate’
others. One has a moral duty to keep one's promises because
making a promise will lead others to believe that you will do what you
promise. Breaking the promise is then tantamount to deceiving those one
promised, and since one has a moral duty not to do this, one has a
moral duty to keep one's promises.
Scanlon's principle governing a promise's generation of
an obligation (the Principle of Fidelity, or Principle F) is:
Principle F: If (1) A voluntarily and intentionally
leads B to expect that A will do X
(unless B consents to A's not doing so); (2) A
knows that B wants to be assured of this; (3) A acts
with the aim of providing this assurance, and has good reason to
believe that he or she has done so; (4) B knows that A
has the intentions and beliefs just described; (5) A intends
for B to know this, and knows that B does know it;
(6) B knows that A has this knowledge and intent, then,
in the absence of special justification, A must do X
unless B consents to X's not being done. (Scanlon 1998:
304)
Principle F is reasonable (i.e., a real moral principle with
normative force) because the reasons potential promisees have not to be
deceived outweigh the reasons potential promisors have to deceive.
There are a number of criticisms and objections in the literature to
the expectational approach to promissory obligations (in addition to
the ones above focused more specifically on the act utilitarian version
of it). One group of problems revolves around the claim that by making
promises out to be merely expectation-producing mechanisms,
expectationalists collapse the distinction between promising and other
things, like advising, warning and threatening (cf. Raz 1972; Vera
Peetz 1977; see also Pall Ardal 1979, in response).
Adjunct to these problems is the charge that the expectationalist
can't explain why promissory expectations produce obligations, in
a way that other expectations don't (cf. Raz 1972; Owens 2006).
Elinor Mason, in a recent article on Scanlon's theory argues in
favor of the collapse, claiming that promises are just one sort of
inducement to trust, and the harm of breaking a promise is exactly the
harm of misleading that might be performed by lying or otherwise
deceiving (Mason 2005).
Another traditional problem for expectational views is a charge of
circularity (cf. Robins 1976; Prichard 1940; Warnock 1971). The
problem is this: When I promise someone to do something then, if all
goes well, as a result of my promise they come to trust that I will do
that thing.  But this trust, on the expectational view, is the source
of my obligation to do what I promise. So it seems that the trust of
my promisee is both the cause and the effect of my promise, and this
seems an unacceptable circle. The problem is best framed in epistemic
terms, as one of the reason that a promisee has to trust a promiser.
The intuitively obvious reason for the trust a promisee has is that
the promiser has promised, and as such has placed herself under a
moral obligation to do the deed. This belief, combined with beliefs
about the moral rectitude of the promiser, give the promisee a sound
reason to believe that the promiser will keep her promise. The problem
for the expectational view is that the promisee, on such a view, can't
rely on the fact of the promissory obligation as a reason to trust,
since on this view that obligation rests on the prior fact of the
trust itself. If the trust of the promiser is the ground of the moral
obligation to keep a promise, then prior to the promisee coming to
trust the promiser, no such obligation exists. So when the promisee
goes searching for a reason to trust, the standard one is barred from
consideration.
Moreover, if an expectationalist aims to offer a theory that explains
promissory obligation without the invocation of a convention or
practice of promising (like Scanlon does), then the other standard
route to explaining promise trust is blocked. If there is a convention
in place that governs promises, and if that convention is such as to
inspire confidence in promisees that promisers will keep their
promises, then promises can be said to generate the necessary
expectations. But such a view is incompatible with the claim that
conventions aren't necessary to explain promissory obligations.  These
objections are pressed against Scanlon's theory by N.  Kolodny and
R. J. Wallace (2003).
Another traditional set of problems with the expectational approach
is their difficulty in handling cases where the expectations that
normally attend a promise are lacking. The Desert Island/Deathbed cases
described above (section 4.2) are one such problem, where the
expectations are lacking because the promisee is dead. Scanlon
discusses another sort of case, the Profligate Pal (Scanlon 1999: 312) where 
the promisee fails to have the standard expectations
because the promiser (the profligate pal) has made and broken too many
promises in the past. In such cases expectationalists must either admit
that there is no obligation to keep the promise, which seems very
counterintuitive, or come up with some reason for the obligation apart
from the fact that the promise created expectations in the
promisee.
Recently Daniel Freiderich and Nicholas Southwood (Freiderich and
Southwood 2009; Southwood and Freiderich 2011)
have put forward a version of an assurance theory they call a trust
theory. This theory that attempts to capture the intuitive appeal of
the view while handling some of these difficulties. They argue that
what is crucial to incurring obligation is the ‘invitation’ to trust
that promising embodies, and that as such actual trust isn't necessary
to generate the obligation (Southwood and Freiderich 2011: 278 ff).
In the last few years a new sort of theory of promissory obligations
has emerged. This approach makes promissory obligations out to be one
of a number of Sui Generis obligations (and other normative
phenomena) that arise from interpersonal exchange. The two pre-eminent
views are those of Stephen Darwall (2006, 2009, 2011) and Margaret
Gilbert (1993, 2011, 2013). Gilbert's theory, sketched in her
“Three Dogmas of Promising” (2011) makes promissory
obligations a matter of ‘joint commitment’, jointly made by two or more
parties, who together commit them all. A given joint commitment, like
the agreement to take a walk together, is undertaken when the parties
make plain to one another their desires to undertake it. Once jointly
committed the parties are obligated to one another to conform to the
commitment, and have the corresponding standing to demand fulfillment
of the obligation. The obligations in question are intrinsic to the
joint commitment and independent of its content. Joint commitments
inform all manner of mutual arrangements, including but not limited to
explicit agreements and promises a commitment composed of (at least)
two personal commitments, which are in turn commitments undertaken by
‘an exercise of the will’ (see, e.g., Gilbert 2013).
Stephen Darwall's view makes promissory obligations out to be a
species of what he has called ‘second-personal’ normative phenomena.
Second-personal phenomena are many and varied, and Darwall places
promises in the category of ‘transactions’, which are a group,
including contracts and other mutual arrangements, in which the basic
second-personal authority (i.e., the power we have to ‘make claims and
demands on one another’) generates obligations to perform what is
outlined in the transaction. This second-personal authority is in turn
a normative basic, and Darwall argues that this sort of authority is
necessarily assumed in all cases of agreement.
Darwall assumes that transactions can engender obligations without
an explicit ‘agreement’. As an example of this he cites accepting an
invitation. As well Darwall's second-personal authority story gives
rise to explicitly moral obligations, through the mechanism of
contractualism: roughly, the sort of authority we have to enter
agreements is the sort necessary to ground a hypothetical
contractualism of the Scanlonian sort.
Besides the taxonomy and critiques of various promising theories,
there are also several other issues concerning promises that have
received significant attention from scholars. These include the role of
promises as speech acts, promising as a sort of game, and promises and
the law, in particular the relationship between promises and other
sorts of voluntary obligations, like contracts and agreements.
Promises have often been cast as speech acts, or actions that we
perform by speaking. The locus classicus for this issue is
J. L.  Austin's 1955 book How to Do Things with Words. In it
Austin defines two sorts of speech acts, or
‘performatives’: illocutions and perlocutions. Illocutions
are those actions that we perform by uttering the words alone. Austin
lists requesting, warning and announcing as examples. Alternatively,
perlocutions are actions performed by speaking which require some
particular effect of the speech in order to be successful.
Austin cites persuading, explaining and alarming as examples of the
latter sort of locution.
Austin takes promising to be an illocutionary act, that is, he takes
it that promising is merely a matter of a certain form of
utterance, under certain conditions. Moreover the reason he takes this
to be is that he thinks that promising is a conventional act,
one that invokes a certain practice to formalize the action. Austin
thinks that in this way promises are just of a piece with many sorts of
obligation-producing actions, such as betting, buying and contracting
(Austin 1955: 19)
Austin's linguistic distinction mirrors the crucial difference
between the expectational and conventional theories of promising. On
the conventionalist view that Austin adopts, promises are
‘conventional’ moves in the game, and as such one promises
by ‘making the right moves’, i.e., saying the right sorts of
things and otherwise obeying the rules of the game. For
expectationalists, a promise is a perlocutionary act, as it's
only successful if it actually produces the expectations in the
promisee that the promise will be carried out. The investigation of
promises as speech acts is furthered in the work of Rawls (1955),
William Alston (1964, 1994), John Searle (1965, 1979, 1985), David
Jones (1966) Otto Hanfling (1975) and Michael Pratt (2003, 2007)
Christina Corredor (2001) and Vincent Blok (2013) among others.
The conventional approach places great weight on the rule-governed
nature of promising. As a result, there is a large body of work on
issues related to rules, games, and other aspects of the conceptual
framework. One such issue is the aptness of the metaphor of promising
as a game. This debate begins with Rawls' 1955 article
Two Concepts of Rules. In it 
Rawls distinguished between what he called the ‘summary’
conception of rules, in which rules are merely ‘rules of
thumb’ i.e., guides to behavior based on reports of prior actions
and their outcomes, and the ‘practice’ view of rules, which
makes them out to be ‘logically prior’ to individual cases.
One important claim Rawls makes about practice rules is that they do
not merely regulate action, but are constitutive of it. Constitutive
rules, like the rules of baseball, are necessary for us to perform (and
even understand) game-based actions like ‘striking out’.
Rawls argues that the promising convention is composed of (at least
one) constitutive rule, i.e., “When you say ‘I
Promise’ or something similar, you must do what you say you
will.”
Rawls' article provoked a large body of response and related
work. Of particular note, John Searle adopts the framework and
champions the notion of a ‘conventional’ promising game.
Searle expands the framework by adding what he calls
‘conventional facts’ to it. Conventional facts are those
that concern the events in a conventional game. Saying that I have made
a promise is a conventional fact. Searle argues in his 1964 article
How to Derive ‘Ought’ from ‘Is’ that
this approach can answer the centuries-old Humean challenge for an
explanation of how to derive moral conclusions from empirical
claims.
But many critics dispute Rawls' and Searle's analysis.
One influential criticism originates with R. M. Hare. In his The
Promising Game (1964) Hare argues that the obligation to obey a
promise, on the constitutive-rule convention view, requires that we be
obligated to play the game in order to ensure that we are obligated to
keep our promises, but that such an obligation cannot come from inside
the game itself. Mary Midgley's 1974 article The Game
Game takes the argument further, in an attempt to refute
Rawls' claim that the notion of constitutive rules can truly
capture the nature of a game. There are many other commentators, e.g.:
Flew (1965), Lyons (1965), Zemach (1971), Vitek (1993). For an
excellent overview of these issues see Vitek (1993: 118)
In addition to this work, there is also a corpus of work on promises
in game theory and economic theory, stemming from the contractarian
project of grounding promissory obligation in self-interested
rationality. Some important elements of this literature are Harsanyi
(1955), Gauthier (1986), Hardin (1988), Narveson (1988), Binmore
(1994), Skyrms (1996) and Verbeek
(2002).
The relationship between the law, contracts and promises is a long and
tangled one. From its ancient origins promissory theory has been
intertwined with issues of contracts and agreements more
generally. And since at least the time of Aquinas and especially with
the works of the later Natural Lawyers like Grotius and Pufendorf,
scholarly work on promising has been done at least in part with an eye
towards informing the law of contract. This in turn gave rise to a
tradition on the part of legal theorists of surveying such scholarship
in their work on both historical and contemporary issues in the law of
contract. Finally, the law itself has methods for dealing with
promises (as they are obviously the sorts of things that might lead to
legal wrangling). Thus the legal practice regarding promises has some
interest to theorists of promising as well. The result is two
interlinked scholarly traditions and bodies of work.
Perhaps the first question on the mind of legal and philosophical
historians is the issue of the degree to which, if any, contractual
obligations are grounded in promissory obligations in contemporary
legal regimes. This question is complicated by the different traditions
and cultures involved in the long path to contemporary law, i.e.,
natural law theory, virtue theory, rights theory, the (anglo) common
law, the continental civilian law, canon law and other theoretical
approaches, which are in turn variously situated in the UK, on the
European continent, and in the anglo territories (Scotland, Australia,
Canada the US, etc.). The answer to the question is different in
different traditions and places, and the contemporary law is the result
of some complicated amalgamation of these different traditions over
time. For an overview of these issues, see, e.g., Swain (2013),
Ibbetson (1999), Gordley (1991), Simpson (1975), or Fried (1981).
One central dialectic within this corpus has the ‘normative
power’ tradition of the natural lawyers pitted against the more
expectational views of the English common law. As Atiyah notes 
(1981: ch. 6), there is a tension between the Natural Law promissory theory
and the actual law of contract and promise plainly evident in the
British common law.  One source of the tension is the common law
doctrine of ‘consideration’, which mandates that only
promises given with ‘consideration’, i.e., given in
exchange for something of value, are enforceable in the law. In other
words, mere promises, given without consideration, are traditionally
not indemnified by the law.
Further, as Lon Fuller and William Perdue pointed out in an
influential 1939 article “The Reliance Interest in Contract
Damages”, the damages awarded by courts to those who have had a
promise or contract broken is best understood as being proportional to
the harm the plaintiff suffered in relying on the promise. These and
other considerations argue for a theory of promises based on
expectations and reliance, i.e., an expectational theory, as opposed to
one based on conventions or natural duties, and this is what a number
of philosophers and legal theorists have done. This debate has spawned
a sizeable literature (see Swain 2013 for a good overview of this
work).
Charles Fried's widely influential book Contract as Promise
(1981) re-kindled this debate in American legal circles. Fried argued
that the traditional approach, which made contractual obligation out to
be grounded in promissory obligation, was slowly being usurped by the
consequentialist-flavored approaches of the English common law, and he
aimed his book as a polemic against this movement.
Fried took on these arguments directly, and the corpus of work that
sprang from the book greatly enlarged the debate. In 2012 a special
conference and subsequent issue of the Suffolk University Law Review
revisited Fried's work, 30 years on. This new corpus of work provides
us with some interesting new explorations. As an example of this, see
Brian Bix's assessment in his essay (2012).
As a practical matter, legal theory continues to be a source of much
of the best academic work on promises and related phenomena, with
scholars like Markovits (2011), Shiffrin (2008, 2012), Pratt (2007,
2013) and many others contributing.
There are several other issues being discussed in contemporary
promissory theory. What follows is a quick listing of some major ones,
with references for further research.
Coerced Promises. Since at least Hobbes
(Lev. I–14:198) there has been a debate about whether a coerced
promise is binding. Some contemporary additions to this corpus are
Gilbert 1993; Deigh 2002; Owens 2007; and Chwang 2011.
Promises to the Self. Again, Hobbes (Lev.
II–26:184) begins a debate that continues today over whether promises
made to oneself are binding, Cf. Hill 1991; Migotti 2003; Habib
2009;
Rosati 2011.