It is often assumed that the primary purpose of prophecy is to
foretell the future, but this is not always the case. In the great
monotheistic religious traditions (Judaism, Christianity, and Islam),
for instance, a prophet is taken to be a person who makes God’s will
particularly clear, whether or not this involves making predictions
about the future. As William Hasker says, in these traditions,
prophets are usually involved in “witnessing to the people
concerning God’s purposes and requirements and seeking to recall them
to obedience” (Hasker 1989, 194). There are fascinating debates
in these religious traditions, especially in the medieval period,
debates that we will not discuss here (see Kreisel 2001, Shatz 1998,
Rahman 2011, and the entries in this encyclopedia concerning key
historical figures discussed in those sources). Related questions
about how a human person might come to know God’s will through some
kind of revelation are discussed elsewhere in this encyclopedia, for
example in the entries on
 the epistemology of religion
 and
 philosophy and Christian theology.
But when philosophers discuss prophecy, they are typically interested
in prophecies concerning the contingent future, so that will be the
focus in the remainder of this article. What special philosophical
issues are raised by this kind of prophecy?
Let’s say that a future event is contingent if and only if it is both
not determined that it will happen and also not determined that it
will not happen.  (For more on the notion of determinism, see the
entry on
 causal determinism.)
 Now imagine that based upon the revelation of an infallible God, a
person prophecies that some future contingent event will occur. Since
God cannot be wrong, does it follow that the future contingent event
must occur? And if it must occur, how can it be a contingent
event?
An especially vivid example of this kind of situation comes from the
Christian tradition. Jesus reportedly prophesied that his disciple
Peter would deny him three times before the cock crowed (see Matthew
26:34). Typically, we would think of Peter’s denial as a free act, and
hence as contingent. (For more on this connection, see the entries on
 compatibilism,
 free will, and
 causal determinism.)
 But since Jesus cannot be mistaken (according to Christian theology),
how are Peter’s later denials free? Once Jesus’ words become part of
the unalterable past, don’t they guarantee a particular future,
whether or not Peter is willing to cooperate?
This problem is an especially interesting instance of the more general
problem of the compatibility of God’s complete foreknowledge with the
existence of future contingent events (for more on this general
problem, see the entry on
 divine foreknowledge and human freedom).
 Whereas the more general question about God’s foreknowledge typically
involves just God’s knowledge and the future contingent event, the
problem of prophecy involves a third element, namely, the prophecy
itself, which becomes a part of the past history of the world as soon
as it is made. This additional element adds an interesting twist to
the general problem, making it more difficult to solve.
Philosophers have responded to this problem in several different ways.
One obvious way to respond is simply to claim that there are no future
contingent events. Different people have taken this approach for
different reasons. Some are attracted to the idea that every event has
a prior sufficient cause (see the entry on
 causal determinism).
 Others believe that the idea of free choice does not require anything
like real contingency or the possibility of doing or intending
otherwise (see the entries on
 compatibilism
 and
 free will).
 Still others believe that God’s providential control over the world
is so thorough and detailed that nothing is left to chance, not even
the apparently free choices of human beings (see the views defended in
Calvin 1536, Carson 1981, and Feinberg 1986, for instance, and the
entry on
 divine providence).
 So one possible response to the difficulty here is to give up one
half of the problem by denying that there are any future contingent
events. To return to our example from the Christian tradition, when
Jesus truly prophecies that Peter will deny him three times before the
cock crows, there is no philosophical puzzle as long as we do not
claim that Peter’s denials are contingent events.
Many philosophers and theologians do not find this approach very
promising, though, because they believe strongly in future contingent
events, especially human free choices. How else might one respond to
the problem posed by prophecies concerning future contingent
events?
Another way of trying to solve the puzzle is to deny that God has any
knowledge of the contingent future. According to this approach, often
called “open theism”, there may be future contingent
events, but God does not know about them. God does not know about them
either because (1) there are no true propositions now that report what
future contingent events will occur, or because (2) it is impossible
for anyone, including God, to know such true propositions, or because
(3) God chooses not to know them in order to preserve our freedom
(see, e.g., Swinburne 1986, chapter 10). Open theists also typically
argue that foreknowledge alone would be providentially useless to God
(see Hasker 1989, for instance; for more on open theism, see Hasker
1989 and 2004, Basinger and Basinger 1986, Basinger 1994, Pinnock
1986, Pinnock et al 1994, Rice 1985, and Davison 1991 and 2003). How
can open theism explain prophecies that appear to make reference to
future contingent events?
William Hasker, perhaps the most prominent advocate of open theism,
addresses this problem explicitly, and suggests a three-fold response.
First, he points out that the main function of prophecy is not to
foretell the future, but to reveal God’s will (Hasker 1989, 194). Many
prophecies, in fact, have a conditional character, such as “If a
nation does not do such and such, then it will be destroyed”
(see Jeremiah 18:7–10, for example). Second, many prophetic
predictions are based upon existing trends and tendencies, which
provide God with enough evidence to foresee the future (Hasker 1989,
195). (Hasker places Jesus’ prediction about Peter in this category,
by the way.) Finally, some prophecies simply reveal what God has
already decided to bring about in the future (Hasker 1989, 195). Since
God’s own actions in the future are up to God, it is possible for God
to know about them even though they are contingent, so it is possible
for prophecies to reveal them.
Thomas P. Flint argues that Hasker’s attempt to solve the problem of
prophecy from within the constraints imposed by open theism is
inadequate. Flint argues that if people are truly free in a sense that
implies future contingency, then not even God could know very much
about the future based upon present trends and tendencies alone. This
is because the probability of any particular future contingent event
is very low, so that God would not have much justification for
believing that any particular future contingent event would occur (see
Flint 1998, 102–5). As an example, Flint points to John 6:64,
which seems to imply that Jesus knew that Judas would betray him. How
could this be, Flint wonders, when the probability that Judas would
betray Jesus was so low?  He also points out that Hasker faces a
dilemma here that other open theists share, namely, that if they
insist that the probabilities of future contingent events are high
enough to justify God in making predictions about the future, then God
actually doesn’t take much of a risk in creating the world. This is
problematic for some open theists, who claim that their view has the
virtue that God takes certain risks in creating the world; see Flint
1998, 104–6.)
We will not try to adjudicate the dispute between Flint and Hasker
here, since that would take us beyond the scope of this article.
Instead, let’s consider other possible solutions to the problem of
prophecy. In order to classify them, it will be helpful to describe
briefly the different ways that philosophers and theologians have
tried to explain God’s knowledge of the contingent future.
William Ockham
 (c.1285–1347), a highly influential Christian philosopher and
theologian from the medieval period, suggested an interesting way of
accounting for God’s knowledge of the contingent future and resolving
the problem of prophecy. (For more detailed presentations of Ockham’s
views, see the introduction to Ockham 1983 by Adams and the
introduction to Molina 1988 by Freddoso.) Ockham claims that what a
prophet has truly revealed about the contingent future “could
have been and can be false” (Ockham Predestination,
44), even though the existence of the prophecy in the past is
“ever afterwards necessary” (Ockham
Predestination, 44). As Calvin Normore puts it, “After
God has revealed a future contingency it is necessary that the
physical or mental things he used to reveal it have existed, but what
is revealed is not necessary” (Normore 1982, 373). In terms of
our example involving Jesus’ prophecy concerning Peter’s denial,
Ockham’s idea is that were Peter to choose freely not to deny Jesus
instead, then Jesus would never have prophesied that Peter would deny
him. (Some philosophers like to call this kind of proposition a
“back-tracking counterfactual”, because it is a
subjunctive conditional statement whose consequent refers to an
earlier time than its antecedent.) In other words, if a person were
about to choose freely to do something, then God would have known
about it from eternity, and hence would have acted accordingly. 
If this is right, then Ockham’s idea seems to imply that we have the
ability to do something now such that if we were to do it, then the
past would have been different (because God would known what we would
do differently and hence would have acted differently in the past).
Some philosophers refer to this kind of ability as
“counterfactual power over the past.” Alvin Plantinga has
this idea in mind in his defense of Ockham’s account of God’s
foreknowledge of the contingent future when he says that “it is
possible that there is an action such that it is within your power to
perform it and such that if you were to perform it, then God would not
have created Abraham” (Plantinga 1986, 257). Along the same
lines, Edward Wierenga suggests that according to Ockham, Peter has
the power to do something such that if he were to do it, then Jesus
would not have intended what he said about Peter’s future
denials as a prophecy (Wierenga 1991, 440). In other words, Jesus
uttered words that actually did constitute a prophecy, but those same
words would not have been a prophecy had Peter chosen otherwise
(Wierenga 1991, 440). 
More recently, Trenton Merricks (2009) has defended the idea that
God’s past beliefs depend upon our future free choices (although he
distinguishes his proposal from Ockham’s: see Fischer and Todd 2011
and the reply in Merricks 2011a).
But doesn’t this attribute to Peter a rather odd power over the past?
Once Jesus says certain words with a certain intention, is it coherent
to say that Peter still has a choice about whether or not to betray
Jesus? Some philosophers have expressed doubts along these lines about
whether or not Ockham’s approach is ultimately successful. Alfred J.
Freddoso, for instance, claims that “Ockhamism commits one to
having to choose between the Scylla of claiming that God can undo the
causal history of the world and the Charybdis of claiming that divine
prophecies might be deceptive or mistaken” (Freddoso 1988, 61;
see also Warfield 2009). Finch and Rea (2008) have also argued that a
commitment to Ockham’s solution is incompatible with a belief in
presentism, the view that only the present moment is real. Whether or
not these things are so, one might wonder about the prospects for
another solution. 
A very different approach to explaining God’s knowledge of the
contingent future involves suggesting that God exists outside of time
altogether. This would mean that God does not foreknow the future,
strictly speaking, since foreknowledge is knowledge of an event that
is possessed at a moment in time that occurs earlier than the moment
in time at which the foreknown event occurs. Instead, the idea is that
God knows all events from the perspective of timeless eternity. (For
further elaboration and defense of this view, see Stump and Kretzmann
1987, Helm 1988, and Leftow 1991.) Many theists have adopted this view
throughout the centuries, including the highly influential medieval
theologian
 St. Thomas Aquinas
 (1225–1274). One of the earliest Christian theologians to
defend this approach to answering the Knowledge Question was Boethius
(480–524 C.E.), who wrote in The Consolation of
Philosophy that “[Since] God has a condition of
ever-present eternity, His knowledge, which passes over every change
of time, embracing infinite lengths of past and future, views in its
own direct comprehension everything as though it were taking place in
the present” (Boethius Consolation, 117).
Some philosophers have objected to this way of explaining God’s
knowledge because they think that it represents an unbiblical picture
of God derived largely from Greek philosophical influences (see
Wolterstorff 1982, for example). But it does suggest an interesting
approach to the problem of prophecy. In terms of our example, the
defender of God’s atemporal eternity would say that God knows from the
perspective of eternity that Peter will deny Jesus at a certain time,
and on this basis, Jesus prophecies in time that the event in question
will occur. 
One worry about this approach is that once Jesus prophecies at a
particular time that Peter will deny him, God’s atemporally eternal
knowledge seems to be “introduced” into the past (as David
Widerker says in Widerker 1991), and the advantages of the atemporal
eternity view seem to disappear. For we are still left with trying to
explain how Peter’s denial could be contingent, given that the
prophecy has already occurred. It seems that either Peter’s denial is
not free or the past can be changed somehow. 
Eleonore Stump and Norman Kretzmann, probably the most prominent
advocates of the atemporal eternity view, have defended the atemporal
eternity approach to prophecy against Widerker’s objection (see Stump
and Kretzmann 1991). They point out that most prophecies are
conditional or vague, so that they leave “room” for
different ways in which they might be fulfilled (400–401). If a
prophecy were to be very specific, then it might actually render the
action in question inevitable, they admit, but they also insist that
rendering an action inevitable is not the same as making it unfree.
This is because they distinguish freedom of action from freedom of
will, and argue that “it is possible for an action to be
inevitable and yet a free action” (403), as (for instance) when
“the agent himself has a powerful desire to do the action, his
will is not causally determined by anything external to him or by
pathological factors within him, and the inaccessible alternatives to
his inevitable action are alternatives the agent has no desire to do
or even some desire not to do” (403). Trying to resolve the
dispute between Widerker and Stump and Kretzmann would go beyond the
scope of this article, though, so instead we will turn to the final
alternative solution to the problem of prophecy. 
This last approach to explaining how God knows the contingent future
starts with an observation concerning foreknowledge and providence
that advocates of open theism have made very clearly and forcefully.
Why would knowledge of the future be useful to God? Well, presumably
knowledge of the future enables God to make decisions about how to
exercise divine power in order to accomplish the purposes behind
creation. But there is a problem here: knowledge of the future is just
knowledge of what will happen (since the future is by definition
whatever will happen), and once God knows that something definitely
will happen, then it’s too late to do anything about it. (This may
sound like a limit on God’s power, but probably it is not: not even
God can make something false while that same thing is known to be
true.) As William Hasker says, “In the logical order of
dependence of events, one might say, by the ‘time’ God
knows something will happen, it is ‘too late’ either to
bring about its happening or to prevent it from happening”
(Hasker 1989, 58). So what God needs, for the purposes of providence,
is not just knowledge about what will happen, but also knowledge about
what could happen and what would happen in certain circumstances. 
Luis de Molina, an influential Spanish Jesuit theologian
(1535–1600 C.E.), thought that this was a serious problem. In
order to develop a view that would explain the relationships between
all of these things, he drew a distinction between three kinds of
knowledge in God, a distinction that suggests another response to the
problem of prophecy. (For more complete and detailed presentations of
this view, see Freddoso’s introduction to Molina 1988, Craig 1987,
Flint 1988 and Flint 1998.)
According to Molina, the first kind of knowledge that God possesses is
called natural knowledge. A true proposition is part of God’s natural
knowledge if and only if it is a necessary truth (a truth which could
not be false under any circumstances whatever) which is beyond God’s
control (nobody, including God, could make them false). Examples of
such true propositions would include “Two plus two equals
four”, “Nothing is both red all over and green all over at
once”, and “Every triangle has three sides.”
The second kind of knowledge that God possesses is called free
knowledge because it is subject to God’s free decision. According to
Molina, a true proposition is part of God’s free knowledge if and only
if it is a contingent truth (an actual truth which could have been
false under different circumstances) that is within God’s control.
Examples of such true propositions would include “The same side
of the moon always faces the Earth”, “Human beings
exist” and “There are iguanas in South America”,
since God could have brought it about that these true propositions
were false instead.
The third kind of knowledge that God possesses, according to Molina,
is called middle knowledge (because it is “in between”
God’s natural knowledge and free knowledge). A true proposition is
part of God’s middle knowledge if and only if it is a contingent truth
(like items of God’s free knowledge) but beyond God’s control (like
items of God’s natural knowledge). The most frequently discussed items
of middle knowledge are often called “subjunctive conditionals
of freedom” by philosophers, since they describe what people
would freely do if placed in various possible situations.
Molina claims that God’s providential control over the world involves
middle knowledge in a crucial way. Very briefly, here is how it is
supposed to work: through natural knowledge, God knows what is
necessary and what is possible. Through middle knowledge, God knows
what every possible person would do freely in every possible
situation. So God decides which kind of world to create, including
those situations in which free human persons should be placed, knowing
how they would respond, and this results in God’s free knowledge
(contingent truths which are up to God), including foreknowledge of
the actual future.
In the case of Jesus’ prophecy that Peter would deny him, Molinists
would say that God knew (through middle knowledge) that if Peter were
placed in certain circumstances, then he would deny Jesus. And for
reasons not known to us, God decided to create those circumstances,
place Peter in them, and prophecy through Jesus what Peter was going
to do. (For a much more detailed explanation, see Flint 1998, chapter
9.) Molina’s theory of middle knowledge generates a theory of
providence designed to combine a strong notion of God’s control with a
robust account of the contingency involved in human freedom. (It also
appears to have some biblical support, because there are verses which
seem to attribute middle knowledge to God, although this is disputed:
see I Samuel 23:6–13 and Matthew 11:20–24.) 
However, philosophers have expressed several doubts about whether or
not it is possible for God to possess middle knowledge, doubts that
parallel those expressed above in connection with the possibility of
God’s foreknowledge of the contingent future. For one thing, they
wonder about counterfactuals of freedom: can we really assume that
these are either true or false? How can they be true if (for example)
the person in question is never in the situation and never actually
makes a choice? What “grounds” them or makes them true? A
second worry about Molina’s picture has to do with the nature of
knowledge. Even if a given counterfactual of freedom is true, knowing
a proposition requires that a person be able to distinguish what is
true from what is false. The worry here is that perhaps not even God
could distinguish true counterfactuals of freedom from false ones. For
more detailed discussions of these objections, see Adams 1977,
Freddoso’s introduction to Molina 1988, Craig 1987, Flint 1988, Flint
1998, Hasker 1989, Davison 1991, and Perszyk 2011. (For a clever
attempt to explain prophecy without middle knowledge, see Pruss 2007
and the response from Corabi and Germino 2013.) 
There are several ways to try to resolve the problem of prophecy,
which arises in cases where a future contingent event is predicted.
The approaches discussed here have various strengths and weaknesses.
The question of prophecy has been receiving increased attention as the
debate over the extent of God’s knowledge has become more widely
discussed in recent work in the philosophy of religion. As a result,
one could reasonably predict that philosophical arguments concerning
these matters will continue indefinitely into the future. 