Though Pseudo-Dionysius lived in the late fifth and early sixth
century C.E., his works were written as if they were composed by
St. Dionysius the Areopagite, who was a member of the Athenian
judicial council (known as ‘the Areopagus’) in the 1st
century C.E. and who was converted by St. Paul. Thus, these works
might be regarded as a successful ‘forgery’, providing
Pseudo-Dionysius with impeccable Christian credentials that
conveniently antedated Plotinus by close to two hundred years.  So
successful was this stratagem that Dionysius acquired almost apostolic
authority, giving his writings enormous influence in the Middle Ages
and the Renaissance, though his views on the Trinity and Christ (e.g.,
his emphasis upon the single theandric activity of Christ
(see Letter 4) as opposed to the later orthodox view of two
activities) were not always accepted as orthodox since they required
repeated defenses, for example, by John of Scythopolis and by Maximus
Confessor. Dionysius’ fictitious identity, doubted already in the
sixth century by Hypatius of Ephesus and later by Nicholas of Cusa,
was first seriously called into question by Lorenzo Valla in 1457 and
John Grocyn in 1501, a critical viewpoint later accepted and
publicized by Erasmus from 1504 onward. But it has only become
generally accepted in modern times that instead of being the disciple
of St. Paul, Dionysius must have lived in the time of Proclus, most
probably being a pupil of Proclus, perhaps of Syrian origin, who knew
enough of Platonism and the Christian tradition to transform them
both. Since Proclus died in 485 CE, and since the first clear citation
of Dionysius’ works is by Severus of Antioch between 518 and 528, then
we can place Dionysius’ authorship between 485 and 518–28
CE. These dates are confirmed by what we find in the Dionysian corpus:
a knowledge of Athenian Neoplatonism of the time, an appeal to
doctrinal formulas and parts of the Christian liturgy (e.g., the
Creed) current in the late fifth century, and an adaptation of late
fifth-century Neoplatonic religious rites, particularly theurgy, as we
shall see below.
It must also be recognized that “forgery” is a modern
notion. Like Plotinus and the Cappadocians before him, Dionysius does
not claim to be an innovator, but rather a communicator of a
tradition.  Adopting the persona of an ancient figure was a long
established rhetorical device (known as declamatio), and
others in Dionysius’ circle also adopted pseudonymous names from
the New Testament. Dionysius’ works, therefore, are much less a
forgery in the modern sense than an acknowledgement of reception and
transmission, namely, a kind of coded recognition that the resonances
of any sacred undertaking are intertextual, bringing the diachronic
structures of time and space together in a synchronic way, and that
this theological teaching, at least, is dialectically received from
another. Dionysius represents his own teaching as coming from a
certain Hierotheus and as being addressed to a certain Timotheus. He
seems to conceive of himself, therefore, as an in-between figure, very
like a Dionysius the Areopagite, in fact. Finally, if Iamblichus and
Proclus can point to a primordial, pre-Platonic wisdom, namely, that
of Pythagoras, and if Plotinus himself can claim not to be an
originator of a tradition (after all, the term Neoplatonism is just a
convenient modern tag), then why cannot Dionysius point to a
distinctly Christian theological and philosophical resonance in an
earlier pre-Plotinian wisdom that instantaneously bridged the gap
between Judaeo-Christianity (St. Paul) and Athenian paganism (the
Areopagite)? [For a different view of Dionysius as crypto-pagan, see
Lankila, 2011, 14–40.] 
Reading Dionysius can be a difficult business for many reasons:
partly because his frequent hyperbolic theological language is foreign
to our own English-speaking practices; partly because almost
every word he employs resonates with the whole history of ancient
thought, from the Christian Platonism of the Fathers, particularly,
Gregory of Nyssa and the Cappadocians, to the Neoplatonism of Plotinus,
Iamblichus, and Proclus, while his theology focuses predominantly upon
the Jewish and Christian scriptures (which Dionysius calls
“divine oracles”); partly, again, because the order in
which we are to read his works is unclear and because Dionysius
mentions at least seven works that have been lost. So we are unsure how
to read him since so much seems doubtful or potentially fictitious.
This picture is further complicated by the titles subdividing portions
of his works, which appear, because of terminology peculiar to them, to
have been inserted by a later hand or hands.
The surviving writings are four treatises and ten letters. The four
treatises are: 1) On the divine names (DN) (Peri
theion onomaton, in Greek; De Divinis Nominibus, in
Latin), the longest work of thirteen chapters that deals with
affirmative or kataphatic theology, namely, the names attributed to God
the creator in scripture and also in pagan texts, but also exploring
the limits of language and therefore also involving negative or
apophatic theology. 2) On the celestial hierarchy
(CH) (Peri tes ouranias hierarchias, in Greek; De
coelesti hierarchia, in Latin), a work that examines how the nine
choirs of angels (in scripture) are to be understood in lifting us up
to God. 3) On the ecclesiastical hierarchy (EH)
(Peri tes ekklestiastikes hierarchias, in Greek; De
ecclesiastica hierarchia, in Latin) that examines the various
orders and liturgy of the church as relating us to God through a
divinely appointed but human hierarchy. And 4) On Mystical
theology (MT) (Peri mustikes theologias, in
Greek; De mystica theologia, in Latin), a brief but powerful
work that deals with negative or apophatic theology and in which
theology becomes explicitly “mystical” for the first time
in history (By mystical here we do not mean an extraordinary or private
experience of transcending one’s self in the modern sense of the term,
but simply “hidden”. On this see Bouyer, 1949; Vanneste,
1959; McGinn 1994). There follow ten letters that provide helpful
comments upon topics in the above four treatises, especially letter 9
on what Dionysius calls symbolic theology of which works 2) and 3)
above (CH; EH) form a substantial part. The ten
letters appear to be arranged in a roughly hierarchical order, letters
1–4 being addressed to a monk (a certain Gaius, also the name of
one or more of St. Paul’s companions), letter 5 to a deacon, letter 6
to a priest, and letters 7 and 9 to hierarchs or bishops. Letter 8
disrupts this order since it is addressed to a monk charged with
disrupting the hierarchical order itself!
What order of the works are we to adopt? In the French translation
of M. de Gandillac and the English translation of C. Luibheid and P.
Rorem (see bibliography), the order is DN, MT,
CH and EH. In the manuscripts of the Areopagitic
corpus, the order is CH, EH, DN,
MT, followed by the Letters. Dionysius himself provides an
explanatory outline that favors the order of Luibheid and Rorem, and
that gives a systematic organization to his body of work, including
both the treatises we presently possess and also the treatises which
either no longer exist or, more likely, were never written. His outline
is especially valuable for two of these latter treatises—the
Theological Representations and the Symbolic
Theology—since the order in which he claims to have written
them reveals both the relative worth of their contents and the
sequence in which the reader should proceed. It thus helps the reader
to divine the nature of their content, and to put them in their proper
place with the remaining two works written by Dionysius on the forms
of theology. The first three—the Theological
Representations, On the Divine Names, and
the Symbolic Theology—discuss ever more divided and
sensuous forms of theology. The fourth theological work,
the Mystical Theology, reverses the sequence and restores the
reader to the divine unity:
In this article we shall adopt a variant of this last order both
because Dionysius himself seems to have favored it and because it
clarifies the systematic structure of the theological works. 
Although the Theological Representations is not extant, we
are able to glean its content from Dionysius’ ample descriptions of it
in his other works. It seems to have devoted itself to names for the
three persons within the godhead and their attributes. These names are
the representations mentioned in the work’s title. They describe two
forms of differentiation within the godhead: the distinction into
persons, and into attributes of the persons. Names for the persons
include “Father,” “Son,” and “Holy
Spirit.” Names for the attributes include “source,”
“offshoot,” “flower,” and “light.”
Dionysius does not explain why he uses the term
“representation” (hypotuposis) for these names,
but his fondness for puns may have led him to adopt it because of its
similarity to “person” (hypostasis).
Some of these names describe more than a person within the godhead.
The name “father,” for instance, may also be used of
animals, in which case it means the male parent. We seem to apply such
names literally to animals and only metaphorically to persons within
the godhead. But Dionysius uncovers a passage from Paul’s letter to the
Ephesians which leads him to claim otherwise. Paul says that God the
Father is the one “from whom all fatherhood in the heavens and on
earth is named.” On the basis of this scriptural authority,
Dionysius explains that we are able to use the terms
“father” and “son” of animals only because the
godhead has already undergone the same relation. In other words, the
internal causality exercised within the godhead is the source of all
other causality. This includes not only the causation of one animal by
another, but of one angel by another, since angels, too, receive the
names of “father” and “son.”
Strictly speaking, all of the theological works except for the
Theological Representations devote themselves to divine names
or names for the godhead. But Dionysius devotes his second theological
treatise, entitled On the Divine Names only to a particular
kind of divine name. This kind of name describes a third distinction
within the godhead (in addition to the distinction of persons and of
personal attributes): the distinction into the multiple attributes of
the godhead as a whole. Though the names apply to the godhead as a
whole, and so refer to it as a unity, each name is different and so,
taken together, they differentiate the godhead. The implicit
distinction between the unity of the godhead and the multiplicity of
the names is reflected in the very structure of the names
themselves. Each name includes the same prefix: “over-”,
or
hyper- in Greek, which indicates the unity of the
godhead to whom the names are applied. But each name is different,
indicating the self-multiplication of the godhead. The result is
a set of names like “over-good,”
“over-being,” and “over-life.”
Occasionally, Dionysius also makes use of a second, equivalent prefix:
“pre-” or pro- in Greek. God is
“pre-good,” and “pre-being,”
meaning that he has the attributes of creatures in a way that
transcends both creature and attribute. The “over-”
and “pre-” prefixes must be applied strictly to the
names when they are used of God in himself. On the other hand, when the
names are used only of God as cause, the prefixes may be left off,
since the causality of God is already a procession into the
differentiation properly signified by each of the different names.
Some of Dionysius’ later medieval interpreters suggest that God
possesses the attributes of creatures in their most proper and ideal
form, but Dionysius himself does not suggest this. Instead, the most
proper object of the names is the highest creature. The exemplary
instances of “goodness,” “being,” and
“life,” for example, are the highest of the angels or
intelligible minds, as Dionysius also calls them. For this reason,
Dionysius frequently refers to this type of name as an
“intelligible name.” He incorporates into the number of
intelligible names the traditional Neoplatonic intelligible categories:
being, identity, difference, rest, and motion, as well as the
Neoplatonic triad of being, life, and intellect. The fact that God
transcends the proper meaning of these names does not mean that he
ought to be called “non-being,”
“non-life,” or “non-intellect.”
Dionysius prefers simply to say that God is “over being,”
“over life,” and “over intellect.”
The intelligible names could form the ground of a theology
independent of any specific religious tradition or sacred text. Many of
them are central to Platonic sources outside the context of
Christianity, and appear only incidentally and obscurely in the Hebrew
and Christian scriptures. They also describe the intelligible structure
of the cosmos, a structure that is accessible to all human inquiry,
whether assisted by scriptural texts or not. But Dionysius explicitly
denies that the names may be acquired from any source other than the
Hebrew and Christian scriptures. Even if the names could be derived
from contemplation of the world’s intelligible structure, we apply them
in theology to the cause of that structure and not to the structure
itself. Since the cause of that structure is beyond the grasp of human
inquiry, we cannot rely on our own powers for our description. We
depend instead on the revelation of the scriptures as our source for
the intelligible names.
Few human beings have the ability to contemplate the intelligible
names in their purity. Most of us require the names to be incarnated in
visible things before we can understand them. Unable to see
“being,” “life,” and “wisdom” in
themselves, we need a visible being who is living and wise. Such a
person can then become the means by which we contemplate the
intelligible. Dionysius’ possibly fictional teacher Hierotheus is one
such visible incarnation of the names. But Hierotheus may do more than
incarnate the names. He can also unfold them in speech, taking the
unitary name of “being” and describing it at length, as
Dionysius does in the fifth chapter of On the Divine Names. As
he describes it, the name unfolds itself into a form that is more
multiple, because of the many words used in his description. It thus
approaches the multiple character of our ordinary human way of knowing,
and becomes more easily understood.
Other names directly refer to visible things, whose multiplicity and
accessibility to sensation make them easy for us to understand. The
difficulty with these names, referred to by Dionysius and the
Neoplatonic tradition generally as “symbols,” is that they
have no inherent relation to the godhead at all. Their literal
signification is restricted to the realm of the sensuous, and so they
must be turned into metaphors if they are to become useful for
theology. This is the task of Dionysius’ Symbolic Theology.
Though the work itself is not extant, we find him undertaking the same
project in each of his extant works.
One of Dionysius’ favorite sources of symbols is a verse from the
78th psalm: “the Lord awoke, like a strong man,
powerful but reeling with wine.” Taken literally, the verse
indicates that God sleeps and gets drunk on wine, two activities that
properly apply only to embodied, visible beings. Only an embodied being
can manifest the activities to which the names “sleep” and
“drunkenness” literally refer. If we are to apply such
terms to God, they must be attached to a foreign, intelligible content
that will be able to lead the interpreter of the symbolic name to the
contemplation of an intelligible name. In “sleep,” for
example, Dionysius finds a meaning common to both intelligible and
visible things: withdrawal from the world. He concludes that God’s
sleep is his “removal from and lack of communication with the
objects of his providence.” In drunkenness, Dionysius sees a kind
of over-filling, and so he explains that God’s drunkenness is
“the overloaded measurelessness of all goods in the one who is
their cause.” From the easily comprehended literal meaning of the
term, the reader rises to the more difficult intelligible terrain of
imparticipability and measurelessness.
Drunkenness and sleep are what Dionysius calls “dissimilar
similarities.” They strike us as exceptionally unworthy of God,
and so are “dissimilar,” yet they reveal an intelligible
truth capable of leading us to him, and so are “similar.”
Dionysius privileges such names over more appropriate names like
“golden” and “luminous.” The more that the name
seems appropriate, the more we are likely to be lulled into thinking
that we have adequately comprehended the godhead in our use of the
name. The very materiality and ignobility of the dissimilar
similarities cry out that the names do not literally describe the
godhead, and compel the reader to seek the intelligible truth behind
the name.
We may wonder whether the symbolic names are a necessary part of
theology at all, since their content belongs to the intelligible
theology and not to a “symbolic” theology. Dionysius
repeatedly affirms their necessity, not because of the character of
their content, but because of the nature of the human soul. The soul
may be divided into two parts: one passionate and the other
passionless. Passionate here means set in motion by things exterior to
the soul. The senses, for example, are passionate because they can
only function when an outside object gives them something to
sense. Dionysius follows a longstanding Neoplatonic tradition when he
says that most of us are unable to engage our passionless part
directly. Instead, our passionless part comes into play only
indirectly, through the activity of the passionate part. By sensing
the world around us, we are led to contemplate its intelligible
structures through the sensations we receive. Even those few human
beings who can engage their passionless part directly find it helpful
to shore up their contemplation with examples drawn from the senses.
Dionysius may understand the causality of God directly, and yet still
find it helpful to compare God’s causality to the emanation of light
from the sun.
Such examples do not require the presence of a revealed scripture.
Skilled teachers in any subject are characterized by their ability to
come up with helpful examples drawn from ordinary experience when
explaining a difficult intelligible truth. Dionysius himself frequently
resorts to examples “at our level” in order to explain
something intelligible. The scriptural symbol goes further, attempting
to reveal the God who is before and beyond even the intelligible truth.
The highest human intellect has little ability to attain this truth
directly, and so we cannot rely on intellectual teachers as guides to
that truth. We require the gift of symbols, which tie our ordinary
comprehension to the godhead beyond being. And so Dionysius does not
describe the symbolic names as pedagogical tools developed by
theologians. The names appear instead in the ecstatic visions of the
prophets. Though Dionysius explicitly asserts our dependence on the
Hebrew and Christian scriptures as the source of these symbols, he has
no qualms about embellishing the list of names with symbols drawn from
other traditions. For instance, he discusses at length the name of
“mixing bowl,” which has no real source in the Christian or
Hebrew scriptures, but occurs centrally in the Platonic philosophy
deriving from Plato’s Timaeus.
When Dionysius praises “dissimilar similarities” over
seemingly more appropriate symbolic names for God, he explains that at
least some dissimilar names are negations, and negations are more
proper to God than affirmations. The Mystical Theology has
this last, most arcane form of theology as its subject. Negations are
properly applied not only to the names of the symbolic theology. Any
and all of the divine names must be negated, beginning with those of
the symbolic theology, continuing with the intelligible names and
concluding with the theological representations. The godhead is no
more “spirit,” “sonship,” and
“fatherhood” than it is “intellect” or
“asleep.” These negations must be distinguished from
privations. A privation is simply the absence of a given predicate
that could just as easily be present. The absence of the predicate is
opposed to its presence: “lifeless” is opposed to
“living.” But when we say that the godhead is not
“living,” we do not mean that it is
“lifeless.” The godhead is beyond the lifeless as well as
beyond the living. For this reason, Dionysius says that our
affirmations of the godhead are not opposed to our negations, but that
both must be transcended: even the negations must be negated.
The most controversial and arcane passages of the Mystical
Theology revolve around the mystical as taken in itself and not as
the act of negating the other forms of theology. Dionysius says that
after all speaking, reading, and comprehending of the names ceases,
there follows a divine silence, darkness, and unknowing. All three of
these characteristics seem privative, as though they were simply being
the absence of speech, sight, and knowledge respectively. But Dionysius
does not treat them as privative. Instead, he uses temporal and spatial
language to mark off a special place and time for them. Using as his
example the account of Moses’ ascent up Mount Sinai in the Hebrew
scriptures, Dionysius says that after Moses ascends through the
sensible and intelligible contemplation of God, he then enters the
darkness above the mountain’s peak. The darkness is located above the
mountain, and Moses enters it after his contemplation of God in the
various forms of theology. Dionysius leaves the relation between Moses
and the darkness highly obscure. Some commentators reduce it to a form
of knowing, albeit an extraordinary form of knowing. Others reduce it
to a form of affective experience, in which Moses feels something that
he can never know or explain in words. Dionysius himself does not give
decisive evidence in favor of either interpretive move. He speaks only
of Moses’ “union” with the ineffable, invisible, unknowable
godhead.
Perhaps even more vexing than the nature of union in Dionysius is
the question of how the theological treatises relate to Dionysius’ two
treatises on hierarchy. The Mystical Theology suggests an
ascent from the lower sensuous realm of reality through the
intelligible intermediate realm to the darkness of the godhead itself,
all accomplished by a single person. The hierarchic treatises, on the
other hand, suggest that the sensible and intelligible realms are not
places reached by a single being, but different kinds of beings, and
that the vision of God is handed from being to being downward through
the levels of the hierarchy. On the Celestial Hierarchy
describes the intelligible realm as divided into nine ranks of beings:
the seraphim, cherubim, thrones, dominions, powers, authorities,
principalities, archangels, and angels. On the Ecclesiastical
Hierarchy describes the human beings within the church as divided
into eight ranks: the hierarchs or bishops, priests, deacons, monks,
laity, catechumens, penitents, and the demon-possessed. Dionysius
does not address human life outside the church, except for a few
scattered references to the angels presiding over other religious
traditions and the earlier “legal hierarchy” of the Jewish
rite, which precedes the ecclesiastical hierarchy of the Christian
rite.
The hierarchs, highest within the human hierarchy, contemplate the
intelligible realm directly, though presumably they contemplate only
its lowest level: the angels. The visible result of the hierarchs’
contemplation of the angels is the series of rites belonging to the
Christian church. Since the hierarchs are able to contemplate the
intelligible directly, they do not perform the rites for their own
sake, but for the sake of the monks and laity, who have no capacity for
direct intelligible contemplation. The monks and laity are able to
engage the passionless part of their souls only through the passionate
part, and so they require a visible trigger—the symbol—to 
stimulate their intelligible contemplation. The ranks of hierarch,
priest, and deacon are in charge of administering the rites, with a
specific set of initiates in their care and a specific action to
perform. The deacons purify the catechumens, penitents, and possessed,
primarily by giving them ethical instruction. The priests illuminate
the laity, who are able to receive the intelligible truth. The
hierarchs perfect, a task whose initiate seems ideally to be the monk,
since Dionysius identifies the monks as leading the more perfect life
of those who are not explicitly consecrated as clergy.
The very structure of the church reflects the different roles of the
clergy and the laity. The hierarch stands still at the altar, facing
away from the multiplicity of the church’s interior. He enters the nave
of the church only to bring sacred objects like incense, bread and
wine, and holy oil into the realm of multiplicity, the spatially
extended nave. When he brings the censer into the nave, for example,
its fragrance is distributed to the laity there, just as the bread and
wine are later distributed in the eucharistic rite. The hierarch then
returns to the altar, and takes up again his own proper object of
contemplation, the intelligible source of the rites. The laity, on the
other hand, remain within the spatially extended nave, but orient
themselves toward the altar, where the sacred objects are raised for
their contemplation. Before this contemplation can occur, the
catechumens, penitents, and the demon-possessed must be removed
from the church. Their orientation toward the material prevents them
from adequately contemplating the intelligible truth through its
visible manifestation in the sacred objects.
Although the rites have intelligible contemplation as their goal, it
does not appear that non-ritual forms of contemplation, like
reading, can substitute for participation in the rites. Dionysian
contemplation is public, so that it may unite us to each other; it
involves prayer, so that it may unite us explicitly with the godhead;
it also requires bodies, since only the interaction of bodies allows
the contemplative act to include both components of our nature: body
and soul. The names used in Dionysius’ theological treatises acquire
their salvific power in this liturgical context. Although the rites
involve the performance of bodily actions, they clothe themselves in
words: the Hebrew and Christian scriptures, and the oral tradition of
the liturgical prayers. Only the silence and unknowing of the
Mystical Theology finds no clear place within the liturgical
rites of the hierarchy, since it transcends both the visible rites of
the laity and the intelligible contemplation of the clergy. It may be
that, just as some points of the liturgy call for a literal silence,
the intelligible contemplation of the hierarch at the altar must engage
in its own form of silence, so as to allow the appearance of the
godhead beyond naming. On this question, however, Dionysius is as
silent as the mystical theology which crowns his vision of the human
ascent to God.
Having examined the plan and content of these works let us now take
a brief look at some of the sources of Dionysius’ ideas (and associated
problems), and at the character of Dionysius’ writing in order to
determine what in practice he is actually doing and to see if there is
anything genuinely philosophical in his writing.
There is a major tension between Platonism and Christianity in
Dionysius’ writing. Luther expressed the negative side of this tension:
“Dionysius is most pernicious; he platonizes more than he
Christianizes” (Babylonian Captivity of the Church
(Weimarer Ausgabe 6, 562)). Von Balthasar has been more
positive, seeing Dionysius’ Christianization of Neoplatonism “as
a side-effect of his own properly theological endeavor”,
namely, “the clear realized synthesis of truth and beauty, of
theology and aesthetics” (The Glory of the Lord, vol. 2,
148–9). Perhaps one may suggest that neither Christianity nor
Platonism are side shows in Dionysius’ thought; They are rather
mutually important whole perspectives that do not get lost in the mix,
no matter how subordinate Neoplatonism nonetheless may be to
Christianity for Dionysius himself. Dionysius’ central concern is how a
triune God, that he calls—among other things—the
thearchy (god-rule; god-beginning), who is utterly
unknowable, unrestricted being, beyond individual substances, beyond
even goodness, can become manifest to, in, and through the whole of
creation in order to bring back all things to the hidden darkness of
their source. To this end Dionysius employs some major Neoplatonic
insights: (1) The abiding—procession—return or
conversion of all things as the creative and receptive expression of
what it means for anything created to be. In Proclus’ terms in the
Elements of Theology, prop. 35: “Every effect remains in
its cause, proceeds from it, and converts to it”. This is a way
of expressing the vertical connectedness of everything by identity,
difference, and the overcoming of difference by a return to identity
that constitutes the nature of anything that is caused. (2) The
hierarchical ordering of beings as an expression of both their natural
placements and their freedoms as well as the simultaneous immediacy,
without intermediary, of the unknown God’s presence (on hierarchy see
CH 3). Each thing and order bears relation to the whole or
manifests the whole, but “according to its own capacity”,
as the famous Neoplatonic saying puts it. A rock or a worm, for
instance, is a window upon the entire universe if you only know how to
look.
In the case of (1), the contrast between Dionysius and Neoplatonism
should not be taken to be a contrast between free divine creation, on
the one hand, and supposed emanation or illumination by necessity, on
the other, for divine/ human freedom and creation out of
“nothing” are conspicuous facets of Neoplatonic thought as
well. What we see in Dionysius is rather a new way of understanding the
abiding, outpouring, and return, not only concretely in relation to the
various hierarchies, and structurally in relation to the various works
(DN is more concerned with procession, for instance, while
EH, CH, and MT deal with different levels of
return), but also in relation to God’s providential love that, while
remaining supereminently identical to itself, and precontaining
everything within itself, nonetheless is the creative power overflowing
into its effects (procession) in order to bring them back into identity
(return): “[The Cause of All] is ‘all in all‘, as
scripture affirms, and certainly he is to be praised as being for all
things the creator and originator, the One who brings them to
completion, their preserver, their protector, and their home, the power
which returns them to itself, and all this in the one single,
irrepressible, and supreme act” (DN 1, 7,
596c–597a).
In the case of (2) (hierarchy and divine presence), Dionysius
emphasizes, much more so than the impression often suggested by
Neoplatonism, the directness of creation. Every being, no
matter where it is placed in the scale of beings and no matter how
dependent it might be on beings ontologically higher than it (e.g., for
human beings, angels) is directly and immediately dependent upon God in
and for its existence. Again, the contrasts often drawn between
Neoplatonism’s “flight of the alone to the alone” and
Dionysius’ community of hierarchy or between the supposed Neoplatonic
view that the One causes the existence of lower beings only through the
mediation of the higher, while Christianity sees creation as immediate
are simply false or too simplistic. Plotinus’ mysticism is not
“solitary” in the sense often supposed and, for Plotinus,
Porphyry, and Proclus, the One causes existence immediately and most
profoundly, whatever other influences enter into the complexity of
existence. What we see in Dionysius, by contrast, is a retention of
one’s place in hierarchy and a very concrete return to identity—in 
the case of human beings, for instance, through scripture, ritual,
and practical performance to a deeper union with God rather than a
simple, spatially conceived movement “up” the hierarchy.
More broadly still, we see in Dionysius’ thought new possibilities for
thinking about divine love, a love that combines beyond beingness and
unrestricted being, transcendence and yet even a kind of hyperessential
vulnerability in rather startling ways, new ways consequently of
thinking about both divine and human eros, about affectivity
(cf. Dionysius’ famous dictum about learning from sacred writers, or
discovering the truth oneself, or not only learning but
“experiencing the divine things” (pathein ta
theia) (DN 2, 9); and compare Aristotle, fr. 15 (Rose)
and Hebrews 5:8), about the nature of signification and the
limits of language (see section 4 below), about the theory of evil as
privation and non-being, however dependent this is upon one of
Proclus’ opuscula (cf. DN 4, 18–35), about the
aesthetic richness of this world in the light of theology and the life
of the Church, and even about the soul–body relation, though
anthropology is not a part of Dionysius’ primary concern (but see his
comments at EH 404B, 433c, 437a–440a, 441b, 553a ff,
565b–c).
Two examples will have to suffice here: (a) Dionysius’ remarkable
description of the ecstatic love of God and (b) his radical
transformation of the Neoplatonic intelligible and sensible worlds.
(a) First, Dionysius evidently cannot accept in any single
straightforward sense the Neoplatonic notion of a One that excludes the
possibility of expressing trinity. He therefore links in a new way God
as unrestricted being with God as utterly beyond being or any
determinate predications. At the same time in the DN he argues
that the ecstasy of love, which moves as a unifying force through
creation without departing from itself, is the divine nature. Dionysius
admits, in a note from Plato’s Phaedrus, that it is
characteristic of yearning not to allow “lovers to belong to
themselves but only to their loved ones” (DN 4, 13).
This is shown, he goes on to argue, by the providential care of the
greater for the lesser (a reference to Proclus’ divine providential
love (eros pronoetikos) from the Commentary on the First
Alcibiades, #56), by the love of equals, and by that of the lesser
for those better than them (a reference both to Aristotle’s seminal
treatment of friendship in the Nicomachean Ethics and to
Proclus’ returning or converting love (eros epistreptikos) in the same
Commentary above), as also in the case of St. Paul’s famous
dictum “I live now, not I, but Christ lives in me”
(Gal 2:20). Might then such a belonging to one’s beloved be
characteristic of God, if perhaps in a different sense?
Dionysius continues as follows:
The very notion is, of course, remarkable, the notion, that is, of a
kind of conjunction of opposites that strives to express the
inexpressible magnitude of divine love and even to suggest power and
vulnerability (or “almost” vulnerability: “as it
were, charmed (beguiled, enchanted)”), as well as the possibility
of a genuine two-way relation between Creator and creatures more
in tune with Biblical thought. Yet the expression remains Greek, for
the word thelgetai that Dionysius chooses is one that echoes
the conclusion of Agathon’s speech in the Symposium where
Agathon praises a Love that everyone “should hymn fairly, sharing
in the song he sings that enchants/charms/beguiles (thelgon)
the thought (phronema) of all gods and human beings”
(197c). Dionysius changes the context but does not really reverse the
polarity: it is God who still—like human beings—is
beguiled by love and affection for beings and “led down” to
dwell in them. Is this small detail and transposition merely
accidental? It may well be, but in this context, the use of such a verb
and thought is not accidental. Dionysius does not write as a Christian
walled off from pagan thought or as if he were a Neoplatonic thinker in
Christian disguise. Instead he provokes and delights in intertextuality
at every point.
(b) A second example is the precise nature of Dionysius’
transposition of Neoplatonic structure. Dionysius makes concrete and
accessible the whole world of Neoplatonism in the human, but
sacramental life of the Church, a world of ordinary people and things
whose significance can only be fully realized and perfected in the
celestial and supercelestial world.
For Classical Neoplatonism, especially in its Plotinian form, the
real truths that undergird or form the origins, beginnings
(archai) of the world of ordinary experience are the three
hypostases or realities of soul, intellect, and the One. The hypostases
are necessary, above all, to account for our experience of degrees of
unity and organization. The life-world accessible to our senses
is an organized, animated world, and this needs a more intensive degree
of unity to account for it, namely, the principle of life, that is,
soul and all souls. But even the world of soul is a “one and
many”, organized from within yet also requiring a principle of
unity and organization beyond itself. And the same is true even to a
higher degree of intellect. Intellect is a “one-many”, an
organized world of intellects, in each of which the whole of intellect
is present. Each is a sort of holographic reality. And because
intellect is still a world despite its more intensive unity than soul,
it requires a unity beyond intellect and beyond being to organize it
and to form the groundless ground of its own being from which it has
emerged.
So (1) in Neoplatonism, there are 3 hypostases, on the one hand,
namely, soul, intellect, and the One, and four cosmic or hypercosmic
dimensions, on the other: (i) the sensible world as a world of things;
(ii) the sensible world linked by the soul to the intelligible world;
(iii) the intelligible world itself composed of all intellects; and
finally (iv) the One or the Good, from which everything has come. And
(2) while everything has its appropriate “place” in this
hypostatic hierarchy, the presence of the Good is so immediate and so
accessible, that the presence is closer to each thing even than
intellect or soul. This is equally true in both Plotinus and Proclus.
Furthermore, (3) in order to explicate the derivation of each entity
from what comes before it, it is not sufficient as some scholars have
supposed that Neoplatonism should just have multiplied intermediaries
and indulged in an absurd proclivity for triads, such as Life, Wisdom,
Mind; Neoplatonism should rather be seen as a form of thought that
attempts to meditate upon, read the signs in, and represent how, as
precisely as possible, all beings are derived from and relate to the
One, to examine and explicate their dependence, open-endedness,
and radical interconnectedness without losing sight of the
multidimensional ordering of the universe (sensible/intelligible) and
of the fact that even the simplicity of things that have no intellect
or life, but only bare existence, springs from the power of the
One.
What Dionysius manages to do is both to capture this spirit
profoundly, and, therefore, transform it, as well as to make it
concrete and accessible in the scriptural, sacramental, and ordinary
experiences of Christian practitioners. Instead of the 4 dimensions of
the Neoplatonic universe, Dionysius has the following: (1) the sensible
world or Legal hierarchy, i.e., the world considered under the aspect
either of objective “thinginess” or of law, namely, in the
case of law, a world in which we are dependent upon prescriptions
rather than upon any deeper understanding, a world in which the
“mysteries” or hidden things (such as Baptism and the
Eucharist) are mere mechanical ceremonies and the Scriptures are given
only a literal meaning. For Dionysius (as for Plato), law is necessary,
but still deficient. The law of Moses, for instance, “gave only a
veiled contemplation as to enlighten without harm weak capacities for
sight” (EH 501c). Then (2) there follows the
ecclesiastical hierarchy, namely, the sensible world as the limbs of
the mystical body of Christ led by soul into the significance of the
intelligible or celestial hierarchy, where the symbols can begin to be
read. Its mysteries, both sensible and intelligible, are the Scriptures
and the Sacraments, its initiators the priests, and its initiated the
ones who receive them. From this perspective, Dionysius transforms
Neoplatonism radically but at the same time provokes entirely new
possibilities in the structures he transforms.
What is the general character of Dionysius’ writing and is there
anything philosophical in it? Dionysius presents us with complex
affirmative (kataphatic) and negative (apophatic)
forms of theology, exploring what we can say about God, what we mean by
our statements, discovering the necessity for us to talk too much about
God and to push language forms to their breaking points, and then to
see what we cannot say about God. Negation is important here at both
levels, in kataphatic theology as well as in
apophatic theology. This complex theory of signification and
its subversion is often referred to as negative theology: affirming our
affirmations, then negating them, and then negating the negations to
ensure that we do not make an idol out of a God about whom we know
nothing. But it is also much more than this.
Dionysius is practising forms of theological meditation in
the sense that the earlier Church Fathers had understood this, not as a
type of objectified, academic knowledge, but rather as a more complex,
intersubjective form of address, communion and contemplation. Dionysius
adopts the word theurgy, “god-work”, together with
theology, “god-word”, to describe the inmost reality
of this practice, adopting it from the later Neoplatonist understanding
of a hidden sympathy or interconnectedness between material things and
the sacred, divine significances resident in them by virtue of divine
power. Iamblichus, for instance, had denied that pure thought or
contemplation could bring about union with the divine. What was crucial
was the performance of certain ritual actions or theurgy,
“god-work”, in the belief that one could attain to
the divine by the incarnation of divine forces in material objects,
statues, or human beings through the divine power mirrored everywhere
in the universe and in the natural sympathy of all parts, and not just
by talking about the gods (theo-logy) or by looking at
them (theoria). For some modern critics, Dionysius’ adaptation
of pagan theurgy is analogous to calling the Christian sacraments
“magical”, which also results in the subsumption of
everything (morality as well as contemplation) to a form of magical
correspondence. But Dionysius does not understand theurgy in this way.
For him, “theurgy is the consummation (sygkephalaiosis)
of theology” (EH 432B), which is to say that God’s activity
within all the orders of nature does not abolish nature, morality,
contemplation, or science but rather completes them and makes possible
the divinization of human nature.
God’s work in all things, therefore, turns the world into a
reservoir of possibilities: at its lowest and most fragmented, it is
apparently a world of only individual, discrete things without
significance, but in reality it is a world vested with signs, symbols,
and hidden meanings as the multidimensional creation of a Triadic God.
Even the lowest things cannot simply be despised, for even in their
dissimilarity from the divine, they bear the capacity to signify the
divine more appropriately than supposedly worthier images. If we say
God is good, we run the risk of thinking we know entirely what we mean
and consequently of closing off a thought that has to be radically
open-ended, if not altogether subverted. If we liken God to a
“worm”, we subvert our own comfortable tendencies by being
shocked into filling the image with enquiry. So the Psalmist who uses
the worm image hides the sacred from those who would defile it
with a lack of understanding and yet points to the sacred in a
new way. This constant tension or dialectic between hiddenness and
openness pervades the whole of Dionysius’ meditative practice of
theology; and from this perspective Dionysius’ practice of writing is a
complex and necessarily deceptive or subversive process of reading the
encoded insight (or contemplation) in created things in such a way that
neither the perceptual beauty of the material thing nor the deeper
hidden beauty of the sign becomes a trap, an idol, or a vanishing point
but, instead, an activity that opens up an irresistibly beautiful world
in and to God.
There are several consequences of this. First, Dionysius’ writing is
a response, a preparing of the organs of reception for the love of God
in praise and worship. In theology, we are learning how to praise, to
hymn—not to catalogue—God. Second, such
writing is dialogic and intersubjective to its core in three ways: a)
As “in between” teacher and pupil, dialogical receptivity
and transmission, open-ended in both directions, characterize its
essential form; b) Even in the content of Dionysius’
various works, replete as they are with triads (which can so easily be
relegated to a Neoplatonic obscure penchant for providing intermediate
links), this open-ended in-betweenness, characteristic of
conversation and cooperation, is fundamental to the ranks of the
various hierarchies. In the EH, for instance, in the triad
catechumen (the one undergoing purification), sponsor or confirmed
Christian (the one being illumined), and hierarch (the one being
perfected and enlightening) (according to the traditional triadic form:
purification—illumination—perfection), the sponsor
first introduces the catechumen and both sponsor and catechumen are
then mediated by the work of the hierarch. For Dionysius at least (if
not in the actual operation of a “church”), hierarchy is
here not a question of domination, but rather of a genuine
open-endedness, testability through interlocutor and mediator,
community and responsibility. c) Finally, what completes both the form
and the content above all is prayer, since, for Dionysius (as
for Anselm much later), prayer is the primary form of reverential
philosophical thought and receptivity, “stretching ourselves
out”, as in Gregory of Nyssa, so as to be “lifted up”
(cf. DN 3). The most famous example of such prayer is the very
beginning of the MT, where in the address/request
“Triad, above substance, above god, above good” to
“make our way straight to the topmost peak, beyond knowing and
light, of the mystical scriptures—there where the simple,
absolute and unchangeable, mysteries of God’s speaking lie wrapped in
the darkness beyond light of secret—hidden silence”,
Timotheus, the disciple is also included, together with us the
readers.
All of this looks so alien to the spirit of modern philosophy that
we may well ask if there is anything really philosophical in Dionysius’
practice? The answer has to be affirmative, for there is a perfectly
reasonable pattern to the whole of Dionysius’ works. In addition,
Dionysius regards his own task as a kind of demonstration
(apodeixis) or showing (deixai). In the Divine
Names, such demonstration is given a Pauline resonance when
Dionysius states that we should hold to the scriptural revelation of
divine names “not in the persuasive words of human wisdom, but in
demonstration of the power granted by the Spirit” (DN
585b; cf. Paul 1 Cor 2–4). In other words, Dionysius here sees
scripture as providing the basis for a deeper understanding of
attribution or predication that will lead us beyond our own merely
human capacities. That such a demonstration involves the unpacking of
the symbolic, contemplative, and mystical significances of ordinary
things by the aid of scriptural testimony is clear in the
Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, which again starts from Dionysius’
purpose of demonstrating what the hierarchy comprises; and that this
includes arguments, reasons, the possibility of debate and even
improvement upon Dionysius’ demonstrations by his interlocutor becomes
clear too at the end of the work, when the literary humility that is
characteristic of his writing (cf. EH 568a ff.; DN
981c–984a; CH 340b) shows itself to be philosophically
justified by Dionysius’ ability to set out both sides of the case for
and against infant baptism in the understanding that he may not fully
be in possession of the most complete view of the situation and that
his interlocutor should “use” what he has said “as
steps (epanabathmois) to a higher ray of light”
(EH 568d–569a). This is a thought couched in terms very
reminiscent of Socrates’ wish in the Republic to subvert or
destroy hypotheses and use them as stepping stones to something better,
and it is also a thought not unworthy of Wittgenstein’s similar view at
the end of the Tractatus. The words immediately following make
clear the connection between charity of interpretation,
open-endedness and demonstration: “Be generous with me
then, my dear friend,… and show (deixon) to my eyes
that more beautiful and unified beauty which you may be able to
see”. Demonstration in this sense, then, includes much of what we
might consider to be properly philosophical, but at root it is also a
form of “divine reading” (lectio divina, or
meditative, prayerful reading) of nature and word, a receptive
recognition as a kind of method or making one’s way “to hear the
sacred words as receptively as possible, to be open to the divine
workings of God, to clear an uplifting path (hodopoiesis)
toward that inheritance that awaits us in heaven, and to accept our
most divine and sacred regeneration” (EH 392a).
In sum, Dionysius represents the instantaneous resonances, possible
in unusual circumstances, between forms of thought and practice that
may at first sight appear entirely divergent. He is therefore in some
respects a dangerous thinker, yet at the same time a forger of new
possibilities:
For the long commentary tradition, from John of Scythopolis to Aquinas
and Ficino, see bibliography 2 below. St. Gregory the Great refers to
Dionysius in his own commentary on the angels and probably had the
complete works at Rome. But the study of Dionysius did not take off in
the Latin West until the Byzantine emperor Michael the Stammerer sent
a copy of the Dionysian corpus as a gift to the Frankish king Louis
the Pious in 827. This copy served as the source of the first
translations of Dionysius into Latin. The first translation, made
around 838 by Hilduin, abbot of a monastery near Paris (who identified
Dionysius not only as St. Dionysius the Areopagite but also as the
first bishop of Paris), was so unintelligible that Charles II asked
the great Irish philosopher, John Scottus Eriugena, to make a new
translation that he completed in 862 and that was subsequently revised
with clarifications in 875. The influence of Dionysius is profound in
Eriugena’s own thought as it would be later in the Franciscan
tradition (especially Grosseteste and Bonaventure) and also to a
lesser extent in the Dominican (both Albert and Aquinas wrote
commentaries). In fact, the abiding-procession-return triad may be
said to form the essential structure of Aquinas’ unfinished
masterpiece, the Summa Theologica. The influence of
Dionysius’ ideas pervades not only the Italian and English
Renaissance, but also the Rhineland mystical writers, such as Meister
Eckhart (d. 1327), Tauler (d. 1361), Ruysbroeck (d. 1381), Gerson
(d. 1429), and later Denis the Carthusian (d. 1471) and Nicholas of
Cusa (d. 1464) (whose work On Learned Ignorance owes a debt
to Dionysius’ agnosia or unknowingness, as does also the
anonymous author of the Cloud of Unknowing) and the great
Spanish mystics, for example, St. John of the Cross (d. 1591). In the
Greek East, Dionysius’ On the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy
inspired a series of liturgical commentaries, beginning with
the Mystagogy of Maximus the Confessor (d. 662) and
continuing with works by Germanus of Constantinople (d. 733) and
Nicholas Cabasilas (d. 1390). Dionysius played a major role in the
Palamite controversy of the 14th century, cited both by Gregory
Palamas (d. 1359) and by his opponents. In the modern world, Dionysius
has received less attention, though he is of some importance for 19th
century German Idealist thought and also to a lesser extent for
English and American Romanticism. In the so-called
“postmodern” world, however, two thinkers who have written
about Dionysius with great insight are Jean-Luc Marion and Jacques
Derrida. Derrida, in particular, has been one of the few contemporary
philosophical thinkers, if not the only one, to realize the importance
of Dionysius in relation to deconstruction (a term he does not use
himself) and to explore the complex nature of prayer, address, and
denial in the context of the necessarily deceptive and open-ended
possibilities of negative theology.