Rooted in both clinical practice with patients and speculative
attempts to apprehend and delineate foundational concepts,
Freud's psychoanalysis aims to offer descriptions of psychical
structures that underlie and account for individual experience in the
variety of its empirical formations. Rather than the rationally
self-interested individual presumed by liberal political theory or the
self-contained and independent cogito presumed by Cartesian
epistemology, Freud puts forward a divided subject, unknown to itself,
an ‘I’ traversed by multiple agencies. According to
Kristeva, “Freud's discovery designated sexuality as the
nexus between language and society, drives and the socio-symbolic
order” (Kristeva 1984, 84). Freud's break-through
insight, in other words, is that sexual bonds initiate us into
subjectivity and civilization.
Freud distinguishes human drives from instincts insofar as drives
(unlike instincts) have no pre-given aim or object supplied by nature
and follow no pre-set biological path. For those who inhabit a
human world, drives might come to be attached to any number of aims or
objects, and felt through any number of bodily locales. Drives,
according to Freud, become specified in these ways through the
mediation of ideas or representations. Human embodiment is thus imbued
with opaque meaning, and sexuality emerges from a kind of instinctual
inadequacy that presents desire as a difficulty or problem, and propels
its increasing complexification.
The core of Freud's claim about the impact of sexuality on
psychic processes can be discerned starting with Freud's early works on
hysteria, although a crucial transformation in his thinking must be
clarified. In Studies in Hysteria (1895), written in
collaboration with Josef Breuer, Freud examines the phenomenon whereby
a symptom might exist in the absence of an organic lesion.
Hysteria is diagnosed when it is an idea or memory that makes one ill,
without any physical disease being the cause. By definition,
hysteria is ideogenic (caused by an idea), as it designates the process
by which a troubling but repressed idea is converted into a bodily
symptom. Freud initially posits that hysterical symptoms arise as
a result of violent childhood seduction (what today would be called
molestation), a real trauma that is then retroactively set in motion by
a second, comparatively more mild, event, after a period of
latency. The ‘seduction hypothesis’ is an attempt to
explain the aetiology of hysteria (the origins of neurosis) by the
traumatic force of a premature sexual experience occurring in early
childhood, an external event that impinges upon the psychical apparatus
but whose memory is repressed, cut off from consciousness. The
repressed memory becomes somatized (enacted on the body and in bodily
symptoms) when a later event, usually occurring in puberty, catalyzes
the earlier memory traces. The talking cure is developed as a way
to bring repressed memories forward and abreact or release them,
re-binding the idea to its severed and dispersed affect (unrepressing
it) and thereby dissolving the bodily symptom.
In the later Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality
(1905), Freud contends, contrary to the earlier supposition that
sexuality intervenes from the outside, that sexuality is a primordial
and innate (if also inchoate) force of infantile life, arising from the
bodily sensations that accompany the life processes. In the
interim between these two works, Freud had abandoned the seduction
hypothesis and replaced it with the thesis of infantile sexuality and
the idea that symptoms are brought about via the conflicts and
repressions of unconscious fantasy. In other words, it is no
longer repressed memory that makes one ill and traumatic sexual violence no longer figures
as the primary cause of symptoms. Instead of an actual past
experience, Freud posits fantasy as the determining factor of neurotic
symptoms. To understand the significance of this transition in
his thinking, we must grasp what Freud means by psychical reality and
its distinction from material reality. In contrast to the
historical, intersubjective domain of material reality, psychical
reality is the vital domain of fantasy and intra-psychic life,
operating independently of objective considerations of veracity.
In Freud's view, unconscious fantasies are not lies or
deceptions, but reveal a truth, not about the objective world, but
about the internal life of the subject, who one is and what one
wants. It might be better to say that fantasies conceal this
truth, since conscious articulations of desire and identity will often
lead us astray, expressing but distorting, manifesting but denying, the
subject's wishes.
As Freud documents in “Remembering, Repeating, and
Working-Through” (1914), the conjectural move from memory to
desire and from fact to fantasy is also a move from external scenes of
seduction to internal psychical acts, from past events to present-day
forces, and from passive submission to active maintenance of
discord. Instead of an external event impinging upon a
child's undeveloped sexuality, the idea of infantile sexuality
presupposes both an energetic drive force at work from earliest
childhood and an internal or intrapsychic dissension, a subject at odds
with its own desires. The thesis of infantile sexuality
universalizes the event of trauma, locating its experience in the
instinctual excitations that overwhelm the psychical apparatus which is
prematurely affected. In discarding the seduction hypothesis,
Freud not only discovers the domain of fantasy and psychical reality,
but he also paves the way for considering the energetics of the libido,
the intrapsychic conflict that is intrinsic to human being, and the
idea of responsibility for the dissonances of desire and the skirmishes
that shape a life and its patterns. While controversy has swirled
around Freud's rejection of the seduction hypothesis, without the
scandalous supposition of infantile sexuality there would be no
psychoanalytic theory of the unconscious. Although some
revisionists have argued that Freud abandons his principles and betrays
his patients, in fact Freud never abjures the reality of sexual abuse
or denies that some children are molested. Rather, the
transformation in his thinking concerns the aetiology of hysteria in a
diagnostic sense; neuroses are no longer said to originate in
(presumably rare) childhood sexual violence, and thus they can be seen
to pervade rather than oppose whatever might be considered normal
sexual development. In discarding the idea of a primary or
ontological innocence of the psyche which is then violently imposed
upon from the outside, Freud arrives at the fundamental premise of
psychoanalytic thought.
The exemplar of this phantasmatic activity of the unconscious is the
Oedipal Complex. In Freud's later writings on femininity,
including “Femininity” (1933), “Female
Sexuality” (1931), and “On the Psychological Consequences
of the Anatomical Distinction between the Sexes” (1925), Freud
postulates that the little girl's Oedipal Complex runs a
different course than the little boy's and holds a different
relation to castration anxiety. Crucially, Freud maintains that
femininity cannot be grasped from a biological or conventional
perspective (Freud 1968 [1933], 114). Another way of putting this
is that sexual difference is centrally concerned with psychical reality
rather than material reality, with the realm of fantasy rather than
nature or culture. The Oedipal story is the story of psychic
development, the story of how we become subjects and in becoming
subjects, how we become sexually differentiated.
The boy and the girl start off, pre-Oedipally, in the same emotional
place, attached to the mother, and it is because of this shared
starting point that Freud claims the little girl is a little man; they
are not yet distinct or sexually differentiated. It is for this
reason as well that Freud maintains the idea of a single, masculine,
libido: the libido is not neutral in Freud's view since its
original object is the mother and this desire for the mother is
associated by Freud with masculinity and activity, just as he
associates infant clitoral pleasure with phallic enjoyment. Still
Freud acknowledges that in the libido's most primordial stages,
there can be no sexual distinction. It is not until children pass
through the Oedipal Complex that they can properly be said to have a
genital organization since this is acquired through a relation to
castration and is the last stage in sexual development (following oral,
anal, and phallic stages). Hence both children at infancy are
‘little men,’ their desire construed through the terms of a
single masculine libido.
Freud seems genuinely puzzled by how femininity comes about:
given the girl's prehistory of love and attachment to the mother,
why would she switch allegiances to the father? And since, prior
to genital organization, she too goes through a phallic (masturbatory)
stage, why would she switch the site of bodily pleasure from the
clitoris to the vagina? These are among the mysteries he means to
designate when referring to the riddle of femininity. That he
understands it to be a riddle also intimates that he understands sexual
identity not as a natural pre-given essence, rooted in anatomy, but
rather as a form of individuation and differentiation realized through
complex interaction between the bodily drives and familial others.
The boy's story is more seamless and continuous since he
retains his phallic pleasure and, although he must displace the
immediate object of his desire (no longer the mother, but someone like
her), can look forward to substitute objects. The boy's
Oedipal attachment to the mother follows uninterruptedly from a
pre-Oedipal attachment and it is brought to an end by the threat of
castration emanating from the father. At the conclusion of the
Oedipal Complex the boy identifies with the father, establishes a
super-ego within, and abandons the immediate object of desire with the
promise that he too will one day possess a similar object modeled on
the mother. But the girl's Oedipal Complex is necessarily
more complicated since it can only be instigated by a break from the
pre-Oedipal relation to the mother and is therefore a secondary
formation. Freud postulates that it is the realization that the
beloved mother is castrated that prompts the little girl to turn her
love toward her father. For the girl, in other words, castration
does not resolve the Oedipal Complex but leads her to enter it, and for
this reason Freud claims that it is never wholly brought to a
conclusion or demolished, thus accounting, in his view, for
girls' weaker super-egos and lesser capacity for
sublimation. The girl turns from her mother not in fear but in
contempt and because of envy for what the mother does not
possess. The father represents for her neither a threat (she
finds herself already castrated) nor the prospect of a fulfilled desire
in the future (the only replacement for the missing penis is a child of
her own), as he does for the boy who can identify with him and hope to
eventually have what he has. The father's only promise is
thus as a refuge from loss, represented by the mother who bears this
loss and who is at fault for the girl's own. In the
girl's Oedipal scenario, the father, unlike the castrated mother,
stands for the virile capacity of desire itself, which she herself
lacks but might reclaim through another man's provision of the
opportunity to have a child. In the trajectory of the
girl's Oedipal Complex, femininity is realized as the desire to
be the object of masculine desire.
Freud's theories of sexuality and the unconscious implicate
not only individual psychology but also the constitution of social
life. Formed in ambivalent relation to others, sexuality and
sexual identity permeate the bonds of civilization and ramify
throughout all social relations. In turning his attention to
broader cultural questions, Freud offers a story or myth of the origin
of political structures that parallels and echoes his understanding of
the individual psyche. To understand the political import of the
Oedipal Complex, it will be helpful to place it more generally within
the scope of Freud's understanding of group psychology. In
Group Psychology and the Analysis of the Ego (1921), Freud
contests any clear-cut opposition between group and individual
psychology and alleges that human infancy is from the beginning
immersed in a world of others. Even in ostensibly individual
psychology, there is always another involved, as model or object, as
site of identification or as object of love. Identification and
love, which form the core of identity, are already “social
phenomena” and, inversely social relations are themselves
premised on developments that occur in the family. It is thus
mistaken to sever individual from group psychology as though they were
not by nature intermingled or to suppose that there is some kind of
special social instinct separate from the drives that energize the
individual. Put another way, the individual subject is neither
formed wholly independently in a kind of solitary interiority nor
formed as merely an effect of exterior social forces.
Totem and Taboo (1913) is Freud's attempt to explain
the origin of social life, the bonds that, on his account, hold
men together, on the basis of psychic phenomena. Freud
envisages a primitive pre-political sociality in which a primal horde
of brothers is oppressed by a powerful father who claims for himself
all the women, all the enjoyment, available in the community. The
brothers are deprived or exiled, and they are motivated to bond
together to overthrow the father; they aim, that is, to kill the father
and take for themselves his women, offenses that mirror, at a
collective level, the Oedipal desires of male children. In
Freud's story, the father's murder results not in lawless
freedom and unlimited access to sexual objects (a fraternal civil war),
but rather in the creation of totems and taboos—the primal
father becomes a totemic figure, a revered ancestral object, and the
brother's actions in killing him and claiming his women are
reconceived as the prohibited transgressions of murder and
incest. The two blood taboos that are instituted as law, the
prohibitions on incest and murder, thus have a common origin and emerge
simultaneously, and together they mandate the social processes of
exogamy (marriage outside one's own kin) and totemism (communal
bonds of affiliation established through the medium of a common
ancestor). Freud thereby allies political formation with the two primal
wishes of children and the two crimes of Oedipus, predicating exogamy
on the incest taboo, and fraternal bonds on the sacralization of life
and the prohibition on murder. Totemism and
exogamy also entail fraternal equality: in order that no one take the
place of the father and assume his singular power, the brothers are
equally constrained and equally respected, the distribution of women
equally allotted. Depicting the creation of a stable society
grounded in law (though founded in violence), Freud's tale serves
as a paradigm for not only rudimentary, but also enduring and
contemporary, political relations, which he views as rooted in
unconscious drives but oriented toward achieving a stabilization or
equilibrium of those drives at the communal level. In
Freud's narrative, it is the father/son relationship that matters
for the establishment of this semi-stable political relation, a band of
brothers with equal rights. This lineage founds political order
in murderous fraternity, with women as objects of exchange not
citizen-subjects.
Moreover, in explaining the advent of lawful existence, Freud
identifies something recalcitrant, intractable in social
arrangements—a kind of self-assault (the super-ego) that links
pleasure with aggression, and thus that carries a potentially
destabilizing force. The sons' attitude toward the father is one of
ambivalence, hatred qualified by admiration, murder followed by guilt
and remorse. The brothers commemorate this loss and maintain their
bond with one another in the public ceremony of the totem meal where
together they consume a common substance (the father's body
transubstantiated into the sacrificed totem), and thereby affirm their
fellowship and mutual obligation. This confirmation of shared paternal
substance and kinship, and the collective affect of love, loss, guilt,
and mourning, maintains ties of identity. The law that emerges from
the father's murder ritualizes and enforces his edicts, forbidding
murder and incest in the public realm, and takes hold internally in
the superegoic 'no' of prohibition, producing a permanent sense of guilt
that drives civilization and renders it a perpetual
source of discontent. Women, however, appear not as subjects of the law but
as objects of its exchange; moreover, given the indefinite
prolongation of their Oedipal Complex, women will be more likely to be
hostile to the edicts of civilization insofar as these infringe upon
family life.
The relation between father and son is also contained, if concealed,
in the account Freud offers in The Ego and the Id (1923) of
how the ego emerges. There Freud writes that identification is
“the earliest expression of an emotional tie with another
person” (Freud 1968 [1923], 37), i.e., it is prior to
object-cathexes or relations of desire. The primordial libidinal,
but non-objectal, attachment is with the father of “personal
prehistory” (Freud 1968 [1923], 37). The subsequent and recurring
retreat from object-cathexis (investment of instinctual energy in an
object) to identification (withdrawal of that energy into the self), is
the primary mechanism of ego-formation, taking the lost object into
oneself. Since the ego is the “precipitate” of
abandoned objects, it is configured through loss, in a melancholy
reabsorption that incorporates via identification objects from which
the ego would otherwise be exiled. Just as the father retains
dominance in political life after his death, so he dominates psychic
life even prior to the ego's formation. In Freudian theory,
the father's reign is pervasive, his sovereignty extended in
every domain. Freud's privileging of paternal and fraternal
relations provides the impetus for much of psychoanalytic feminism, as
will be discussed below.
Even in Freud's circle, not all analysts agreed with
Freud's assessment and there were debates concerning
women's sexuality and the roles of castration and penis envy
therein, notably among Karl Abraham, Ernest Jones, Helene Deutsch, and
Karen Horney. Horney in particular argued for an inherent
feminine disposition that is not merely a secondary formation premised
on castration and she took issue with the ostensible effects of penis
envy and women's supposed feelings of inferiority. As with
some later feminist criticisms of Freud, Horney attempted to retrieve
female sexuality, and by extension a valid form of feminine existence,
by appealing to a genuinely independent nature and holding culture
culpable for women's subordinate status. By thus
reasserting the primacy of biological and social forces, however,
Horney disputes precisely the idea that is central to Freud's
hypothesis and that marks psychoanalysis as a unique field of inquiry,
that of a distinctive psychical realm of representation that is
unconscious.
Somewhat later, Simone de Beauvoir addressed the discourse of
psychoanalysis in The Second Sex (1989 [1949]), devoting an
early chapter to her distrust of “The Psychoanalytic Point of
View” (Beauvoir 1989, 38–52). Like Horney, Beauvoir
denounces Freud's idea that there is but one, masculine, libido
and no feminine libido with “its own original nature”
(Beauvoir 1989, 39). Freud, in her view, takes for granted what
he needs to account for, namely the value placed on virility.
Beauvoir takes Freud to task for not considering the social origins of
masculine and paternal power and privilege and deems his theory
inadequate to account for woman's otherness. If women envy
men, she argues, it is because of the social power and privilege they
enjoy, and not because of anatomical superiority. Unlike the
determinisms and objectifications of human life offered by biological
science (which treats human beings as determinate objects in the
natural world and thus not as free or self-determining subjects with
agency), but similar to the “economic monism” of historical
materialism (Beauvoir 1989, 52), psychoanalysis is characterized by
Beauvoir as “sexual monism” (Beauvoir 1989, 52): everything
in its purview is interpreted through a single lens. Beauvoir
indicates at the opening of the chapter that psychoanalysis offers a
perspective which she does “not intend to criticize as a
whole” (Beauvoir 1989, 38), especially since it does understand
that “no factor becomes involved in the psychic life without
having taken on human significance” (Beauvoir 1989, 38), but she
questions both its dogmatic reliance on determinate elements of
development and its “embarrassing flexibility on a basis of rigid
concepts” (Beauvoir 1989, 38). Most seriously, in
Beauvoir's view, psychoanalysis allots to women the same destiny
of self-division and conflict between subjectivity and femininity that
follows from social dictates and biological norms. Psychoanalysis
presents the characteristics of femininity and subjectivity as
divergent paths, incompatible with one another. Women might be
able to be full persons, subjects with agency, but only at the expense
of their femininity; or they can embark on the course of femininity, but
only by sacrificing their independence and agency. This either/or
between the masculinization of subjectivity and the submission to
femininity retains the moral, political, and metaphysical opposition
between free self-creation and corporeal incarceration that precludes
the possibility of being both a woman and a subject.
Beauvoir alleges that psychoanalysis holds women to a fixed destiny,
a developmental and teleological life process, precisely insofar as it
defines subjects with reference to a past beyond their control.
 By assigning to women an essence or determinate
identity, the psychoanalytic reliance on sexual categories once again
renders woman as the other to a subject rather than a subject herself,
and thereby denies her existential freedom. In Beauvoir's view,
however, if women are not themselves subjects, but that in contrast
with which men's subjectivities are constituted, they are still
freely responsible for this situation, insofar as women collaborate in
this process by seeing themselves through the eyes of men, justifying
their existence through their romantic relationships, and attempting to
mirror men's being. By casting women's otherness as
an effect not only of their social situation (with its power
relations), but also of their choices (and hence responsibility), Beauvoir
preserves women's freedom, unlike the psychoanalytic discourse
that she claims rejects “the idea of choice and the correlated
concept of value” (Beauvoir 1989, 45).
Beauvoir's misgivings about Freud's account of
femininity stem from two sources, a feminist suspicion that women, in
psychoanalytic discourse, are understood on the basis of a masculine
model, and an existentialist conviction that human
beings are self-defining, choosing themselves through their
own actions. Following her existentialist convictions, Beauvoir
insists that even when women abdicate their freedom, they do so as
agents responsible for their own destinies, not merely as passive
victims following a developmentally determined fate. Following
her feminist convictions, Beauvoir recognizes that women's
choices may be constrained by powerful social and bodily forces, but
insists that women nonetheless bear ultimate responsibility for
realizing their own possibilities by emancipating themselves. Her
reading of Freud is thus largely directed against the perceived
determinism of psychoanalysis and less against the idea of an
unconscious per se, although she does want to defend the notion of a
unitary subject at the origin of choice, insisting that “psychic
life is not a mosaic, it is a single whole in every one of its aspects
and we must respect that unity” (Beauvoir 1989, 44), a
supposition that certainly limits the affinities between existentialism
and psychoanalysis. Nonetheless, Beauvoir's dispute with
Freud appears to be less about whether constraint is part of our being
in the world, and more about where that constraint is located:
psychoanalysis locates constraint internally, in the constitution of
the psyche itself, not only in the situations of social life, whereas
Beauvoir locates it externally, in the cultural forces that impact even
the most intimate sense of our own agency. Beauvoir thus claims
that her own interpretations of women's femininity will disclose
women in their liberty, oriented freely by the future and not simply explained
by a past. She thereby ratifies the promise of existentialism for
feminism.
Beauvoir's own project of elucidating the paradoxical relation
between femininity and subjectivity is nonetheless influenced by
psychoanalytic concepts and appropriates its theoretical insights in
various ways. The Second Sex highlights the practices by
which women become women through their appropriation of bodily (sexual)
difference, as well as the manner in which a human being generally is
limited and compelled by bodily and unconscious forces. Indeed
Beauvoir and Freud seem to agree that one is not born but becomes a
woman, i.e., that femininity involves some sort of (social or
psychical) process rather than a biological or natural given.
Both are interested in the ‘how’ of this process, how one
becomes a woman, although, as discussed above, they disagree about what
this ‘how’ is. Moreover, in her articulation of
women's ambivalent attitudes toward embodiment, sexuality, and
maternity, Beauvoir is clearly indebted to the attention psychoanalytic
practice gives to listening to women's first person narratives,
interpreting the emotional impact of events that can not be easily
categorized, and heeding attachments that carry both affection and
resentment. Like Freud, Beauvoir recognizes that we are embodied
as sexual beings and that our bodies not only testify to our own
finitude and limits but also matter as sites of encounters with others,
encounters that are multivalent—including loving connections
and threatening defenses, moments of affirmation and of
dissolution. Beauvoir refuses any political program that demands
we deny our bodily possibilities in order to be fully human and
proclaims that bodies and bodily difference are integral to projects of
selfhood, and not merely accidental contingencies of a rational and
disembodied mind. For Beauvoir, as for Freud, there is no such
thing as a disembodied, non-sexed human being; any ideal of the human
apart from sexual identity or difference is an abstraction that can
only be affirmed on the basis of a mind/body dualism. Femininity
for her is not merely a mystification that imprisons women's
subjectivity (even if its social construal has had this effect).
Finally, like Freud, Beauvoir is fully aware of the impact on children
of their domestic situation, the way familial life resonates with
meaning that informs not only intimate relations but relations to the
larger world.
Beauvoir's portrayal of living a feminine existence, of sexual
difference as an embodied situation, developed through a series of
phenomenological descriptions, tries to understand how women have been
cast as other in the drama of masculine subjectivity and doubts the
premise that this is an historical event, occurring at some definitive
point in time. Beauvoir herself has often been (mis)read in a way
analogous to her (mis)reading of psychoanalysis, as proferring a
determinate succession of experiences for women, rather than describing
socially extant processes. But The Second Sex depicts
the effects on women's character of inequitable social
arrangements; it neither proffers a normalized destiny for women nor
presupposes a common metaphysical identity. 
Even so, in many ways Beauvoir's work is more easily aligned with
the sociologically oriented Anglo-American feminists than with Irigaray
and Kristeva.
In considering the background of psychoanalytic feminism, a large
portion of which is rooted in or aligned with what gets called French
Feminism, the French context of psychoanalytic theory is also crucial,
and in particular the work of Jacques Lacan. Lacan's work
has been both a powerful influence on, and an object of critique for,
feminist appropriations of psychoanalysis, and his ideas have been
taken up, transformed, and challenged by Luce Irigaray and Julia
Kristeva (both of whom are discussed below), among others.
Lacan's work is both praised for its de-biologization of Freud
and pilloried for its phallocentrism. These two aspects are in
fact imbricated, as both hinge on Lacan's elaboration of language
as a symbolic order that precedes and makes possible human
subjectivity. In order to stay focused on the feminist deployment
of the psychoanalytic theoretical apparatus, I will concentrate first
on Lacan's understanding of the intersection of language and law
in the symbolic order, and then on his account of the ego's
formation in the imaginary order. The imaginary and symbolic are
modes of representation that make the world and the self
intelligible. The symbolic is Lacan's term for the way in
which reality becomes intelligible and takes on meaning and
significance, through words; the imaginary refers to the mode of
intelligibility offered by images. The concordant and conflicting
mediation of the world by images and words coordinates, or makes sense
of, reality and instigates both subjectivity and social relations.
As with Freud, maternal and paternal figures are central to his
account of subjectivity.
Lacan characterizes his own work as fundamentally a return to Freud,
albeit one that brings the insights of structural linguistics,
especially Ferdinand de Saussure and Roman Jakobson, and structural
anthropology, primarily Claude Levi-Strauss, into the domain of
psychoanalysis. Even so, his returns are also revisions; he not
only retrieves but renovates Freud's central concepts.
According to Lacan, Freud's theory of sexuality anticipates a
theory of signification that he could not yet elaborate. The
anthropological and linguistic lineage of Lacan's thought is
central to this conceptualization of a “symbolic
universe.” Lacan explicitly endorses Levi-Strauss's
conception of the transcendental law at the origin of human sociality
as the incest taboo; he writes that “the fundamental or primary
law, the one where culture begins in opposition to nature, is the law
of the prohibition of incest” (Lacan 1992 [1986], 66–7).
The intrusion of language and law institutes a break with nature, one
that transfigures the world by imbuing it with meaning. Following
the logic of Totem and Taboo, social identities are
constituted on the basis of exclusions that establish kinship
networks. These social bonds are maintained through mandates and
prohibitions (what is required and what is forbidden), and in
particular through the mandate of exogamy (with its structures of
exchange) which determines that “the Oedipus complex is both
universal and contingent” (Lacan 1991b [1978], 33): paternal
prohibition provides the conditions for human sociality without the
prohibition itself being innate. Lacan thus accounts for the
transgenerational transmission of elementary structures of kinship
without appealing to any natural necessity. Lacan takes this law
of kinship (dictating desire and its limits) to be fundamentally
co-terminous with the order of language since it is instituted through
a symbolic articulation.
Lacan calls the paternal prohibition (the incest taboo) the
‘law of the father,’ and he develops the connection between
law and language by way of a pun. In French Non (No) and
Nom (Name) sound alike. The no that prohibits (the
father's law) and the name that establishes authority (the
father's name or the proper name) are conferred
simultaneously. By submitting to the law of the father (his no
and name) the child assumes a symbolic identity and place in the human
universe of meaning, i.e., the child becomes a subject, bound by law
and bearer of language. With this compliance, the child takes on
a life of desire and incompletion, pursuing lost objects with no firm
ground or fixed purpose, a lack of plenitude in being that Lacan
designates as castration.
As discussed above in the section on Freud, Freud understands women
to be ‘castrated,’ deprived of a penis, and men to live
under the threat of castration. Lacan complicates this
theoretical perspective by deeming all subjects, all speaking beings,
to be castrated, by which he means deprived of the phallus, which is
not the same as the penis. While the penis is a biological organ,
the phallus is a signifier which invokes or points toward other
signifiers, or toward a system of signifiers. The moment of
castration is the primordial moment of loss, the fracturing of being by
language. With entry into the reign of law and language, subjects
are cut off from the immediacy of bodily experience; relations to
things, and to oneself and others, are now mediated by words and
representations. The distinction between phallus and penis can be
seen to carry forward Freud's own distinction between instinct
and drive, since in each case the latter term indicates that the
experience of the body has meaning insofar as it takes place in the
medium of language and in a world of others.
Castration takes place when the child recognizes lack in the mother
and her maternal omnipotence is annulled. The mother, for the
child, ceases to be the all-powerful provider of every satisfaction as
she herself is a desiring being deprived of satisfaction. This
conundrum of maternal desire points elsewhere, toward “the law
introduced by the father” (Lacan 2006 [1970], 582). The
paternal prohibition intervenes to warn the child that s/he is not the
answer to the question of the mother's desire. Galvanized
by the mother's lack, the law of the father (which need not be
embodied in an actual person) takes the place of the desire of the
mother, substitutes for it, occludes it. Indeed the paternal
function, working through name and law, indicates a dead father, just
as Freud understands in Totem and Taboo that the murdered
father, the precondition of law, is stronger than the living one.
In the Lacanian version of the Oedipal Complex, human beings achieve a
sexual position by traversing the Oedipal Complex, i.e., by submitting
to castration, also called the phallic function, and thereby entering
into signification. There is thus no sexual difference prior to
representation.
Here we arrive at the phallocentrism, if not the patriarchalism, of
Lacan's thought, the central role of the phallus in his thinking
about subjectivity and sexual difference. According to Lacan, the
phallus instates the signifier into the subject regardless of any
“anatomical distinction between the sexes” (Lacan 2006
[1970], 576). The phallus, in other words, is responsible for the
child's passage from immersion in perceptual immediacy to a
representational domain in which the world takes on meaning. It
is this claim that de-biologizes Freud, since it articulates the
function of the phallus apart from any particular bodily attributes.
Lacan insists that the phallus is a signifier, not an image or
bodily organ, and that in relation to it all are castrated. The
father's No effectively says to the child ‘you are not the
object of the mother's desire’ or ‘you are not her
phallus, the thing that fulfills her.’ As such, it also conveys
the message that the child too is lacking or desiring. Although Lacan
distinguishes between a ‘seeming to be’ which characterizes
femininity, in the attempt to be the phallus that one is not (to be the
object of desire), from a ‘seeming to have’ which
characterizes masculinity in the attempt to have the phallus that one
does not have (to possess the object of desire), he still maintains
that everyone is lacking the phallus in some way, either in the mode of
not being it or in the mode of not having it. Nonetheless, while Lacan
centers human experience not on the supposed biological fixity of
anatomical distinctions, but on a representational economy, the phallus
retains its associations with masculinity and remains the focal point
of sexual identity.
As already discussed, Freud had theorized that there is only one
libido and it is masculine. In “The Signification of the
Phallus,” Lacan explicitly addresses, and criticizes, the
alternative view that there might be two libidos, which he satirizes as
a kind of sexual equality, the “equality of natural rights”
(Lacan 2006 [1970], 577). This is the view I earlier mentioned as
belonging to Karen Horney who defends the idea of an inherent,
underived, biologically-based, nature of feminine sexuality.
Lacan also disparages the idea that the final stage of genital
sexuality is directed toward the entire person in his or her
personhood, the achievement of a kind of tenderness toward the whole
being of another (Lacan 2006 [1970], 580). Lacan disputes both of
these positions as normalizing and biologizing and claims that the
psyche is not harmonized with nature in either of these ways. In
contrast to this fantasy of sexual complementarity, the idea that
men's and women's sexual interests converge, Freud, Lacan
claims, understood “the essential disturbance of human
sexuality” (Lacan 2006 [1970], 575), that we are always lacking,
always in search of aims and objects, “the deviation of
man's needs due to the fact that he speaks” (Lacan 2006
[1970], 579), and that this discordance means also that there is no
symmetrical or harmonious sexual relation between well-integrated and
self-realized men and women.
This symbolic dimension of human relations must be clearly
distinguished from the imaginary as the domain of the ego. The
imaginary order is most fundamentally and plainly elucidated in
Lacan's essay “The Mirror Stage as Formative of the
I Function as Revealed in Psychoanalytic Experience,”
where he elaborates Freud's insights in The Ego and the
Id, taking up the idea that the ego is first and foremost a bodily
ego formed through the “projection of a surface” (Freud
1968 [1923], 27), a visual representation of an external veneer or
façade. Lacan concurs, writing that consciousness occurs
“each time … there's a surface such that it can
produce what is called an image” (Lacan 1991b [1978],
49). The mirror stage commences, pre-Oedipally, when the infant
is around 6 months old. The infant at this age is literally
infans, without speech and moreover, without bodily
coordination or motor control. Born prematurely, at a point prior
to any adequate capacity for self-care, the infant is wholly
instinctually inept. By identifying itself with an image, a
coherent unity that contrasts to its own fragmented and dispersed
bodily existence, the infant forms a preliminary self, one animated by
an illusion but an illusion that allows it to anticipate its own future
organization.
Lacan's account of the mirror stage establishes the ego as
fundamentally imaginary, formed through the infant's specular
captivation with the unitary form presented in images of itself which
it assumes as its own through identification. This perceptual
image of coherent bodily contours and boundaries is at odds with the
infant's motor incapacity and the “turbulent
movements” or fragmented drives that animate its own body and
processes. The ego, with its illusion of self-mastery and
containment, is formed through misrecognition, an anticipatory
identification with an idealized, stable, self-enclosed, citadel of
self. This identification with an image of oneself sets up the
ego as rivalrous, narcissistic, and aggressive. While the act of
misrecognition becomes the basis for a sense of self or for
self-consciousness, it is also an act of alienation, exclusion, or
self-division; by erecting an imaginary ideal, representing oneself in
a perfected image, the self is also split and rendered unconscious to
itself, cut off from the multiplicity of dispersed drives.
For Lacan, the ego is a “knot of imaginary servitude”
(Lacan 2006 [1970], 80) and thus the site of the subject's
stagnancy and inertia. The mirror stage also forms the basis of
Lacan's critique of ego psychology; whereas the latter takes
strengthening the ego to be the aim of analytic practice, Lacan takes
the aspirations of the ego to be a “lure” (Lacan 2006
[1970], 78) of self-possession, an armor that rigidifies the subject
and resists freedom and movement, a defensive structure that provides
an alienating identity. With this theory of the ego, Lacan
presents a subject at odds with itself, non-self-identical, in
“primordial Discord” (Lacan 2006 [1970], 78), torn between
unity and anarchy, organization and chaos, integration and
fragmentation. The withdrawal of the self from itself proceeds
from the reflexivity of representational practices of language.
The ego as object is trapped in oppositional relationships, including
with itself, and cannot therefore be equated with the subject as
speaking being who, in the use of words, signifiers that are
differentially related to one another, is capable of more complex plays
of presence and absence; language, unlike perception (I perceive an
object or I don't), can evoke simultaneously the presence and the
absence of the thing (I can represent objects that are not
present).
While the advent of the symbolic order is tied to Oedipalization,
and the imaginary order is tied to the pre-Oedipal period, it would be
mistaken to think of the imaginary and symbolic in only developmental
or chronological terms as they are also ongoing structures of
experience. Even in the seemingly dyadic relation between mother and
child, Lacan argues, a third term is always at work. Initially
this third term is simply a question, the question of the
mother's desire, of what she wants, but already this question
interrupts or destabilizes the child's position, rents dyadic
unity, even as the child takes itself to be this object of desire,
since it indicates in a preliminary way that the mother is lacking,
that she is not whole, entire, omnipotent. The question of
desire, in other words, means that the phallic mother of the imaginary
is already the castrated mother of the symbolic, and that the imaginary
unity of the ego, with its oppositional relations, is bound to be
sublated into a symbolic relation of difference.
It is important, however, not to conflate the mother with the woman
or maternity with femininity. Lacan famously declares that
“there's no such thing as Woman, Woman with a capital
W indicating the universal” (Lacan, 1998 [1975], 72), a
metaphysical concept with determinate and substantive content. In
asserting that ‘The Woman’ does not exist, Lacan indicates
that something of the psyche escapes castration, limitation,
signification, and the demands of the law of the father. Symbolic
and imaginary representations leave something out, hit their limit,
produce an impasse that presents a fracture or fissure in the symbolic
order. While sexual difference is mediated by representation, it
cannot be fully contained within its terms.
The idea that sexual difference is not biologically innate but
established through language and law has led some feminists to conclude
that Lacan is on the side of social constructionism but this would be
mistaken. Lacan is adamant that the choice between nature and
culture is a false one, and that language is not a “social
phenomenon” (Lacan 2006 [1970], 578). Language and law,
personified by the name of the father, are irreducible to social
practices and processes and are in fact the condition of their
possibility. While Lacan is criticized for constituting sexual
difference on the basis of the phallic function and subjectivity on the
basis of paternal authority, what the Lacanian project does provide for
feminism is not the idea of a malleable culture, susceptible to human
mastery, as distinct from a fixed nature that escapes it, but the more
disconcerting idea that human mastery, of ourselves, of others, of
nature and culture, is itself illusory. Rather than the promise
of a rational progress toward greater and greater equality, respect for
individual difference, and universality, Lacan's insights, like
Freud's, point toward the precariousness of identity and social
bonds and to the instability of the drives that attach us to one
another. Subjectivity and sexuality are not natural adaptations
but deviations, detours, breaks from nature that undermine identity and
divide or limit any unity of self or community. In addition to
the distinctiveness of his method, focus, and insight, this willingness
to grapple with the limits of self-mastery is one reason why Lacan has been taken
as an innovative and amenable resource for some feminist theorists.
In exposing the inadequacies of social or empirical accounts of
sexual difference, identity, and the power relations built upon them,
Lacan confronts the fundamental structures at the root of empirical
socio-historical circumstances.
French Feminism is in many ways a misnomer since the authors thus
characterized are rarely of French origin or nationality (although
French is the predominant language of their writing) and not
necessarily overtly self-identified as feminist. The writers
affiliated with French Feminism, including Luce Irigaray, Julia
Kristeva, Sarah Kofman, Catherine Clement, and Helene Cixous, among
others, variously ask about the relation between the maternal and the
feminine, doubt that we can say what a woman is, worry about
Freud's lack of attention to mothers, play with writing style,
wonder about feminine subjectivity, ask if women can be subjects or
citizens without adapting to masculine norms, impeach Lacan's
phallocentrism, and suspect that access to language assimilates women
into neutralized brothers. Unlike Beauvoir, they are
philosophically and temperamentally more sympathetic to the split of
subjectivity detailed by psychoanalysis, the idea that I am not I, that
self-division rather than self-identity is the fundamental feature of
human existence, and therefore that the subject is not a unitary point
of origin for choice. Like Beauvoir, they ask whether the
structures of femininity and the structures of subjectivity are
compatible, commensurable, reconcilable, and are vexed by the
apprehension that they are fundamentally at odds. While they aim
to disentangle femininity from maternity, and provide a critique of
their conflation, they also take seriously the significance of
maternity for women and for children of both sexes. Because they
concede the limits of socio-cultural explanations for women's
lack of standing in the social contract, and take femininity and the
feminine body as points of departure for speech or writing, they have
often been accused of essentialism. Below I focus on the work of
Irigaray and Kristeva, examining how they engage with and transform the
ideas of Freud and Lacan, and how they articulate sexual difference as
integrally connected to the foundation, and disruption, of a symbolic
order.
Irigaray characterizes her own project as taking place in three
stages: first, deconstructing the masculine subject; second,
figuring the possibility for a feminine subject; and third, construing
an intersubjectivity that respects sexual difference (Irigaray 1995a,
96). Sexual difference, in her view, is not a system of
domination to be overcome but a cultural process and practice to be
achieved and nourished; the actual relations of domination and
subordination that characterize Western politics, society, history,
literature, language, and law, epitomize for Irigaray the reign of
sexual indifference, the fraternal order of equal
brothers/citizens that is inattentive to the self-division of nature,
its immanent sexual differentiation. Irigaray's writings
implicate Freud in this culture of sexual indifference, his work a
symptom of masculine metaphysics and its dream of self-identity and
self-mastery. I will discuss Irigaray's understanding of
sexual indifference further below, after first describing and
elucidating her style of writing.
Irigaray's writing style is often mimetic, an approach that she
claims has been “historically assigned to the
feminine” (Irigaray 1985b, 76) and therefore that she adopts
deliberately in order to “try to recover the place of her
exploitation by discourse” (Irigaray 1985b, 76).
Irigaray's writing does not proceed propositionally, laying down
theses and supporting arguments, nor is it formulated through
conventionally linear explanations. This is not to say, of
course, that she does not draw conclusions or that her writing is empty
of insight. But these insights are reached by mirroring the text
she is reading, allowing it to play out its tensions and
contradictions, juxtaposing, transfiguring, and intensifying its crises
and putting its parapraxes (its textual and conceptual slips of the
tongue) on display. Her writing is driven by the vagaries of the
author before her, and makes appear, or unmasks, the structuring forces
of the text and its impasses and limits. This reading strategy
goes to work on the unconscious logic of a text, revealing the
author's underlying fantasies and anxieties by amplifying and
reflecting them, and thereby attempting to loosen the masculine hold on
the symbolic by conveying its unstated postulates and conversing from a
different perspective. Intently attentive to the signifer, to the words
and silences of psychoanalytic texts, she aims to retrieve the bodily
in language, something underlying symbolic processes of representation,
and to invent a new language and imagine new forms.
Speculum of the Other Woman (her dissertation and the work
that got her exiled from the Lacanian school) includes “The
Blind Spot of an Old Dream of Symmetry,” Irigaray's long
essay on Freud's writings on femininity. Irigaray's
essay on Freud begins by tackling head-on his articulation of the
riddle of femininity (Irigaray 1985a, 13) in his lecture on
“Femininity.” Here already we can recognize both
Irigaray's unique style and her critical project, and the way
these two features of her writing are imbricated and entangled with one
another, propelling a distinctively mimetic method of reading,
repeating, and reproducing the text, mirroring Freud's speculative
discourse but also transforming and sabotaging its terms. Her
text opens as Freud's does, with his words, and is comprised of
long quotations that follow the course of Freud's essay.
Insofar as this appropriation might at first appear as the passive
listening of a dutiful daughter, Irigaray performs a kind of masquerade
of femininity: receptive, submissive, obedient. But this
performance does not merely reiterate or reproduce; in exemplifying the
ways in which women have no language of their own, can only speak in or
through the voice of the father, she is establishing the symbolic
terrain upon which any critique must move while also subverting its
presuppositions. Her own words are inserted as commentary,
question, counterpoint, breaking open the Freudian text, usurping its
privileges, revealing its wounds. By engaging Freud in a
conversation, she insists on her own status as a speaking subject, and
not merely an object of study in support of the expansion of a sexist
science.
Irigaray's insistence on her own speech is especially crucial
given Freud's reprimand to women: “you are yourselves
the problem” (Freud 1968 [1933], 113). Freud's lecture had
ventured to address the question of sexual difference, and had
endeavored to complicate rather than simplify our perceptions and
certainties concerning its meaning and status. Irigaray, however,
by retrieving and replaying Freud's voice, attempts to show that
he remains caught up in certainties and dogmatisms about sex, so that
ultimately his discourse is one of sexual indifference, as I
will discuss next. Freud is thus not the master of
Irigaray's essay: his words do not so much determine her
trajectory as reveal their own (freely) associative character, his own
unmastery, the egoic and identificatory fantasies that haunt his texts
on femininity.
According to Irigaray, Freud's work is sexually indifferent
because of its assumption of a kind of symmetry or harmony between
masculine and feminine identities and sexualities. With regard to
sexual desire, Freud assumes that ‘normal’ women will
desire men and be desired by them and thus that each sex can fulfill
the longings of the other. With regard to sexual identity, Freud
models the feminine Oedipal Complex on a masculine paradigm and origin,
with the feminine as its distorted copy. In both cases, Freud
contrives to understand women as the complementary other to men, an
other modeled on the same. Irigaray considers this to be a monosexual,
homosocial economy governed by specular opposition or mirroring. It is
this sexual indifference that is referenced in the title of
Irigaray's essay as “the old dream of
symmetry.” But, as also indicated by her title, Irigaray
believes this dream is premised on a “blindspot.”
Freud characterizes the girl's relation to the maternal figure as
an “especially inexorable repression” (Freud 1968 [1931],
226) and views the little girl as a little man; the mother/daughter
relation is not seen or apprehended by him. The crime here, in
Irigaray's view, is matricide and the suppression of maternal
genealogies or lines of descent. The law of the father, the
patrimonial order by which sons inherit the father's name by
submitting to his prohibitions, privileging this name over the maternal
body, appropriates even birth to the father. The maternal lineage
is suppressed. Irigaray argues that this means that a pre-Oedipal
mother-daughter relationship has not been taken up by the signifying
order; in fact that order retroactively denies that such a relation
ever existed, since a daughter becomes a daughter properly, becomes
feminized or sexually differentiated (as a girl or woman), only post-Oedipally. In
Lacanian terms, Freud excludes the mother/daughter relation from the
symbolic order. Not only is the maternal connection lost or
repressed, but the ability to name or identify the loss as a loss is
also barred. Banished from memory, the loss of the mother cannot
be mourned. Irigaray claims that it is this genealogical
asymmetry, with the father's name memorialized and the
mother's body sacrificed to it, that sustains the legitimacy of
patriarchy and propels the fantasy of a harmony of sexual difference,
the conviction that the sexes are reciprocal and complementary in their
identities and desires.
Sexual difference, in Irigaray's reading of Freud, is thus
subsumed under or derived from “the problematics of
sameness” (Irigaray 1985a, 26) and oriented by the fantasy of
auto-genesis, being one's own origin, an ideal of self-mastery
that is not threatened by any real difference. Freud's
account of sexuality presupposes that the sexual subject is male, and
even that there are no women, only mothers or those destined to become
mothers, that is that the meaning of being a woman is fully exhausted
in the meaning of being a mother. In the psychical pre-history of
the little girl as elaborated in the idea that “the little girl
is a little man” (Freud 1968 [1933], 118), she will not have been
a daughter. As little girls diverge from little boys, as they
cease to be little men, they are expected to be appealing visual
objects, the mirror of men's desires, enabling men to represent
themselves, shore up their self-image with an adoring reflection.
Irigaray sees in this account a masculine desire for women's
desire to be directed toward men. Women are expected to provide the
mirror that supports men's projects, nurtures and nourishes their
identities, energizes their drive for mastery, by presenting themselves
as an alter ego. This imaginary, specular, order is matricidal,
feeding on the blood of women, leaving unpaid its fundamental debt to
the mother, and abandoning the subjectivity of the daughter. By
repressing dependence on the maternal origin of life, the masculine is
marked as originary, that from which differentiation proceeds. What
functions as a primal loss for boys/sons, the cause of their desire,
can only function as a gap in language, an absence of meaning for
girls/daughters, an exile from desire, language, and other women, an
irretrievable void that cannot be recuperated in language because it is
instigated by language, by the entry into symbolic order called forth
by the paternal prohibition of the father's no/name.
Irigaray's concern is that for Freud, the mother is only a mirror
and her relationship is always to a son; there are no mother/daughter
relations. Not only is Western culture premised on matricide,
which she claims is more primordial than the patricide of Totem and
Taboo, but this matricide is forgotten and the mother remains
unmourned.
Repressing any maternal genealogy, political life has been
predicated on the lineage between fathers and sons and the bonds of
brotherhood, appropriating universality and citizenship to men and
rendering women as objects of their desire and exchange. The
exploitation of women is not merely a phenomenon that takes place
within the social order, it is its very foundation and premise.
Irigaray calls the fraternal order “hom(m)osexuality,”
meaning both that it is an order of the same (homo) and that it is the
order of men (homme): the regime of sexual indifference ignores
relations among women, and especially between mothers and daughters,
and situates women as the medium of men's alliances with one
another, as the buried support and energetic reserves of the body
politic. This forgetting of the mother supports vertical and horizontal
relations between men but leaves women unrepresented in language (as
subjects) and incapable of achieving representation in the body politic
(as citizens). Irigaray's own project thus aims to criticize the
hom(m)osexual order and its specular economy, to reinvigorate
mother/daughter relations to make possible a feminine subjectivity, and
to cultivate sexual difference in the political realm, in civil
identity. Developing the resources for transformation, i.e., for
women to become citizens and subjects, entails disrupting the
transmission of power between men and rethinking the passage from
nature to culture represented by the Oedipal Complex. This task
requires intervening in the symbolic and imaginary realms, creating a
new language that would not be severed from the body and ending the
division of labor between love and law.
The structure of the representational economy, its association of
subjectivity with masculinity, precludes the convergence of being a
woman and being a speaking being. Although of course there are
words for women, these words constitute her only with reference to
masculinity, as a photographic negative of man, or in response to a
patriarchal exertion of feminine norms and expectations. They
secure her in a masculine universe, they say in advance what she is,
they render her captive to an idea of feminine essence. By
contrast, Irigaray seeks to create a representation for women that
would not be a designation of what she is, defining her by and holding
her to some concrete essence, but would allow her to exist on her own
terms and speak for herself. Irigaray believes that this type of
self-determination is barred by the exclusion of mother-daughter
genealogies, an exclusion that works to assign woman to a maternal
destiny (as mothers of men). Neither denotative nor expressive,
neither speaking of woman (as though woman were a determinate object of
study) nor speaking as one (as though the aim were to express an inner
essence), Irigaray's writing establishes a reflexive relation to
language. By acquiescing, in her mimetic writing style, to the
cultural expectation of feminine artifice, Irigaray stages her own
exiled agency and thereby extends the possibilities for being a woman
to include being not only an object in or reference of language but a
transformer of language. Without claiming to say what a woman
really is, to get right what the symbolic order gets wrong, she shows
that in speaking differently, the very meaning of being a woman (or
being a man) can be transformed, so that sexual difference remains open
to new possibilities. She thus does not so much refute Freud's
account of the Oedipal Complex and the little girl's purported
masculinity as re-present its primal crime against women, the Oedipal
exclusion of maternal dependency, thereby altering the scene of its
representation.
Irigaray also challenges the Lacanian idea of the law of the father
and the phallic signifier, pillorying the way in which natural birth
has been assigned to maternity while cultural birth is assigned to
paternity, equating the woman-mother with body and the man-father with
language and law, and relegating the bodily process of parturition
(maternity) to mute nature while valorizing the symbolic process of
legitimation (paternity) as constitutive of civilization. Human
subjectivity has been masculinized, while human flesh is both feminized
and animalized. Irigaray aims to provoke a legitimation crisis in
the paternal legacy and the name of the father that bestows on the
child a political and familial identity.
The erasure of sexual difference enables a metaphysics of substance
in which sexual identity is a matter of fixed and pre-determined being,
of underlying essences or common properties, rather than a form of
becoming and self-generation. Irigaray's genealogical
account of sexual difference resists both the idea of an invariant
universal (and hence sexually neutral) human essence that subtends (and
thereby expels) human multiplicity and the idea of sexual essences that
consist in self-enclosed identities between which there is an
uncrossable divide. That is, she rejects the ontological
assumptions of both universal equality and separatism, taking both to
be implicitly masculine and patriarchal, bound to a metaphysical
essentialism that aims to capture diversity in first or final
principles, or to subsume particulars under general concepts.
Challenging the logic of the one and the many, Irigaray takes the
self-division of nature, its being-two, as a model of autonomous
self-development. When Irigaray says that human nature is two, she does
not mean that there are two fixed sexual substances, but that to be
natural is to be embodied, finite, divided, that the fundamental
character of nature is growth through differentiation. Human
nature, in her view, is not disembodied or neutral; it is always
distinctively sexed or sexuate, a neologism for sexed, but not
necessarily erotic, bodily difference. Viewing the natural body
as self-differentiating rather than self-identical, Irigaray also
articulates distinctive capacities for generation corresponding to
differing morphological possibilities (the possibilities of bodily
form) that entail “different subjective configurations”
(Irigaray 2001 [1994], 137). 
If human nature is two, and always divided, Irigaray argues, then
civil identity is also two and divided; the two of nature needs to be
brought into the two of culture. The one is an illusion of
patriarchy, while the two threatens the phallocentric order and
challenges the supposition that universality must be singular.
The scandalous idea of a feminine subjectivity means that the universal
must be doubled. Doubling the universal does not, for Irigaray,
mean merely replacing a neutral universality (something that holds true
for all human beings) with two wholly distinct and separate truths. A
universal that has been doubled has also been split or divided from
itself, no longer one, and Irigaray sees in this the possibility for
cultivating sexual difference and overcoming a culture of sexual
indifference that is dependent on the idea of the generic
human.
If the other has always been formulated on the basis of the same, as
merely a specific difference from some underlying generic identity,
there has only been complementarity and opposition, there has never
been an actual other subject, each with its own path of development.
Women have mirrored men's subjectivities, reflected their
egos back to them in an illusion of wholeness and unity, submitted to
the demand that they perform or masquerade femininity. Given this
criticism of the exploitation of otherness, and despite her criticism
of a feminist politics of equality, Irigaray thus cannot be
simplistically aligned with the project of difference, if this means
asserting features of women's biological or social specificity as
essential and innately valuable attributes, since these Irigaray takes
to be framed already and in advance by a patriarchal symbolic and
imaginary order. Irigaray's affirmation of sexual
difference does not mean affirming the feminine traits that have been
ascribed to women, since these are actually, in her view, the traits of
sexual indifference, defined only with reference to men. Sexual
difference has yet to appear and it is her task to bring it into
being.
Being-two is counterposed to the metaphysical alteration between the
one and the many, with its incessant oscillation between the
essentialism of a rigid identity and the laissez-faire contingency,
independent of any determining essence, of unlimited multiplicity and
atomistic individualism. It is on the basis of this being-two
that Irigaray attempts to build an ethics of sexual difference, a
political relation between-two, with civil rights appropriate to
sexuate identity, so that one's identity as a citizen is not cut
off from the body, and law is not severed from nature. If sexual
difference is not simply an effect of oppression, then freedom does not
mean freedom from sexed embodiment. While political neutrality
can only recognize disembodied subjects deprived of their bodily life,
for Irigaray, citizens are not abstractions. The doubled,
non-neutral, universal allows for distinctively feminine (and
distinctively masculine) subjects to be recognized
politically.
Similarly to Beauvoir, who ascertains that language and culture
constitute the subject as masculine, and the feminine as other to him,
Irigaray maintains that inhabiting a feminine subjectivity is
paradoxical in a fraternal social order. But, for Irigaray, both
Beauvoir and Freud fail to address sexual difference insofar as they
retain a singular notion of masculine subjectivity, Freud because he
presumes the libido is always masculine, and Beauvoir because she
reckons the aim of women's emancipation as equality with men (for
instance by concluding the Second Sex with a call to
brotherhood and seeming, arguably, to be calling for women to
assimilate to masculine norms of selfhood). Irigaray rejects the
project of equality, since ‘equality’ can only ever mean
equality to men, and proposes instead doubling the notion of
subjectivity in line with the subject's own self-division.
This might seem unnecessary, especially to equality-oriented feminists,
since of course, women can, at least in much of the liberal, democratic
world, be citizen-subjects, just like men. But Irigaray's
point is that women can have the rights of men only so long as they are
like men, i.e., insofar as they are brothers, subsumed into the neutral
individuality of the liberal social contract. This purportedly
equal access to citizenship and subjectivity thus does not resolve the
paradox, since it merely takes the side of subjectivity over that of
femininity, retaining the constitution of the feminine as lack, the
inverted image of man, the other of the same, that which stands in the
way of political agency and obstructs autonomy, and which thus must be
overcome in order to achieve self-determination. In the
prevailing social contract, femininity and subjectivity remain
opposed.
Irigaray does not think she can say what a woman is or what
femininity is. Familial, social, and symbolic mechanisms of
exchange have denied femininity its own images and language, fashioning
women through men's language, images, and desires, and thereby
producing an apparent, but false, symmetry within a single, monotonous,
language. Against this homogeny, with its same and its other,
Irigaray construes the production or work of sexual difference, sexual
difference as a relation between-two, to be the path toward liberating
both femininity and masculinity from their metaphysical and political
constraints by allowing them each to cultivate their own interdependent
natures. The idea of a between-two does not mean a singular path
that is shared by both, but rather indicates, in addition to the value
of a specifically feminine sexual identity and a specifically masculine
sexual identity, the ethical path of an intersubjective relationality
that allows them to appreciate and value one another. Since the
between-two is premised on being-two (self-differentiated), it is in
the cultivation of this sexual difference that we will find the
possibility of an ethical sexual relation, what Irigaray calls an
ethics of sexual difference. For Irigaray, then, contra Lacan,
there can be a sexual relation. Irigaray's undertaking thus
involves not merely an assertion of difference against equality, nor
certainly a simple reversal; such stances take place on the basis of an
already existing symbolic order and imaginary relation and are
themselves what need to be interrogated. To find a language for
feminine sexuality and feminine subjectivity, we must go “back
through the dominant discourse” (Irigaray 1985b, 119) with its
metaphysical assumptions of substance or essence, and its concept of
identity which adheres to the regime of sexual indifference.
Although Irigaray often invokes the maternal as the source of life
and subjectivity, she does not equate maternity with femininity or the
mother with the woman. Among many others, Jessica Benjamin (whose
work will be discussed below) seems to share the mistaken view that
Irigaray's theoretical project is premised upon valorizing
“female genitals as a starting point for a different
desire” (Benjamin 1988, 276). No doubt this
(mis)interpretation stems from Irigaray's difficult text
“When Our Lips Speak Together.” But what Irigaray
means by ‘speaking from the body’ is moving away from a
singular conception of origin and desire, and most especially the
origin of desire. Her writing of women's bodies, like her
retrieval of mother/daughter genealogies is a strategy of language and
imagination, situating the body as fluid border, the site of the
overflow of culture into nature and vice versa, rather than a
self-enclosed egoic center. She is not an essentialist who views
women's biology as their destiny. Instead she challenges
the nature/culture divide, and the either/or of biology or
civilization.
While often grouped together in cursory overviews of so-called
French Feminism, Irigaray and Kristeva have fundamentally disparate
projects (and locations in the academy), both with regard to their
critical analyses and with regard to their political enterprises.
Whereas Irigaray was a student of Lacan who breaks with (even as she is
inspired by) his teachings from her earliest work, Kristeva has a much
more ambiguous relationship to his school of thought and was never his
student or attended his seminars. Their respective views can
perhaps best be captured with respect to their attitude toward the
symbolic violence of castration (the Oedipal Complex) and the social
contract. As explained above, Irigaray envisions a sexuate
culture that would overcome the Oedipal demands of a sacrificial
economy and restore feminine genealogies to the work of civilization.
Kristeva, by contrast, argues that there is no subjectivity
beyond sacrifice and does not believe Oedipus can or should be
overcome. Kristeva and Irigaray do not form a cohort and they do
not respond to each other's writings. But they both have
psychoanalytic training and practices and both attend to the body and
the drives, taking up the theme of loss or exile of the mother's
body and the impact of matricide on social relations.
Kristeva even (echoing Irigaray) condemns humanism as “the
fraternity of the same” (Kristeva 1998, 168) and, like Irigaray,
she plays with writing style, offering experimental, innovative,
sometimes imagistic portraits of psychical moods, maternal practices,
and artistic endeavors.
Kristeva's connection to feminist thought is also unsettled
and volatile, although her focus on questions pertaining to language,
femininity, and the maternal body has made her work amenable to
feminist interest and development. In her essay
“Women's Time,” she classifies the feminist movement
into three distinct times or generations, each with its own approach to
and vision of justice. The first generation is universalist in
principle and aspires to give women a place within history and the
social contract; this generation takes equality as its mission and
asserts women's identification with the dominant values of
rationality. Kristeva aligns Beauvoir with this project of
pursuing access to universal subjectivity. The second generation
is reactive, rejecting the idea of assimilation to values taken to be
masculine; this generation insists on feminine difference. While
Kristeva does not mention Irigaray, it seems clear that Kristeva would
align her with this strategy and the project of recognizing feminine
specificity. In Kristeva's view, the first generation is so
committed to universal equality that it denies bodily difference, and
the second generation is so committed to difference that it refuses to
partake of a history it deems to be masculine. The third
generation follows neither the path of fixing identity nor the path of
neutralizing difference in the medium of universality. Instead it
embraces ambiguity and non-identity, respecting both the value of
participating in historical time and the ineluctability of bodily
difference. The third generation recognizes that it is as
embodied beings that we enter into the social contract and community
with others.
Since Kristeva believes that there is no subjectivity and no
sociality without the violence of the symbolic contract and the
splitting of subjectivity, the feminism that she proposes would not
take refuge from this violence either by standing outside history (as
the second generation does), or by denying women's bodies and
desires (as the first generation does). Taking seriously the
intransigence of sexual difference, and the violent fractures within
and of identity, Kristeva advocates feminist support for alienation
that would not pretend to reconcile the rupture
between body and law (what Lacan calls castration) and would refuse the
solace of identity. Kristeva mentions the bodily experience of
pregnancy, an experience of being split, of being two in one, as
manifesting the instability of, and alterity within, identity.
This insistence on the fragility and precariousness of identity can
be grasped in the first instance by looking at Kristeva's
understanding of the drives and language. Kristeva introduces the
notion of the semiotic as the affective dimension of language that
facilitates its energetic movement. The semiotic is the
materiality of language, its tonal and rhythmic qualities, its bodily
force. In Kristeva's account, the drives are not simply
excluded by language but also inscribed as an alien element within it.
While more primitive than signification, the semiotic
participates in signifying practices.
Kristeva's elaboration of the semiotic situates it at a point
prior to the Lacanian imaginary, i.e., prior to the moment at which the
infant identifies with its own ego and distinguishes itself from an
object. Still in porous relation to another body, without clear
borders or limits, the infant is propelled by the anarchic,
heterogenous, rhythmic flow of drive energy “which has no thesis
and no position” (Kristeva 1984, 26). Mobile and
provisional, moving through the body of the not-yet subject, the
semiotic is a chaotic force anterior to language, unlocalizable because
it courses through an as yet undifferentiated materiality in which the
infantile body is not yet distinct from the maternal body.
Kristeva calls this stage pre-thetic since it is prior to the
reign of propositions, judgments, positions, and theses, these being
subsequent possibilities that might arrest or seize a movement that
always exceeds them. Since the image is itself a kind of sign, a
first representation, the advent of the imaginary demarcates the first
thetic break, a break from nature and into the realm of convention.
What Kristeva means by the thetic then includes both the imaginary (the
mirror stage) and the symbolic (the Oedipal Complex) dimensions of
Lacan. Only with the advent of the thetic phase, the “threshold
of language” (Kristeva 1984, 45), can there be said to be
signification proper along with negation as judgment. In thereby
altering Lacan's understanding of the imaginary or mirror stage,
she attends to the pre-Oedipal mother/child relation in a way he does
not, while also elaborating on an underdeveloped theme in Freud's
work.
Freud distinguishes between auto-erotism and primary narcissism,
attributing to the latter a new psychical action. While
auto-erotism precedes the formation of the ego and the individuation of
the self, primary narcissism only ensues with the preliminary
development of egoic unity, when the ego is able to demarcate itself
from the surrounding world and take itself for an object. The semiotic
corresponds to the diffuse drive energy of auto-erotism and Kristeva
takes up Freud's challenge to assess the psychical action of
ego-formation that enables primary narcissism, which she attributes to
a primary identification with the imaginary father. In Tales of
Love, which jumps off from Freud's claim in The Ego and
the Id that identification with the father of individual
pre-history is prior to and more primary than object-cathexis, Kristeva
offers an original account of the pre-Oedipal period, finding a
paternal figure there. Since the bond of identification precedes
any bond with objects, the imaginary father is what makes possible the
initial separation between ego and object, or rather proto-ego and
proto-object. This father is not the first object, but the first
identification, making language and love possible, movement within and
among a world of others. This identification, Kristeva
hypothesizes, alters maternal space, interrupts it with something
beyond its borders. But it also indicates that there is a
preliminary pre-thetic symbolic capacity at work in infantile
life. As the drives expel, detach, or isolate a proto-object, the
space of differentiation is supported by identification with the
imaginary father, who holds it open. The imaginary father is here
associated with love (unlike the symbolic father who is associated with
law), an invitation to language and subjectivity, to become a being who
can have relations with others.
Kristeva accepts Freud's insight that the thetic break, or the
prohibitory break of the Oedipal Complex and the dead father, that
founds law and sociality is violent and murderous (Kristeva 1984,
70). The capacity for representation transforms our perceptual
universe, entailing that no bodily immediacy is possible, that all
experience will be mediated by significatory practices and filtered
through the ego's organization. But although this rent in
experience is suffered by the signifying child as a loss to be mourned,
it is also, Kristeva claims, a gift, the gift of a self that can
navigate language. With words and memories available, the child
can compensate for the loss of objects in perception (in the exemplary
case, learning to endure the mother's absence). On
Kristeva's view, “the structural violence of
language's irruption as the murder of soma, the transformation of
the body, the captation of drives” (Kristeva 1984, 75), is
preceded by a loving father who makes possible the preliminary
individuation of the infant from the mother. Although symbolic
violence is integral to the maintenance of a social order, the promise
of language on Kristeva's account is initially brought forward by
love, not by law. Unlike Irigaray, who wants to retrieve the
pre-Oedipal period in order to reclaim feminine genealogies, Kristeva
wants only to redescribe it in order to reassess its import for
individuation and creative self-transformation. She takes
infantile matricide (separation from the mother) to be a necessary
condition of subjectivity and not a remnant of patriarchal
violence.
Still, Kristeva charts differing arcs for the paternal and maternal
relationships in the constitution of subjectivity. The imaginary
father empowers a new psychic space premised on the distinction between
internal and external, self and other. The breaking in of the
signifier inaugurates individuation, the assumption of bodily form and
corporeal unity, and thereby entails loss of the maternal body.
In Kristeva's view, matricide, repression of the maternal body,
is a necessary event on the way to subjectivity. The bodily
exchange between mother and child can serve as a barrier to love,
imprisoning the child in an overwhelming bond. The loving mother
provides the first approach to language and law by demonstrating love
for an object who is not the child, a third outside this dyad who makes
the dyadic relationship itself possible and releases the emotional
pressure of it. The loving father proffers a kind of promise,
even as he disrupts fusion with the mother, allowing and encouraging
the child to represent itself. Kristeva's thought here
follows Lacan's idea that a mother whose only object of desire is
her child will produce a child who cannot move beyond the psychosis of
being the phallus for her.
Signification and language are sites of sublimation, creative
workings out of the drives, but they can be stalled by abjection and
melancholia which are both preconditions for, but also limits to,
subjectification. Kristeva identifies abjection and melancholia
as sites of psychical (and social) crisis rooted in narcissistic
disorder. In them, the tenuous processes of ego-formation risk
collapse; faced with difficulty clarifying the boundaries of the self,
the subject reverts to ambivalent aggressivity. While Kristeva
understands narcissism to be a fundamental, if unstable, structure of
the psyche, abjection and melancholia are problematic relations to the
maternal body and its loss (or the malfunctioning of its loss). They
are experiences of disintegration or dissolution of the ego without
reorganization, but also of its rabid fortification.
In Powers of Horror: An Essay on Abjection, the abject is
described as neither inside nor outside, neither subject nor object,
neither self nor other, troubling identity and order with the
instability of boundaries, borders, and limits. Kristeva offers
the examples of bodily fluids, sweat, blood, pus, milk, as non-objects
that are banished in the course of ego-formation. These
non-objects also include the mother's body; indeed the maternal
body is a privileged site of abjection, as it is that which must be
excluded in order for individuation and separation to take place, so
that one can distinguish self from other and establish a dyadic
(imaginary) relation out of undifferentiated maternal space or the
semiotic chora, the pre-spatial relation of fluid (although
not entirely unregulated) drives. The abject can then also be
called the primally repressed, primal because prior not only to the
secondary symbolic prohibition of the incest taboo or Oedipal Complex,
but also prior to the establishment of any identity.
The abject is horrifying, repellent, but also fascinating; it is
strange but familiar. The process of abjection is not merely a
symptom of phobia or borderline disorder, but a necessary and even
recurring ordeal in any subject's transition to identification
with the father and accession to language. It is the most archaic
form of negativity, an exclusion or expulsion which functions by
securing the borders of self, carving a space, marking a divide, out of
which the ego can emerge. Kristeva calls it the violent attempt
“to release the hold of maternal entity” (Kristeva
1982, 13) or rather what will have been the mother, since this process
establishes the distinction between the maternal body and the infant in
the first place, making possible primary narcissism. The abject
exposes the precariousness of the subject/object divide, the fragility
of identity, the need to constitute oneself against the threat of, and
desire for, dissolution.
Although this is not primarily Kristeva's concern, abjection
can also be understood as a social phenomenon, one with political
implications. The psychically primitive experience of egoic
instability can be propelled into the political realm, and be socially
accentuated or reinforced. In abjection, subjects confront what
they must exclude or expel in order to maintain identity, that is, they
confront their own dependency, mortality, finitude, and
materiality. This strangeness experienced at the porous edges of
identity can rebound into troubling relations with others, including
especially with others who are perceived as lacking intelligible
identity, socially marginal, or refusing cultural assimilation.
While Kristeva's own focus is less on what is abjected than
the process of abjection, that is, less on the expelled non-object than
on the violence of separation that brings objects (and others) into
being, her work provides the theoretical underpinnings to ask questions
about who bears the burden of abjection, how and why some are figured
as inhuman, animal, or alien. Her analysis of abjection exposes the
ways in which social life is dependent on jettisoning or containing
disorder and disruption, and managing the fear of contamination.
The confusion of borders, the ambivalent relation to maternal space
at the outskirts of narcissism, also motivates melancholia. The
idea of the maternal as the primally repressed recurs in Black
Sun: Depression and Melancholia, where Kristeva claims,
“matricide is our vital necessity” (Kristeva 1989, 27), the
founding partition that facilitates the birth and growth of the
ego. Kristeva praises the child, the “intrepid
wanderer” who “leaves the crib to meet the mother in the
realm of representations” (Kristeva 1989, 41). Maintaining
that the organization of the psyche is premised on loss, Kristeva also
understands that the suffering entailed by loss can derail the
formation of a self, that loss itself can become the dominant reality
for some who are unable to establish a secure relation to
themselves. While mourning, for Kristeva as for Freud, enables a
subject to, gradually and painfully, let go of loss by establishing a
relation in language to it, melancholia is a practice which enables the
subject to hold onto lost objects, most especially the mother or,
better, the dead (or repressed) mother. The loving father
facilitates mourning and linguistic creativity; the deadening mother
disables self-creation. The generation of the ego out of
expulsion, the division of unity, is not simply a mournful moment, but
also potentially a joyous one, in which the advent of language, the
promise of the father, offers reparation and life with a world of
others, so that words can provide the nourishment that the breast
previously had. The father makes it possible to fill the void
with language and the formation of signifying bonds.
In Kristeva's understanding of melancholic breakdown, the
problem is similar to the one discussed above in the section on
Irigaray, namely that loss goes unnamed and unmourned but thereby stays
unprocessed within, leaving the subject stagnant and inert.
Women, in Kristeva's view, suffer the loss of creativity, the
incapacity for sublimation, more severely than men. Women's
access to language, and creative self-transformation, is more
vulnerable to disturbance both because of the (previously discussed)
inexorable repression of their pre-Oedipal relation to the mother and
because they have greater difficulty establishing a primary
identification with the father. Whereas the loss of the archaic bond
with the maternal body is (potentially) sublated by men into the
rhythms of language, for women it often becomes a dead space where once
there was life, filled only with loss and emptiness. Imprisoned
by an undead, unmourned, mother, excluded from language or
representation, women are vulnerable to the devastations of symbolic
sacrifice without recompense.
Psychoanalysis is presented as a counter-depressant, as are art and
writing, able not only to keep the drives or semiotic forces moving
through language but also to foster their revolutionary potential to
transgress symbolic limits and laws and to creatively rework self and
society. Accessing the drives and rhythms that symbolic law and
order typically repress, psychoanalytic practice, like the poetic text,
revitalizes or reactivates the semiotic chora, a connection to
the maternal body or to femininity. Such practices let loose the
disorganizing energies of the body, the pleasurable rupture of sense
and nonsense. They take productive advantage of the dialectical
discord between semiotic and symbolic and thus keep this discord
oriented toward dissent and protest rather than inner collapse.
Although the semiotic resists the symbolic order, or cannot be
contained by it, the two are always entangled and imbricated in
language; drives both support and subvert the symbolic operation,
bringing bodily rhythms and forces to signification, both impelling and
pulling apart its organization and stases. This disruptive
potential of semiotic drives and rhythms is associated with negativity
as a force of revolt, an excess, most archaically, the force of bodily
expulsion, but more generally the forces that continually spur the
dissolution of one's own organization. Negativity maintains life,
keeps it going by circulating energy, rendering the subject always in
process. Through its movement, the subject is not a rigid
identity, but always developing, reconfiguring itself through the
interplay of drives and language, in the tensions between body and
mirror image and between mirror image and self.
While Kristeva advocates for ‘poetic revolution,’ (meaning
the ongoing process of reconfiguring language and oneself by exploiting
the heterogeneities between semiotic and symbolic elements), she is
sometimes read as a conservative thinker because of her commitment to
maintaining a symbolic order and social contract. The danger of a
too strong or too weak symbolic order is that it encourages a return to
abjection or melancholia, to the point prior to ego-formation, to a
dissolution of the borders that maintain social life and creative
subjectivity, contributing to the ego's collapse into an empty
abyssal void and discouraging semiotic creativity. Such a
fragile, fragmented, disintegrating ego, always in search of objects to
heal the rift of being, dreaming of a return to unity but suffering the
nightmare of upheaval and collapse of identity, is especially
susceptible to the traumatic impact of encountering the stranger, the
unfamiliar other or alien who provokes turmoil and who is repudiated in
a rebound to delirious narcissism and a reassertion of self-mastery and
self-identity. The stranger disturbs boundaries, indicating the failure
to fully eliminate the refuse of identity and purify oneself.
Kristeva sees in the ethics of psychoanalysis, premised on
self-division, being strange to oneself, the possibility of
establishing an ethical relation to alterity, inviting it into our
political bonds (and warding off the most virulent forms of
abjection). Where Irigaray aims to introduce sexual difference
into the social contract and the domain of law and rights, Kristeva
proposes that we introduce self-discord.
There are a number of Anglo-American (and Australian) feminist
theorists and scholars who read Lacan and laid the groundwork for the
passage from French to English and from France to the US, Britain, and
Australia in the 1970's, 1980's, and early
1990's. Among these are Juliet Mitchell (Psychoanalysis
and Feminism), Teresa Brennan (The Interpretation of the
Flesh: Freud and Femininity), Elizabeth Grosz (Jacques Lacan:
A Feminist Introduction), Jane Gallop (Reading Lacan and
The Daughter's Seduction), and Jacqueline Rose
(Sexuality in the Field of Vision). While writing in
English, these theorists take their bearings from the French Lacanian
approach to psychoanalysis and can generally be classified in the field
of what today gets called “Continental
Feminism.” Responsible for revitalizing
psychoanalysis for feminist thought and countering earlier feminist
dismissals, they aim to reclaim Freud's central analyses for
feminist purposes. Juliet Mitchell, for instance, develops the
insight indispensable to any feminist reading, that
“psychoanalysis is not a recommendation for a
patriarchal society, but an analysis of one” (Mitchell
1973, xiii). Mitchell and Rose are also the co-editors of
Feminine Sexuality, a selection from Lacan's seminars,
for which both editors wrote influential introductions.
This section will address, however, not the Lacanian inspired
feminist appropriation of psychoanalysis in the English speaking world,
but the Anglo-American development of feminist psychoanalysis that has
descended from and is indebted to British object relations theory and
its focus on the pre-Oedipal mother-child bond, especially the work of
Melanie Klein and Donald Winnicott. Authors who work in this vein
include Nancy Chodorow (The Reproduction of Mothering),
Dorothy Dinnerstein (The Mermaid and the Minotaur), and
Jessica Benjamin (Bonds of Love and Like Subjects, Love
Objects). What distinguishes this Anglo-American tradition
from the French-influenced one is its emphasis on pre-Oedipal sociality
or intersubjectivity and its focus on the values of integration,
harmony, and wholeness, as opposed to those of self-division and
respecting the alien within.
The remainder of this section will focus on the work of Benjamin as
exemplary of the Anglo-American approach, and clarify its differences
from and similarities with the French approach. Like Irigaray,
Benjamin is perturbed by the psychoanalytic depiction of social life as
the world of men, developed on the basis of the father-son relation and
its aggression, hostility, love, and mourning. Deploring this
“struggle for power” (Benjamin 1988, 6) in
which women are merely the triangulating object of desire, Benjamin
argues that, in the formation of identity, subjects become bound by
love to oppressive social relations. She worries that
“domination is anchored in the hearts of the dominated”
(Benjamin 1988, 5), that women are erotically attached to patriarchal
power, and she believes that psychoanalysis can help explain how and
why this is so. Psychoanalysis thus offers to Benjamin insights
not only into the individual psyche but also into the organization,
structure, and distribution of political power and hierarchy. Her
aim is “to grasp the deep structure of gender as a binary
opposition which is common to psychic and cultural
representations” (Benjamin 1988, 218). Unlike Kristeva and
Irigaray, both of whom problematize the duality and comprehensiveness
of the nature/culture distinction, and emphasize transformation of
symbolic bonds, Benjamin highlights the role of (contradictory)
cultural stereotypes in bringing forth gender as we know and live it,
and emphasizes the need for social transformation.
Taking what she calls an eclectic approach, and eschewing
methodological orthodoxy with regard to Freudian metapsychology and the
theory of the instincts, Benjamin establishes her project on the basis
of a two person relational perspective, with the other as a separate
independent subject. Rather than an undifferentiated unity
governing early infantile life in the pre-Oedipal period, which would
make of the infant merely a “monadic energy system”
(Benjamin 1988, 17), she maintains that a genuine duality and
relationality exists from the start and that the process of growth
entails development within relationships rather than a development of
them. The infant, she postulates, is a fundamentally active and
social creature, reaching out to the world and expressing a desire for
recognition. The knots of identity are formed via the interplay
of this desire with the response of another who variously affirms or
defies the child. Benjamin claims that this emphasis on sociality
and intersubjectivity is not intended to disregard the intrapsychic
elements of subject formation, and in fact she argues for “the
interaction between the psyche and social life” (Benjamin 1988,
5). She holds that the inner and the outer are not competitive
but complementary theoretical perspectives. Nonetheless, she does
want to situate identity generally, and gendered identity more
specifically, within the purview of the subject's multiple and
ambiguous social identifications.
Domination, she argues, ensues from the failures of recognition
built into the political and social order, not merely failures that
take place at the personal or individual level in a single
relationship. Borrowing an initial insight from Foucault,
Benjamin looks at the way power shapes and forms identities and
desires, producing gendered relations (Benjamin 1988, 4).
Borrowing another insight from Hegel, Benjamin depicts the dialectic of
recognition in the struggle for identity as a “conflict between
independence and dependence” (Benjamin 1988, 33). In her
view, however, the Hegelian tale, like the Freudian one, erroneously
begins with a “monadic, self-interested ego” (Benjamin
1988, 33) and it thus concludes with the inevitability of breakdown and
domination. According to Benjamin, Winnicott resolves the
Hegelian and Freudian dilemma (Benjamin 1988, 38), the solitary egoism
of the fight to the death, by reformulating the problem of recognition
at the level of fantasy and distinguishing between internal and
external worlds. The infant feels confident in asserting its
independence, and destroying its object in fantasy, so long as that
object is discovered to have a secure external existence in reality.
 In other words, the fantasy of destruction is
appeased by its failure; the infant destroys internally but externally
is relieved to still have an object to address and interact with.
More particularly, the infant destroys or separates from the mother
internally and in fantasy, but simultaneously retains a relation to her
externally and in reality. The good enough mother must foster
this relationship between two separate egos, neither allowing the child
to succeed in destroying or dominating her, nor allowing herself to
squash the child's nascent attempts at self-assertion. The
mother-child relation is then a kind of revised neo-Hegelian struggle
for power, retaining the aim of mutual recognition or respect, but
risking domination and rebellion. The violent conflicts within
are not repressed but neutralized and pacified in the reality of
intersubjective life that affirms and recognizes autonomy.
Asking, as do Chodorow and Dinnerstein, about the genesis of
patriarchal power, Benjamin concludes, as they also do, that a main
source or component lies in exclusive childrearing by women/mothers,
which occasions the related risks of collapsing maternal authority into
mere dominance, supporting the fantasy of maternal omnipotence,
centering potent ambivalence on the mother, and fostering rigid gender
identities and identifications. While the boy attains autonomy
via loving identification with the father and separation from the
mother, the girl's relation to paternal power is complicated by
its inaccessibility to her. If she seeks “liberation in the
father” (Benjamin 1988, 99), she connects her femininity to
submission rather than agency, and attaches to masculinity as an
idealized object of love (and as its love-object), conferring on it
value while devaluing the mother, and creating a divide between
feminine sexuality and autonomous subjectivity. Benjamin argues,
however, that the “protean impersonality” (Benjamin 1988,
216) of male domination cannot be addressed by a critique that focuses
solely on the family and childcare and that power relations cannot be
overcome solely through a transformation in caretaking roles, although
the equation of women with motherhood is certainly one component of the
problem. If gendered identities are encouraged by social power
relations—masculinity is developed as a denial of dependency and
assertion of independence, while femininity is developed in an
identification with nurturing and concession of autonomy—then
real transformation requires attention to social roles and
“cultural representations” (Benjamin 1988, 217), since
“the core feature of the gender system—promoting
masculinity as separation from and femininity as continuity with the
primary bond—is maintained even when mother and father
participate equally in that bond” (Benjamin 1988, 217). In
Benjamin's theoretical model, children are responsive not only to
their social environment, but also to ideas with opaque meanings
(mandates, expectations, prohibitions, exhortations, etc.) that are
often covertly, indirectly, or unknowingly conveyed in parental
language and edicts. Gender equality thus requires that women be
recognized, by themselves and by men, as subjects in culture and that
intersubjectivity itself be revalued.
Benjamin's analysis can be distinguished from those of
Irigaray and Kristeva precisely by the way in which it tends to
conflate or collapse the distinction between representation and social
roles. While Anglo-American psychoanalytic feminism theorizes gender as
derived from or dependent on social (including familial) inequalities
and power relations, and thus aims to reduce its psychic effects by
redressing social and familial domination/subordination, French
feminism does not calibrate the psyche on socio-cultural relations but
on imaginary and symbolic representations. Benjamin's
partitioning of intrapsychic life into internal and external relations,
and her vision of intersubjective equilibrium is, in contrast to
Irigaray and Kristeva's assertion of discord within and between
subjects, oriented by the conviction that social harmony is desirable
and attainable.
Psychoanalysis presents a critical and diagnostic project, not
necessarily a normative or liberatory one. In developing a theory
of the drives and the non-rational forces that move and impel us, the
idea that we are opaque rather than transparent to ourselves, incapable
of complete self-knowledge or self-mastery, psychoanalytic theory also
challenges the rationalist, humanist ego and proposes that our ethical
characters and political communities are not perfectable, exposing the
precariousness of both psychic and political identity. The
unconscious cannot be assumed to be inherently either a transgressive
or a conservative force, but an unreliable one, promoting revolt or
rebellion sometimes, intransigence and rigid border preservation at other
times. 
Although they are in often uneasy alliance, the
psychoanalytic account of the unconscious provides feminist theory with
resources for both political and ontological inquiry.
Ontologically, psychoanalysis offers a distinctively psychical
understanding of sexual difference, how we come to inhabit our bodies
and our identities, and misinhabit them, an analysis reducible to
neither social nor biological categories. Politically,
psychoanalysis offers a depiction of the forces that impel us to
organize, disorganize, and reorganize the bonds that hold us
together. By offering insight into the formation of subjectivity
and the animating fantasies of social life, psychoanalysis thus also
facilitates feminist analysis of the obdurate elements of patriarchal
social relations, including the symbolic bonds and internal forces that
undergird identity and attach sexed subjects to relations of dominance
and subordination. Psychoanalytic feminist attention to the core
constituents of civilization, to the nuclei of sexual difference and
communal affiliation, helps explain the perpetuation of masculine power
and enables feminist theorists to articulate possible correctives,
challenges, routes of amelioration, or ethical interruptions that go to
the roots of political life and to its beyond and do not simply operate
on the given social terrain.