The idea of public justification has been refined over the last
several decades from materials drawn from the social contract
tradition. The great social contract theorists – Hobbes, Locke,
Rousseau and Kant – all held that for a political order to be
legitimate it had to be agreed upon by or justified for each person.
Of course, these theorists differed substantially about how such a
demonstration should proceed. Hobbes, Locke, and Rousseau developed
consent theories of legitimacy, but these three theorists seemed to
oscillate between an empirical standard of consent and a normative
standard of consent. On the empirical standard, we have public
justification for some arrangement when what each party actually
believes, desires, and values is effectual in motivating her consent
to the implementation of that arrangement. On the normative account,
we have public justification for some arrangement when what each party
ideally would believe, desire, and value gives her reason to consent
to the implementation of that arrangement. In the latter case, we
sometimes speak of hypothetical consent. One reason these theorists
may have had for transitioning from actual to hypothetical consent is
that they hoped to identify a rational justification of a political
order that was not based on a sectarian theology or ideology, which
might happen to enjoy widespread, but probably not universal support
within the relevant community. Instead, they wanted to show that each
person, given their diverse interests and reasons, still had
sufficient reason to comply with some form of political regime even if
that regime did not permit them to act as they would like. On this
understanding of the social contract, it makes sense that, by
Kant’s time, the standard of actual consent had disappeared,
replaced with a standard of hypothetical consent. This appears to be a
move away from actual consent and towards a normative standard of
legitimacy.
Notice that all four theorists were aware of and concerned about the
diversity of private judgments about justice and right action, which
might systematically diverge for any number of reasons. All of these
theorists concluded therefore that the private judgment of a few could
not serve as the basis for legitimacy for a diverse people. As Rawls
(2005, xvii) would eventually put it, these theorists recognized,
however dimly, the fact of reasonable pluralism—that citizens
who freely exercise their powers of reasoning will tend to pervasively
and persistently disagree about their fundamental values and
principles. The contract theorists concluded that the justification of
coercive social arrangements had to respect, with some limits, this
diversity of judgments and, hence, that justification could not be
tied, either empirically or normatively, to some one specific set of
beliefs, desires, and values. Such a justification had to be impartial
among at least the normatively respectable diversity of points of
view.
The idea of justifiability to all had just surfaced in Kant’s work when it
was laid to rest for over a century. As time progressed, social
contract theory was displaced by utilitarianism, Hegelianism and
Marxism. These three schools of political thought criticized the idea
of a social contract, though for different reasons. The social
contract tradition would be revived only during the post-war period in
the United States. One of the first four forms of social
contract theory to arise was contractarianism, which attempts to
justify coercive institutions in terms of pure instrumental
rationality through rational bargains among parties dividing social
resources. The first 20th century contract theorists were
economists, especially John Harsanyi and James Buchanan, though
attempts to work out such a theory later spread to neo-Hobbesian
philosophers, especially David Gauthier, Jean Hampton and Gregory
Kavka. But the dominant strand of the contract tradition is the
Kantian version articulated by John Rawls, from his early work (1951,
1958) to A Theory of Justice and finally in Political
Liberalism where the idea of public justification plays an
explicit and central role. Rawls initially understood public
justification entirely in terms of a hypothetical contract where
principles of justice were justified for all members of the public. It
would not be until Political Liberalism that Rawls would
explicitly articulate the challenge that reasonable pluralism poses to
political philosophy. For Rawls, members of the public must live
according to principles that are justified for all despite the deep
differences among them. Political power can only be legitimate when it
is exercised in ways compatible with publicly justified norms. (It is
important to note that “justified” and “publicly
justified” are synonyms only for some theorists and that, on
some accounts, a principle might be publicly justified because it is
separately justified for each relevant individual, though perhaps in
different ways. See 2.3 below.)
Thus, while public justification was a theme in neo-Hobbesian and
neo-Kantian political theory (and later deliberative democratic
political theory), it only came to full light in the early 1990s.
Afterwards, many works on public reason and justification were
published in rapid succession, the result of which is a new tradition
of political thought that flourishes today. The idea of public
justification is thus a core social and political concept in
contemporary political philosophy. However, public justification
admits of considerable variation. Each strand in the tradition
resolves core ambiguities differently. These strands are examined in
what follows.
The family of public reason liberal political theories (and others,
such as Gaus, who sever the typical connection between public
reasoning and public justification) can be categorized in
accord with a master principle, the Public Justification
Principle (PJP). This principle is a formal representation of
this family of theories and it is used throughout the entry to
classify variations on the idea of public justification. Define the PJP as follows:
The Public Justification Principle (PJP): A coercive law
L is justified in a public P if and only if each member
i of P has sufficient reason(s)
Ri to endorse L.
The generality of the principle, which permits individuals 1 and 2,
for example, to have different reasons to endorse L, means
that, on some accounts, it is not the reasons which are public, in the
sense of shared among all members of P. Even in this case,
however, the justification of L may be public in the sense that
there is, for every member of P, a reason why she endorses
L and, hence, L is, subject to some other provisos,
justified for the public P. The justification is
“public” because it is a justification that encompasses a
public, though it does so severally and individually. It is not
necessarily public in another important sense, i.e., the kind of
publicity associated with common knowledge. So an individual’s
reason is Ri need not be commonly known to others
who are members of the same public P. This would be an
additional condition which is not imposed here.
PJP can be analyzed in terms of the answers to the following six
questions:
Before continuing, it is necessary to reiterate that public
justification is not limited to those cases where reasons are
successfully presented to others in justification of some
claim. As indicated above, that is not the most general
specification of the idea of public justification. Instead, it is
simply one way to understand how the PJP is satisfied or how a public
justification is brought about. Public justifications may be brought
about in other ways as well (see 2.7). Notwithstanding this point, a
key idea requires some further elucidation here, namely the idea of a
reason and, in particular, a sufficient reason to endorse some
law L. (One account of the point just made is that a justifying
reason may be one that an individual i has without its being one that
is presented by or to her discursively in an explicit course of
reasoning. Notice also that one individual’s sufficient reason
to endorse L might differ from other individuals’ reasons
to endorse L.)
Notwithstanding the complexities already mentioned (one person’s
reason may not be another’s; a reason R doesn’t have to be
presented by or to an individual i in order for R to be
i’s reason to endorse L; etc.), the PJP requires that
individual members of a public P have reason to
endorse a principle L if that principle is to be considered
legitimate. What counts as i’s “having reason to endorse
L” therefore needs to be specified.
A common approach to reasons in normative ethics is to take the idea
of a reason as a primitive. A reason to Φ is simply a
consideration that counts in favor of Φ-ing (Scanlon 1998, 17).
But the idea of a reason in public justification political theory is
more specific. While many leave the idea under-discussed, we do not
need a complex ontology of reasons, only a standard for what public
reason liberals should count as a justificatory reason. Gaus
has provided a conception of reasons he thinks is most appropriate to
the project of public justification. In Justificatory
Liberalism, he holds that one has a justificatory reason when the
reason is openly justified or when it is “stable in the face of
acute and sustained criticism by others and of new information”
(Gaus 1996, 31). This means that a reason is sufficient for a single
member of the public when it is both justifiably affirmed by that
person and when the member has no other reason that overrides or
defeats it in the relevant circumstances. However, simply because a
reason is sufficient for one member of the public does not mean it is
sufficient to justify the coercion in question for all members of the
public. A coercive law is only justified when each person has a
sufficient reason to endorse the law. Thus, a law is justified based
on sufficient reasons when each person has a sufficient reason in this
sense to endorse the law.
A core assumption of public reason liberalism, the political theory
associated with the idea of public justification, is that
people’s reasons for action and belief can differ
substantially. Consequently, a reason must in some sense be relative
to an agent’s beliefs, values and other commitments. While
public reason liberals need not share Gaus’s epistemology of
justificatory reasons, the right account cannot be too far off, for
any public reason liberal must accept that citizens can be rational to
comply with reasons that others systematically reject and so, in some
way or another, different individuals must be epistemically justified
in affirming very different reasons. Note that this does not mean that
members of the public must acknowledge the validity of a particular
conception of justificatory reasons, rather that the public reason
liberal theorist must accept an epistemology of justificatory
reasons that allows that different reasons can be epistemically
justified for different persons.
A principle of association A (such as a law or policy or constitution)
is publicly justified for members of P if each i in
P has a sufficient reason to endorse A. This leaves open
the question of the “granularity” of A: how
specific is A in relation to the conduct of members of
P? Does it require specific forms of behavior? or does it
function at some more abstract level, for instance by specifying the
sorts of institutions (legislature, court, bureau) that might develop,
through their own processes, subsidiary principles requiring specific
forms of behavior?
Rawls held (2005, 140) that the requirement of public justification
applies merely to “constitutional essentials” and that
public justification is required when “basic questions of
justice” are at stake. Jonathan Quong has argued (2004,
233–250) that the requirement of public justification applies
first and foremost to laws, a more finely grained kind of principle
justifying coercion. Gaus (2011, 495) holds that the requirement of
justification applies to laws that lack “strong interactive
effects” with other laws. For instance, a law banning smoking
lacks strong interactive effects with a law that provides a corn
subsidy. His argument for this level of granularity is that the unit
of public justification must be narrow enough to identify specific
forms of behavior as permitted or prohibited but general enough that
it can rightly be understood and internalized as governing classes of
behavior (Gaus 2011, 122–125). We focus on law L as the
relevant principle of association for purposes of brevity,
acknowledging that some public reason liberals work with other
principles of association. 
We turn now to one of the most important sources of disagreement among
public reason liberals, the disagreement concerning the nature of
justificatory reasons described by variable Ri in
the PJP. The mainstream view within public reason liberalism is that
justificatory reasons are public reasons in the sense that they can be
shared by all members of the public (or, at least, be
“accessible” to them in a sense to be elucidated below
(see 2.3.2)). In general, variable Ri is indexed to
members of the public, R1, …,
Rn, but on some (consensus) interpretations of PJP,
Ri is the same for each individual i. But on another
(convergence) interpretation, justificatory reasons need merely be
reasons that all citizens can see as justified according to reasonable
evaluative standards, even if they do not accept those standards
themselves. For instance, on a convergence view, a religious reason
can be justificatory if it is based on reasonable religious evaluative
standards that a non-religious citizen might reasonably reject for
herself but that she can still acknowledge as reasonable for others.
In this case, one individual’s reasons for considering some
arrangement legitimate might differ from another individual’s reasons;
each has reasons, but these reasons aren’t the same in the two cases.
(See D’Agostino 1996, 30.)
This is a difficult concept, admittedly, and we consider it further
below. It ought to be familiar, though, given that it is the sort of
convergence which underwrites, for example, the legitimacy of market
transactions. So, for example, antecedently A has apples
and B has bananas. Because A wants bananas and B
wants apples (two different reasons for action), we may find, subject
to other conditions being fulfilled, that, later, after a trade,
A has bananas and B has apples. This later state of
affairs is “justified” for A and B because
each has a reason for preferring this state to the antecedent state,
even though their reasons are different reasons. And indeed, though
this would be stretching the analogy to public justification
too far, A’s reasons for wanting bananas might be quite
unintelligible to B (perhaps he wants them for some religious
ritual and she is an atheist) without that undermining the
“justification” of the posterior state of affairs. Indeed,
A and B need neither share, endorse, or even know what
the other’s reason is; none of this undermines the
“justification” of the post-trade situation.
In other words, a convergence conception of reasons requires only that
individuals have their own individual reasons Ri
(R1, R2, … ,
Rn) to support a coercive law L, whereas the
consensus conception requires, in the limit, that all members of the
public share a (set of) reason(s) R to endorse L. Of
course, even unshared reasons have to be subject to some discipline
before we can speak even of convergence rather than consensus based
public justification. A’s reasons for endorsing some principle
L might be so repugnant that the fact that they count in favor
of L might actually undermine L’s claims to public
justification (and might do so even if there were other and in her
fellow citizens’ view, better reasons for endorsing L).
The consensus approach, understood as requiring that reasons be
somehow mutually shared or accessible, is by far the dominant
conception of public justification. The convergence view is in the
minority, both in earlier works (Gaus 1990, 256; Stout 2004; Klosko
1993; Rawls 2005) and more contemporary work (Gaus 2011; Vallier
2014).
Rawls’s view helps to illustrate the complexities involved in the
distinction, as he seems to have combined the two approaches. In the
first “freestanding”
conception of political justification, Rawls (2005, 12) requires that
citizens reason on shared terms in order to converge on a political
conception of justice. But in the second “overlapping
consensus” conception, Rawls leaves it “to each
person” to render the political conception compatible with her
distinct, unshared comprehensive doctrine. Rawls included these two
conceptions of justificatory reasons in a single account of political
justification due to the need to identify a common, political
conception of justice that all reasonable persons could share as
regulative of their actions while simultaneously justifying the
conception for each reasonable point of view. However, while a
combination may be attractive, several writers have identified a
tension between the two forms of justification and resolve it in favor
of one conception of justificatory reasons or the other. Habermas (1995)
provides the most well-known illustration of the tension.
We’ve mentioned that there are, plausibly, some limits to how relaxed we
can be about the diversity of different reasons for endorsing L
that can be entertained by the advocate of a convergence approach. Of
course, some discipline is implicit in the concept of “a
reason”. A factual claim, for example, does not count as a
reason for (or against) endorsing some proposed principle L if
there is evidence available to relevant individuals which would, in
conjunction with reasonable rules of inference, imply its falsity. And
a normative claim does not count as a reason in respect of L if
it is utterly lacking in legitimacy, however that might be determined.
But this still leaves a great variety of potential reasons available
and some theorists, in seeking to organize this variety have proposed
some additional tests that it might be appropriate to place on
potential reasons. These are, in order of increasing stringency,
intelligibility, accessibility, and shareability.
Define intelligibility and the intelligibility requirement as
follows:
Intelligibility: A’s reason RA is
intelligible to members of the public if and only if members of the
public regard RA as justified for A according
to A’s evaluative standards.
Intelligibility Requirement: A’s reason
RA can figure in a justification for (or rejection
of) a coercive law L only if it is intelligible to all members
of the public.
Intelligible reasons are those that members of the public can see as
reasons for those who advance (or rely upon) them, as opposed to mere
utterances, expressions of emotions, irrational demands or other
irrelevant considerations. They see the grounds identified by
as reasons in A’s understanding of what counts as a
reason; RA is therefore intelligible to them as
something that would count for A as a reason.
Defenders of intelligibility (Vallier 2016b) argue that reasonable
pluralism applies to evaluative standards just as it applies to
reasons (Vallier 2011). That is to say, reasonable people can disagree
on their standards of inference and epistemic justification. For
instance, some might regard theological discourse as intelligible by
holding that one can reason well with respect to Biblical exegesis.
Others may disagree, holding that most religions’ sacred texts are too
indeterminate to effectively interpret. More abstractly, members of
the public may differ as to what constitutes a good cognitive process.
The intelligibility requirement is generous enough to recognize these
differences but still puts some pressure on a purely empirical
approach, especially in demanding that an individual’s reason for
endorsing a principle must be justifiable as such according to her own
standards of justification.
Not all intelligible reasons will, by that very fact, be eligible to
figure in a justification of some specific principle L. Some,
for example, while intelligible, are not relevant, or at least do not
seem to be the sort of reason that should count towards the
justification for a law. For example, suppose one favors a law making
tennis part of school curriculum because one thinks tennis is good for my
health, while recognizing that it is necessarily beneficial for the
health of others. In this case, the reason may be intelligible but
should not figure in the public justification for a law.
Further, intelligible reasons may not be sufficient to justify a law
in the sense specified in 2.1. Instead, intelligibility is an
additional requirement, apart from bare logical sufficiency, that
recognizes that, while A might not share reasons with others,
the reasons he has should, in some sense, be available to others to
consider and endorse as reasons at least for A (even if not for
them). Intelligibility is one interpretation of how this availability
might be demonstrated.
The accessibility requirement is more stringent than intelligibility.
Rather than requiring that a reason for A to accept L be
justified according to A’s reasonable standards (even if these
are not shared by others), accessibility requires that reasons be
justified according to shared evaluative standards. (In particular,
that members of the public believe that RA justifies
L for A according to common evaluative standards, not
that RA is accepted by A as justifying
L.) While accessibility permits reasons to differ
(A might and B might not endorse RA),
it requires that they be evaluated as reasons according to
evaluative standards that are shared. Thus, accessibility
lies between intelligibility and shareability, which is considered
next, in section 2.4.3, because intelligibility permits differing
reasons and evaluative standards, whereas shareability permits
neither.  Accessibility is perhaps the most common standard in the
literature, with no less than eight available interpretations (Eberle
2002, 252–286; for a recent defense, see Boettcher 2015). Define
accessibility and the accessibility requirement as follows:
Accessibility: A’s reason RA is
accessible to the public if and only if all members of the public
regard RA as justified for A according to common evaluative
standards
Accessibility Requirement: A’s reason
RA can figure in a justification for (or rejection
of) a coercive law only if RA is accessible to all
members of the public.
Shareability is the strongest of the three requirements, as it
combines the requirement of shared evaluative standards with the
requirement of shared reasons (Bowman and Richardson 2009; Hartley and Watson 2009; Watson and Hartley 2018). (This
results in a version of the familiar consensus interpretation of
public justification.) Public reason liberals often argue that reasons
should be shared but say little about what it means to share reasons.
They presumably hold that reasons must be shareable, meaning that
citizens will all have the reasons in question at the right level of
idealization.
The shareability requirement, like intelligibility and accessibility,
possesses two components—a requirement concerning the
appropriate evaluative standards and a requirement concerning the
range of permitted reasons. Define shareability and the shareability
requirement as follows:
Shareability: A’s reason RA is
shareable with the public if and only if members of the public regard
RA as justified for each member of the public,
including A, according to common standards.
Shareability Requirement: A’s reason
RA can figure in a justification for (or rejection
of) coercion only if RA is shared with all
(suitably idealized) members of the public.
If shareability is imposed, then convergence approaches to public
justification are, of course, ruled out. This is so because citizens’
public uses of reasons are restricted to shareable reasons (Some may
claim that any good reason is shared by members of the public at high
levels of idealization, where people would share their comprehensive
doctrines; this point bleeds into the matter of idealization, addressed below).
Intelligibility, Accessibility, and Shareability are the three core
requirements on justificatory reasons on offer within the public
justification literature. They can be grouped together in a
diagram:
The bottom left quadrant is left open because public reason liberals
never advocate shared reasons and unshared evaluative standards at the
same time. There are perhaps two reasons for this. First, it is
usually thought that sharing evaluative standards is more common than
sharing reasons, and so if reasons are shared, evaluative standards
should be too. Second, evaluative standards help to individuate and
distinguish between reasons, so it’s not clear we could determine
which reasons are shared if evaluative standards are not shared.
Once the outer bounds of the public are set (see
 Section 2.5
 below), and we know which individuals have to have reason(s) for some
arrangement for that arrangement to be legitimate, public reason
liberals need to specify how reasons are to be ascribed to the members
of this group. Specifically, public reason liberals, unless they are
empirical consent theorists, engage in idealization in order
to understand how the beliefs, desires and values of citizens enter
into the process of public justification. Idealization is the practice
of considering citizens’ beliefs, desires and values as they would be
given good information and good reasoning. It is typically employed on
the grounds that an individual’s morally significant reasons may not
be the same as the reasons she actually affirms, which are frequently
based on poor information, poor reasoning or incoherent beliefs and
desires. Views that determine citizens’ reasons by their actual
commitments are typically described as forms of justificatory
“populism” (Eberle 2002, 200).
Rawls’s primary model of idealization (1971, 118) is the veil of
ignorance which models parties as reasonable by withholding from their
deliberations information that would undermine their impartiality. (It
is important to note that the veil device models reasonableness and
that the reasoning of the parties behind the veil models
(instrumental) rationality.) Jürgen Habermas (1999, 198) prefers
deliberative conditions without such abstract idealization, instead
favoring constraining the form of discourse among actual individuals.
David Gauthier (1986, 245) prefers a bargaining scenario where
individuals know the characteristics of persons but are unaware of
which person they are.
Idealization should be understood in terms of
citizens’ belief-value sets. A citizen’s belief-value set is the set
of all her beliefs, desires, goals and plans, i.e., everything she
thinks and wants. (This idea derives from Bernard Williams’s (1981,
102) conception of a subjective motivational set.) A citizen is
idealized when we consider her belief-value set as it might be altered
by changing one or more of her beliefs, desires, goals and/or plans
according to some criteria. Theorists may imagine her having more or
different information or values or require that she be fully rational,
both of which will alter her belief-value set. And the appropriate
level of idealization might vary with context depending of the
epistemic quality of reasoning demanded by the situation (say between
the reasoning required to design institutions vs. planning a family
vacation).
To motivate idealization, consider how public justification fares
without idealization.
Populist views “take citizens as they are: the default populist
position is that a rationale R counts as a public justification only
if the members of the public find R acceptable in light of their
existing [subjective motivational sets], irrespective of their
epistemic pockmarks and doxastic defects” (Eberle 2002, 200).
Populist conceptions of idealization are widely regarded as subject to
enormous problems, since people can “withhold their assent
because of obstinacy, selfishness, laziness, perversity, or
confusion” (Gaus 1996, 121). Populism has the further problem of
requiring that we ask everyone about their reasons before deciding
whether a coercive law is justified. 
Public justification theorists typically radically idealize in
response to the weaknesses of justificatory populism, that is, they
alter belief-value sets to rid them of inconsistencies and ignorance.
Radical idealization thus contains two primary
dimensions—rationality and information—that are pushed to
their upper-bound.
The distinction between theories of full rationality and
less-than-full rationality is central to the project of idealization,
though, as will emerge, full rationality is elusive. To attribute
reasons to citizens on the basis of poor reasoning would arguably
corrupt the process of public justification. A theory of full
rationality idealizes agents by giving parties flawless cognitive
powers. (See Rawls (1971, 12) and Gauthier (1986, 234) for explicit
attributions of full rationality to their agents.)
The assumption of full rationality initially seems irresistible. If we
can discern the reasons citizens would affirm were they perfectly
rational, then surely those would be the morally relevant reasons of
citizens. The public reason liberal wants to justify demands
and coercion for all rational beings in her society. How could she do
better than full rationality? Another motivation for embracing full
rationality is to generate agreement; many public reason liberals
tacitly assume that when suitably idealized, rational and reasonable
individuals will agree about many things they otherwise would not. For
instance, in order to induce agreement, Rawls assumes that parties to
the original position are fully rational. Were they less than fully
rational, the parties might reach different conclusions.
But problems with full rationality abound. First of all, the notion of
full rationality is incoherent when applied to finite and fallible
beings (see Cherniak 1986); it requires adjustments to a dense web of
beliefs and values that are not computable in real time and given
limited resources. Secondly, the notion of full rationality, were it
coherent, would leave us with justifications of arrangements that
could not be reflexively endorsed by the individuals whose behavior
they govern, so different are these individuals’ actual beliefs and
values from those which provide the reasons justifying the
arrangements. (This is one way in which the problem of stability might
arise. See below 5.2.)
Again, public reason liberals add information to the belief-value set
of ordinary citizens (and, indeed, remove misinformation) in order to
avoid holding public justification captive to ignorance. Rawls,
Gauthier and Habermas all pursue this strategy. Their models take for
granted that idealized agents possess all (and only) the general facts
required to determine what reasons they have. In general, then, public
reason liberals remove beliefs and desires that interfere with the
individual’s ability to adopt an impartial perspective and to add such
general and specific information as is necessary for her to reason
well about the issues before her. Public reason liberals disagree
about what sets of information interfere with impartiality, but all
theorists subtract misinformation and biasing information.
Public reason liberals are only beginning to take criticisms of
radical idealization seriously. (See Gaus 2011, 232–260 and
Vallier 2014, 145–180.) If these criticisms are successful, then
one might reconsider returning to justificatory populism. However,
there may be a third option: moderate idealization, where one
attributes to citizens reasons based on some reasonable standard of
adequate information and reasoning that nonetheless falls short of
full information and perfect reasoning. The moderate idealization
theorist can insist that we can go too far in separating idealized
belief-value sets from the dingy, real-world belief-value sets of
citizens, eventually arriving at a point where the tie is severed and
indeed, as Wolterstorff insists (2007, 153), the person being
idealized has no reason to care about his counterpart’s
recommendations (also see Enoch 2013, 164–170; for a reply, see
Gaus 2015). The pull toward radical idealization must be balanced
showing respect for citizens as they actually are (this latter element
will be crucial for maintaining stability; see 5.2.) While radical
idealization may test the “strains of commitment” (Rawls
1971, 155–9), some moderate idealization is acceptable to most
ordinary citizens as an appropriate acknowledgment of the demands of
the impartial perspective.
When public reason liberals idealize, they circumscribe the set of
reasons to a set that can be recognized from a particular point of
view as legitimately playing a role in public justification. This
circumscription also occurs in “normative” conceptions of
idealization that represent members of the public as being
reasonable. In one way, reasonableness may seem to be a redundant
category since figures like Rawls, Gauthier, and Habermas model
reasonableness largely in terms of the information dimension by
considering members of the public as deprived of partializing
information that might lead them to select unfair principles. But
reasonableness is not redundant, for it attributes cognitive
dispositions to agents that are not explicitly captured by
idealization over beliefs, desires, and values. Note that
Rawls’s conception of the reasonable plays two roles in his
theory of justice. First, reasonableness is modeled by the veil of
ignorance, but a citizen of the well-ordered society is also
reasonable because she possesses the following four dispositions
(Rawls 2005, 49–52, 53–58, 60, 76, 119, 162–3,
229). (1) A disposition to engage in public justification, or to offer
justifications for her own preferred principles and abide by the
justified principles proposed by others. (2) A disposition to
recognize the “burdens of judgment” which imply reasonable
pluralism. (3) A disposition to reject the repression of other
reasonable points of view. (4) A disposition to rely on methods of
reasoning that others can share or access.
The scope of the public determines which persons are idealized, not
how the idealization should proceed. By and large, public
justification theorists consider the public to include all members of
a traditional nation-state. This is largely due to the need to
simplify but also due to what some have called an implicit nationalism
about public reason liberalism. For instance, Rawls is well-known for
having confined his theory of justice to members of a nation to which
no one could be added or subtracted, though he later developed an
account of public justification for global matters (2002). 
This matter is left to debates about nationalism and cosmopolitanism
(see the entries on
 nationalism
 and
 cosmopolitanism).
There is also some controversy concerning whether future generations
should be parties to public justification and if so how they should be
built into the relevant deliberative model (see the entry on
 intergenerational justice).
 Similarly, some public justification theorists, such as Gauthier,
have confined public justification to those who contribute to the
cooperative surplus, though others have thought that the ideal of
public justification applies to all citizens, regardless of their
contributions.
The final dimension relevant to specifying the PJP is the structure of
justificatory argumentation. The variation among conceptions of
argumentation within public reason liberalism can be sorted into four
groups: discursive, universalizing, bargaining, and evolutionary.
Discursive theories hold public justification is achieved when an
agreement has been reached among the relevant class of public
discussants, whereas universalizing approaches hold that public
justification has been achieved when we have located a set of moral
rules or principles that can be seen as reflecting fair and reciprocal
relations among persons. Bargaining theories hold that public
justification is achieved when individual interests are advanced as
far as possible. Evolutionary approaches are the most distinctive, and
they mark the distinction between public reason theorists and the more
general notion of public justification most vividly. According to
evolutionists, a coercive principle L is justified for members
of a public P when that principle is a stable and evolved equilibrium
for P. These four theories each have a prominent representative. In
order they are Jürgen Habermas, John Rawls, David Gauthier and
Gerald Gaus.
Discursive theories, broadly speaking, hold that the aim of public
justification is to generate agreement and resolution among disputants
through the process of real discourse secured by just and fair social
institutions. They come in different forms, primarily either
Habermasian or pragmatist theories, such as those of Robert Talisse
(2005) and Cheryl Misak (2000). For our purposes, the key features of
the discursive view can be examined by briefly reviewing Habermas’s
theory, as he is the most prominent discourse theorist (see the entry
on
 Jürgen Habermas).
Habermas holds (1999, 68) that “the justification of norms and
commands requires that a real discourse be carried out.” The
only way to achieve public justification is through free argumentation
that convinces citizens to recognize the claims others make on them.
For A to make a legitimate claim on B, the claim must be
submitted to B’s critique.
For Habermas, one point of a discourse-focused conception of practical
reason is that an individual’s conception of her interests and
commitments is formed in the discursive process. He often refers to
this process as “will formation” where individual opinions
can change and ultimately produce a rational consensus. He idealizes
in this way in order to develop a conception of the reasonable where
citizens take up a discursive, moral point of view aimed at a rational
consensus concerning the interests of all. (For details concerning how
idealized discourse proceeds, see Habermas 1999, 65–6.)
Universalizing views hold that the point of public justification is to
arrive at a regime that fairly advances the interests of all as seen
from those individuals’ perspectives. The universalizing conception
suggests a discourse among parties in search of an ideal that each can
endorse as a public ideal for the community of which they are members.
Rawls is the exemplar of such a view. For Rawls, the aim of a theory
of justice is to provide a justification for the claims that citizens
make on one another’s conduct. Rawls realizes, however, that gaining
traction on the problem of justification is difficult, and responds by
converting it into a social choice problem: “the question of
justification [can be] settled by working out a problem of
deliberation” (Rawls 1971, 16). Principles of justice are
justified if they are selected by all parties to a properly specified
choice situation, which Rawls argues will lead them to select
principles of justice that will apply to all persons.
The bargaining conception of public justification holds that a regime
is legitimate for an individual because it maximally advances her
interests. The bargaining conception suggests a negotiation among
parties in search of a stable equilibrium of opposed forces; that is,
each has been assigned, by a regime, as much as she can be assigned
consistent with the need to assign enough to every other party to
secure their compliance. The most prominent example of a bargaining
theory is David Gauthier’s contractarianism. In Morals by
Agreement, he argues that citizens require a social morality in
order to secure the benefits of social cooperation. But for Gauthier,
unlike Rawls, moral and political norms are justified by showing that
instrumental rationality requires that persons embrace a scheme of
social rules. Individuals, “faced with the costs of natural or
market interaction in the face of externalities agree to a different,
cooperative mode of interaction”; rational individuals do so in
order to “maximize their own utility” (Gauthier 1986,
145–6). Gauthier’s main concern is to show why anyone should
accept the restraints morality places on individual behavior. His
proposal, in short, is to show that even a very thin notion of
rationality—instrumental rationality—can justify moral
constraints to all. A citizen can properly be subject to state
coercion in certain respects, on this account, because it is in his
interests that he be so. It is important to stress that Gauthier does
not base the public justification of a rule or law on the aggregate
utility it will produce across persons. Instead, bargains are reached
when each person provides the minimum relative concession of rents
needed to get a bargain off the ground. To put it roughly, publicly
justified rules are those that maximize the share of each person
relative to and constrained by a similar maximization of shares on the
part of others. Each side seeks the best bargain they can get.
Evolutionary views of public justification, such as those advanced by
Bryan Skyrms (1996) and Gerald Gaus (2011) are late-comers to public
reason liberalism. The reason for this is that they are partly
reactions to the perceived failures of the other three, more familiar
approaches to public justification. In light of these failures, Gaus
argues that parties to the process of public justification must be
understood as intrinsically rule-following in ways that sometimes
frustrates their own goals, rejecting the bargaining view, and that
the parties acknowledge that discourse will not resolve their
disagreements, rejecting the discursive view. Gaus also argues that
parties to a universalizing form of justification will find themselves
with multiple eligible social arrangements, which shows that the
universalization procedure itself is insufficient to produce a
determinate set of justified social arrangements. It is here that Gaus
appeals to social evolutionary processes in order to produce
justification. Gaus argues that evolutionary forces can select a
member of the eligible set of social arrangements for implementation
because each party will recognize there is no other way to secure the
benefits of social cooperation. Thus, public reason is mixed with a
sociological thesis about the ability of spontaneous order processes
to generate convergence on a single member of an (optimal) eligible
set. No one person foresees or constructs the actually justified set
of moral principles or rules, but all have reason to accept the
outcome of such a process.
Typically public justification is said to concern the use of
political coercion, either regarding matters of constitutional
essentials and basic justice (Rawls 2005) or coercive law as well
(Gaus 2011, Quong 2011). However, in recent years, a number of
theorists have argued that coercion does not always require public
justification. Gaus (2011) and Chad Van Schoelandt (2015) have argued
that public justification is aimed, primarily, at the justification of
relations of moral authority, that is, of our capacity to issue
genuinely binding moral demands of others. We have to justify our
demands that others follow shared moral rules that are not coercive,
such as rules requiring that we keep our promises. Colin Bird (2014)
has argued that the foundation for public justification is grounded in
the standing that democratic citizens have as co-authors of
legislation. On Bird’s view, we may have to justify non-coercive
legislation if it affects the standing of citizens, such as
communicative legislation that, say, defines an optionally sworn
national pledge of allegiance.
One concern about defenses of the PJP is that the PJP only specifies
how coercion is justified. It does not include in its content any
further normative principle about why coercion is undesirable or about
how coercion is to be handled if it is not publicly justified. For
instance, one might combine the PJP with a consequentialist norm that
unjustified coercion is to be minimized or a deontological principle
that morality requires not engaging in unjustified coercion. Again the
PJP is silent on these matters.
However, a number of public justification theorists and others in the
liberal tradition have worked out a version of this additional norm
called the Liberty Principle. The Liberty Principle takes the form of
a presumption in favor of liberty or against coercion. Stanley Benn
(1988, 87) defends a presumption against interference in politics and
morality, claiming that “the burden of justification falls on
the interferer, not on the person interfered with.” Joel
Feinberg (1987, 9) is another prominent defender of the
“presumption in favor of liberty” which he defines as
follows: “liberty should be the norm, coercion always needs some
special justification.” While Benn is concerned with
interference and Feinberg with coercion, the presumption is quite
similar. Rawls (2001, 44) endorses a presumption against legal
coercion. He also appears to endorse a presumption in favor of liberty
in his liberal principle of legitimacy: “Our exercise of
political power is proper only when we sincerely believe that the
reasons we offer for our political action may reasonably be accepted
by other citizens as a justification of those actions” (Rawls
2005, xlvi). Rawls does not use the phrase “coercion” in
this formulation, but for Rawls, “political power is always
coercive power” (68). And on his view, the question of public
justification for citizens is this: “When may citizens by their
vote properly exercise their coercive political power over one another
when fundamental questions are at stake?” (217). Given that
political power is coercive power, we can understand Rawls as
endorsing a presumption against the use of coercion.
When conjoined with the PJP, the Liberty Principle explains how the
PJP can be applied to the justification of laws. Since there is a
presumption against coercive law, the PJP, when satisfied, overcomes
the presumption.
In recent years, the number of different normative foundations for the
Public Justification Principle has increased. Typically public
justification has been grounded in (i) respect for persons as free and
equal (Larmore 2008; for criticism, see Eberle 2002, Gaus 2011 and Van
Schoelandt 2015), but we also find attempts to ground the PJP in (ii)
an analysis of the nature of rationality and morality (Habermas 1996),
(iii) the requirements of justice (Rawls 2005; Quong 2013), (iv) the
value of civic friendship (Lister 2013; Ebels-Duggan 2010; Leland and
Wietmarschen 2017; for criticism, see Billingham 2016), (v) the
avoidance of authoritarianism and the preservation of moral relations
between persons (Gaus 2011; for criticism, see Enoch 2013). For
purposes of space, however, we omit a discussion of these foundations
here, as it largely recapitulates the discussion in the entry on 
public reason.
A related foundational question concerns precisely to whom public
justification is owed. Quong (2011, 137–160) has argued that
public justification is owed exclusively to an idealized constituency
of reasonable people, whereas Gaus (2011, 232–268) has argued
that public justification is owed to real persons whose justificatory
reasons are determined by what their moderately idealized counterparts
accept as their reasons. Quong calls his view the “internal
conception” and contrasts it with an “external conception” which
directs public justification to real persons as they are, but the only
developed alternative in the contemporary literature, the Gausian
model, also appeals to idealization while directing public
justification to real persons. The internal conception has been
subject to a number of recent criticisms (Gaus 2012, Billingham 2017a,
Vallier 2017), as has the Gausian approach (Enoch 2013, Quong
2014)
Different decisions about those to whom public justification is owed,
however, traces to a deeper question about what the point of public
justification is. For Quong and other defenders of the internal
conception (Hartley and Watson 2018), the point of public
justification is to render consistent some of our most fundamental
political ideas, like the idea of society as a system of cooperation
and a political conception of the person. Others following Gaus, like
Vallier (2014), think the point of public justification is to
establish some kind of respectful, equal, moral relations between real
persons.
The PJP is tied to two important concepts within political theory: the
ideas of publicity and stability. In some cases, public reason
liberals understand public justification in terms of the capacity of
laws to achieve both stability and publicity, whereas in other cases
they see the ability of their conception of public justification to
achieve publicity and/or stability as a merit of their conception over
competitors. For instance, if a conception of the PJP is incompatible
with a plausible principle of publicity or will fail to produce the
right sort of stability, then that counts against the conception. Now
it is true that many considerations can count against interpretations
of the PJP other than problems with publicity or stability. But
because public justification theorists see the concepts of publicity
and stability as so central to fleshing out a conception of public
justification, it seems appropriate to treat these connections
here.
In Political Liberalism, Rawls claims that “public
justification” occurs when a well-ordered society achieves what
he calls “full publicity” which contains or consists of
three levels (see the entry on
 publicity).
 The first level “is achieved when society is effectively
regulated by public principles of justice: citizens accept and know
that others likewise accept those principles, and this in turn is
publicly recognized” (Rawls 2005, 66). At the first level, each
person grasps that a society’s basic structure is justified in terms
of commonly accepted practices of inquiry and reasoning. The second
level of publicity requires that citizens of a well-ordered society
have shared beliefs “in the light of which first principles of
justice themselves can be accepted, that is, the general beliefs about
human nature and the way political social institutions generally work,
and indeed all such beliefs relevant to political justice” (67).
The third level of publicity concerns what Rawls calls “the full
justification of the public conception of justice as it would be
presented in its own terms” and must include all of the
considerations we bring to the table when generating a conception of
justice in the first place. The full justification must be
“publicly known, or better, at least to be publicly
available.”
Full publicity is achieved when all three levels of publicity obtain.
And when full publicity is achieved, Rawls says that a political
conception of justice is publicly justified. Public reason liberals
generally hold that a law is public under a number of conditions, say
when citizens know that each person has some reason to endorse their
society’s laws, or when each person accepts the laws for reasons that
are publicly available.
Importantly, full publicity comprises “public
justification,” which is Rawls’s third stage of the
justification of the political conception generally. The first two
stages of justifying the political conception are the pro
tanto and full justification stages, which occur only
when citizens both construct a political conception of justice from
shared considered judgments (the pro tanto stage) and accept
the political conception from within their comprehensive doctrines
(the full justification stage). Public justification occurs when each
person knows that the political conception is fully justified (in the
second stage’s sense) (Rawls 2005, 386–7). For Rawls (2005,
387), “public justification happens when all the reasonable
members of political society carry out a justification of the shared
political conception by embedding it in their several reasonable
comprehensive views.” Thus, public justification is understood
in terms of publicity.
Charles Larmore (2008, 203–7) traces Rawls’s idea of public
reason as arising from his concerns about publicity and in his recent
study of Rawls’s Political Liberalism, Paul Weithman (2011,
242) shows that publicity helps to educate a society about the basis
of its political views that is crucial for maintaining a society as
stable for the right reasons.
Rawls’s notion of publicity is the most common in the literature; Gaus
(2011, 296–7) offers a less demanding standard of “weak” publicity.
While Rawls uses the term “public justification” to refer
to the process of making an overlapping consensus public, in this
entry the term is used to refer to the broader process of ensuring
that all uses of coercive power are justified for each person given
their reasons. Thus, publicity may be conceived of as a part of public
justification but is not the primary goal that the public
justification of coercion is meant to achieve. The PJP does not
require that public justifications achieve publicity in order for
coercion to be compatible with respect for persons. Nonetheless,
publicity is a “sister concept” to the idea of public
justification because it realizes the ideal of public
justification.
The idea of publicity is frequently understood in terms of the
publicity of shared reasons (see Rawls 2002, 173 for a connection
between shared reasons and publicity). One reason for adopting a
consensus conception of reasons might be that it aids the public
recognition of what is publicly justified because public justification
appeals primarily to reasons that are shared (Hadfield & Macedo
2012; Watson and Hartley 2018). However, any public justification view (including convergence
views) should appeal to some notion of publicity, since while public
justification can, on some views, occur without public recognition,
many make the public recognition of justification to all a
constitutive condition of a polity’s coercive laws being fully
publicly justified in the broad sense of the term employed in this
entry. This is, in fact, the relevance of the ideas of intelligibility
and accessibility which was discussed earlier.
Another sister concept to the ideal of public justification is the
notion of the stability. Many public reason liberals think it crucial
to public justification that publicly justified principles be stable
in some sense. For Rawls (2005, 140–143), public justification
helps a political conception of justice to be “stable for the
right reasons.” Weithman (2011) has argued that the central
motivation for Rawls’s development of the ideas of public reason and
public justification was to ensure that the justification of political
principles could be stable in a society that faces the fact of
reasonable pluralism. In some ways, then, the search for stability is
part of the motivation for caring about public justification as such. A
society can only be stable for the right reasons when the use of
coercive power within that society is justified to each person based
on reasons they could recognize and endorse. Otherwise, a society is
stable merely because of the use of power within it. Some public
justification theorists see a looser connection between stability and
public justification. Whether a norm or principle can be stable is
simply a good-making feature of that norm or principle
vis-à-vis others (Rawls sometimes talks this way in
Theory). Stability can also be seen as a merit of a
particular conception of public justification over others. For
instance, if a convergence conception of reasons would facilitate the
public justification of laws in ways that would in turn promote
stability, then that may be one reason to prefer it to a consensus
conception of reasons.
Rawls’s focus on stability raises another complex issue in
debates about the nature of public justification. The present entry
has already distinguished between idealizing persons as reasonable or
not (2.4.3).  Some conceptions of idealization attribute reasons to
citizens based on what they actually endorse and others attribute
reasons to citizens based on what they would reasonably
endorse. Stability is sometimes moralized to mean that stability is
only of the valuable sort when it is based on “the right
reasons” or what reasonable citizens would endorse. Rawls
exemplifies this view but also resists a merely prescriptive form of
stability; that is, he does not want a society to be stable based on
what should render it stable. Instead, while Rawls wants a society to
be stable for the right reasons, the idea of stability has content
independent of its normative status of being based on the right
considerations. A society can be unstable even if its institutions are
based on good reasons. So the idea of stability seems tied to both a
prescriptive ideal of public justification and a descriptive ideal of
actual stability for the right reasons. Thus the ideal of public
justification itself has both a prescriptive and a descriptive
element. Public justification theorists want public justification to
be actually achieved and to be based on good reasons. Gaus has
criticized Rawls (1996, 130–136) for having an excessively
populist or actualist conception of stability and has developed his
own conception of stability for the right reasons (2011,
389–408). In general, public justification theorists all feel
the pull of the normative and the descriptive, though some are more
inclined toward a purely normative interpretation (Quong 2011) and
others toward a more descriptive interpretation (arguably Rawls
2005).
In recent years, especially following Weithman (2011), philosophers
have started to explore the mechanisms by which a well-ordered society
can become stable for the right reasons. Weithman argues that
stability for the right reasons is generated by the use of public
reasons; in fact, Weithman argues that this was Rawls’s view. Kevin
Vallier and John Thrasher (2015) have argued that public reasons are
inadequate assurance mechanisms due to problems associated with cheap
talk and bad information that will be present even in a well-ordered
society. Brian Kogelmann and Steven H. W. Stich (2016) have argued
that convergence discourse, through allowing persons to use diverse
reasons as signals, can help to generate stability.
The ideal of public justification has many critics whose concerns are
often quite deep. Since the purpose of this entry is to explain the
ideal, it simply offers a comprehensive list of criticisms with brief
explanations. Some members of the list are drawn from a shorter list
constructed by Jonathan Quong (2011, 259–60). In general, the
objections are indexed to the conceptions of public justification to
which they apply. In the absence of such statement, the objection is
taken to apply to all versions discussed in the entry.
Many critics of the ideal of public justification argue that it cannot
address a number of important issues due to its restrictions on
permissible reasoning in public life (De Marneffe 1994, Reidy 2000;
Schwartzman 2004). This objection is typically lodged at the
standard, consensus view as the consensus view restricts the set of
justificatory reasons to the subset of shareable or accessible
reasons. There will be many issues on which citizens have little
common ground and thus should be able to appeal to private
considerations. Notice that the convergence view renders this
objection less pressing.
Some public reason liberals are criticized for developing conceptions
of justice that are highly indeterminate. Instead of generating clear
solutions to political problems, these critics claim, public reason
liberals cannot use the ideal of public justification to make
determinate recommendations. The most well-known version of the
objection is pressed by Gaus (2011) against more standard Rawlsian
conceptions of public justification. Gaus argues that we must appeal
to real social processes and evolutionary mechanisms to resolve the
problem (see above 2.7.4). This objection is related to a
“normalization” objection which holds that public reason
liberalism avoids indeterminacy only by building implausible
theoretical assumptions into their models (D’Agostino 2003).
Deliberative democrats have sometimes criticized Rawlsian versions of
public reason on the grounds that they “fix” the content
of, say, principles of justice, in advance of real deliberation.
Habermas famously (1995, 127–8) lodged this criticism against
Rawls. But notice that on our broad conception of public
justification, this objection is merely an objection to the Rawlsian
form of public justification vis-à-vis a more deliberative
conception.
The integrity objection holds that public justification imposes
excessive burdens on people of faith because it restricts the use of
unshared, comprehensive reasons, frequently religious reasons. The
argument here is that persons of faith have no reason to accept the
constraints that public reason liberals would impose upon them (Eberle
2002, Wolterstorff 1997, Vallier 2012). The integrity objection is
often tied to a fairness objection, which holds that public reason
liberalism treats religious reasons and secular reasons unequally,
giving arbitrary and unjustified preference to secular reasons (Perry
1993, Wolterstorff 1997). Note that the convergence view provokes this
objection less forcefully, as it allows appeal to religious reasons
(Eberle 2012), though convergence is thought to have its own problems
(see below). This objection is also related to what Patrick Neal
(2009) calls the “Denial of Truth” objection which
complains that citizens subject to the ideal of public justification
cannot in their political lives appeal to the whole truth as they see
it. Andrew March (2013) offers a useful taxonomy of religiously-based
arguments, and motivates the view that restricting some such arguments
can be overly burdensome, but restricting others can be justified.
Still other critics claim that public justification is too burdensome
because it implies an unrealistic and excessively high-minded view of
democratic politics due to how it restricts public discourse. Real
politics requires the use of private reasons in cases of
coalition-building and forging compromise (Shapiro 1999). This
objection is related to the integrity objection because of its focus
on public reason’s burdensomeness. However, it is focused more on
whether public reason is realistic, not whether it is unfair or
burdensome. The antidiscourse objection is aimed primarily at
discursive interpretations of the idea of practical reasoning in the
PJP.
Some critics argue that the ideal of public justification privileges
logical, calm, dispassionate forms of discourse that are uncommon
among minority groups. (It is a matter of controversy who these
minority groups are.) The objections here tend to mirror those of the
integrity objection, though they apply to different social groups
(Sanders 1997, Young 2000). Those who advance this criticism are most
concerned about the standard, Rawlsian interpretations of the PJP.
Public reason liberals often appeal to the sometimes controversial
idea of reasonableness when delineating the relevant members of the
public, which some critics find objectionable because it is
inegalitarian (Bohman 2003, Friedman 2000). This objection 
focuses on Rawlsian interpretations of PJP.
Public reason liberalism acquires much of its intuitiveness from
pointing out that reasonable people disagree about their conceptions
of the good and then use this fact to help generate a common
conception of justice. But critics argue that public reason liberalism
denies reasonable pluralism about justice, and thus prefers agreement
about rightness over agreement about goodness. They thereby point to an
asymmetry. (For discussion and rebuttal, see Quong 2011,
192–220.) This objection can be taken to apply to a wide range
of interpretations of the PJP. However, it does not apply to some
convergence views, as convergence theorists typically accept justice
pluralism (Gaus 2011, 276–279).
The PJP holds that all coercive actions or laws must be justified to
each member of the public. But critics ask whether this treatment
applies to the PJP itself. If it applies, then given that reasonable
people disagree about the PJP, the PJP is self-refuting. If the PJP
need not be publicly justified, then it looks as if public reason
liberals are arbitrarily privileging their own principle (Wall 2002;
Christiano 2010, 206–213; Estlund 2008; Wall 2013; Enoch 2013,
170–173). Some public reason liberals respond by trying to show
that their version of the PJP can satisfy itself (Estlund 2008),
whereas other public reason liberals attempt to show that the PJP is
not arbitrarily excluded from the process of public justification
(Gaus 2011; Vallier 2016a). This objection can be leveled against
almost any interpretation of the PJP. (For an additional recent
discussion, see Billingham 2017b.) 
Liberal perfectionists criticize public reason liberalisms on the
grounds that they prevent states from promoting the good and
flourishing of citizens. The forms of “neutrality” and
“restraint” the PJP entails cannot be justified (Wall
1998, Chan 2000), though perfectionists substantiate this objection in
many distinct ways. For some prominent replies, see Quong
2011. Perfectionists typically reject the PJP itself, not merely some
interpretations of it.
A general objection to the PJP is that it provides too many defeater
reasons for proposed laws, though such an objection is sometimes
leveled specifically at convergence views (Eberle 2012). When the
diversity of citizens’ reasons is brought to bear on the process of
public justification, it may turn out that very few proposals can be
publicly justified, so few that intuitively legitimate political
orders could not permissibly engage in the forms of coercion required
to maintain even a society’s basic structure. Public reason liberals
like Rawls admit that a society may have a basic structure that cannot
be publicly justified (Rawls 2005, pp, also see D’Agostino 1996), and
they admit that it takes a certain degree of social development to
reach a publicly justified polity (Rawls 2005). One might reply that
persons’ interest in having shared moral and political norms excludes
a priori the possibility of an empty “eligible set” of
justified proposals. But the most prominent arguments against the
debilitating presence of empty sets are sociological, arguing that our
shared ideas and practices make empty sets unlikely. Both Rawls and
Gaus give various sociological arguments to suspect that the set is
not empty (Rawls 2002, 124–128, Gaus 2011, 303–333,
389–408, 424–447). One strategy for resolving the empty
set objection is to provide a ranking of eligible laws or proposals in
accord with what members of the public have reason to accept or
reject. Given citizens’ interest in having at least some laws to
generate public order, empty set problems may be manageable. Thus
citizens have reason to accept non-optimal proposals so long as they
are not defeated.
This objection is directed at convergence views. Quong has argued that
by permitting private reasons into the process of public
justification, convergence liberals permit citizens to be insincere
with one another since those citizens can offer reasons to others that
they do not think are good reasons (Quong 2011). This ignores the
complexity which is introduced when we distinguish between shared
reasons and shared standards. Certainly, there is no insincerity
in A’s saying that, according to shared standards, it is
appropriate that B has a reason R and that R is a reason to endorse
some arrangement even though A herself does not have this reason. 
It also appears to rule out reasoning by conjecture (Rawls 2002,
Schwartzman 2012), where persons can appeal to the reasons of other
comprehensive doctrines in certain cases. That said, there are
nonetheless good reasons to adopt sincerity requirements (Schwartzman
2011).
Fred D’Agostino (1996) has argued at length that the PJP admits of
many variants (we have characterized these variants in terms of
different values for the variables in the PJP). While there are
reasons to favor different variants of the PJP, there will be many
different desiderata for any adequate interpretation of the PJP. To
give one example, public justification seeks some distance from
people’s actual reasons, in search of genuine justification rather
than specious rationalization. On the other hand, public justificatory
arguments are meant to have an impact on the individuals whom they
target and, in particular, to give them motives as well as reasons for
conformity to the demands they are subject to (Macedo 1990 makes these
points especially forcefully). Unfortunately, there is prima facie
incompatibility between these dual demands. To the extent that a given
course of reasoning satisfies the demands for normative distance, to
that extent is it likely to fail to meet the demands for motivational
impact.
Ordinarily, the fact that a principle admits of differing conceptions
which we must weigh along a number of dimensions is not a problem.
Even if no one conception is superior on all relevant dimensions, we
may still be able to select a variant based on all things considered
judgments. But D’Agostino worries that theorists lack the conceptual
resources to generate a weighing algorithm to ground these all things
considered judgments.
Public reason liberals, again, feel powerful pressure to idealize
members of the public, but some critics of public reason worry that
there is no way to idealize in a non-arbitrary fashion. Eberle (2002)
has argued that any idealization will tend to reflect the biases and
values of the theorists who engage in the idealization. Thus, public
reason liberals often end up excluding religious reasons from their
idealization in ways that the critics find arbitrary. Any version of
the PJP that appeals to idealization is subject to this objection.
David Enoch (2013) has recently argued that Gaus’s attempt to use
moderate idealization to show that the moral demands licensed by
publicly justified social-moral rules does not reduce the threat of
authoritarianism. Nicholas Wolterstorff (2007) has argued that
coercing someone based on an idealization is disrespectful and
patronizing.
The idea of public justification is often applied in order to make
progress on a number of important applied questions, in particular on
issues surrounding the role of religion in liberal democratic
politics, feminism, and marriage policy.
On the expansive religion in politics literature see the entry on
religion and political theory and
recent literature reviews in March 2013, Vallier
2014, and Bailey and Gentile 2014.
On feminist issues in public reason, see Okin 1994, Rawls 2002,
Nussbaum 2003, Baehr 2008, Hartley and Watson 2009, Hartley and Watson
2010, Neufeld and Van Schoelandt 2014, and Watson and Hartley 2018.
Concerning how public justification applies to marriage policy, see
Brake 2010, Macedo 2015, and Chambers 2017.