Pyrrho appears to have lived from around 365–360 BCE until
around 275–270 BCE (for the evidence see von Fritz (1963),
90). We have several reports of philosophers from whom he learned, the
most significant (and the most reliable) of which concern his
association with Anaxarchus of Abdera. Alongside Anaxarchus (and
several other philosophers) he allegedly accompanied Alexander the
Great on his expedition to India. We are told that in the course of
this expedition he encountered some “naked wise men”
(gumnosophistai); Diogenes Laertius (9.61) claims that his
philosophy developed as a result of this meeting, but it is not clear
what basis, if any, he has for this assertion. In any case, after his
return to Greece Pyrrho did espouse a philosophy that attracted
numerous followers, of whom the most important was Timon of
Phlius. The travel writer Pausanias reports (6.24.5) seeing a statue
of him in the marketplace in Pyrrho’s home town of Elis in the
Peloponnese; Diogenes also reports (9.64) that he was made high
priest, and that in his honor philosophers were made exempt from city
taxation. While Pausanias’ report is easier to accept at face
value than Diogenes’, both suggest that (at least locally) he
achieved considerable celebrity. However, there is no good reason to
believe that a Pyrrhonist ‘movement’ continued beyond his
own immediate followers; it was not until the first century BCE that
Pyrrhonism became the name of an ongoing philosophical tradition.
With the exception of poetry allegedly written while on Alexander’s expedition
(which, as far as we can tell, did not survive that expedition),
Pyrrho wrote nothing; we are therefore obliged to try to reconstruct
his philosophy from reports by others. Unfortunately the reports that
we have are fragmentary and, in many cases, of doubtful reliability.
Pyrrho’s follower Timon wrote numerous poems and prose works; but of
these only fragments and in some cases second-hand reports survive. It
is likely that much of what we hear about Pyrrho in later sources also
derives indirectly from Timon, but it is frequently not possible to
judge, in individual cases, whether or not this is so. Other
difficulties concerning Timon’s evidence are, first, that he writes as
a devotee rather than as a neutral reporter, and second, that the
great majority of Timon’s fragments derive from a poem
called Silloi (Lampoons), and consist of satirical
thumbnail sketches of other philosophers rather than any kind of
direct exposition of Pyrrho’s outlook. Nevertheless, Timon is clearly
the most important and the most trustworthy source of information
about Pyrrho. Of the evidence from Timon, one piece is especially
important. This is a summary, by the Peripatetic Aristocles of Messene
(late 1st c. BCE), of an account by Timon of Pyrrho’s most general
philosophical attitudes; it is generally agreed that this passage must
be the centerpiece of any interpretation of Pyrrho’s philosophy.
With the exception of a very few snippets of information, the only
other source of evidence on Pyrrho that is close to contemporary is
Antigonus of Carystus, a biographer of the mid-third century BCE.
Diogenes Laertius, whose life of Pyrrho is our major source of
biographical anecdotes, frequently cites Antigonus, and is probably
indebted to him in many places even when he does not cite him;
Antigonus is also mentioned by Aristocles, and is likely to be the
origin of much or even most of the surviving biographical material on
Pyrrho. But Antigonus needs to be handled even more carefully than
Timon. He was not a philosopher, and there is no reason to think that
he was capable of or particularly interested in comprehending
philosophical nuances. Nor is it clear that accuracy was high on his
list of priorities; on the contrary, what we know about him suggests
that he was a purveyor of sensationalist gossip rather than a reliable
historian. His account probably did contain genuine information about
Pyrrho’s demeanor and activities; but it would certainly be unwise to
take his anecdotes as a group on trust.
Cicero refers to Pyrrho about ten times, and Cicero is, in general, a
responsible reporter of other people’s views. Unfortunately his
information about Pyrrho appears to be very incomplete, and, as we
shall see, the impression he conveys of him may very well be
inaccurate. With one exception, he never mentions him except in
conjunction with the famously non-orthodox Stoics Aristo and
(sometimes) Herillus, and the remarks in question always concern the
same one or two points in ethics; it looks as if his knowledge of
Pyrrho derives almost entirely from a single source that conveyed
little or nothing about Pyrrho individually, and nothing at all about
any views of his in metaphysics or epistemology. In addition, a number
of authors in later antiquity make isolated comments about Pyrrho. But
since these comments postdate the rise of the later Pyrrhonist
movement, there is often room for suspicion as to whether they reflect
genuine information about Pyrrho himself, as opposed to the later
philosophy that took his name.
The safest way to proceed, then, in attempting to interpret Pyrrho’s
philosophy, is to begin with a detailed analysis of the summary of
Timon in Aristocles; the remaining evidence should be interpreted, and
assessed for its trustworthiness, as far as possible in light of what
the Aristocles passage has to tell us about Pyrrho’s philosophy. This
methodology has been challenged by Green (2017), who proposes a more
holistic approach in which other pieces of evidence may be used to
shed light on the Aristocles passage itself. Pursuing that method
would be highly desirable, if it were possible. But it would require
us to find other evidence that is both at least as historically
reliable as, and clearer in purport than, the Aristocles passage; and
it is highly doubtful whether any such evidence exists.
Whatever one’s view on this last point, there is no doubt that the
interpretation of the Aristocles passage itself is fraught with
controversy. Given the admitted centrality of this passage in any
interpretation of Pyrrho, it follows that the character of Pyrrho’s
thinking is, at its very core, a matter for sharp disagreement. The
present survey will attempt to lay out the two main alternatives and
explore the consequences of each. (Numerous other readings besides
these two have been proposed; in particular, the interpretation of
Svavarsson (2004) is an intriguing, though arguably unstable, hybrid
of the two. But it is fair to say that these two are the ones that
have commanded by far the most scholarly attention.)
A word, first, about the provenance and evidential value of the Aristocles
passage. Several chapters from book 8 of Aristocles’ Peri
philosophias (On Philosophy) appear in quotation in the
Praeparatio evangelica of Eusebius, the fourth-century bishop
of Caesarea. These chapters expound, and then attack from an
Aristotelian perspective, a number of philosophies that impugn the
reliability of one or other of our cognitive faculties. Among these
Aristocles counts Pyrrhonism, as represented by Pyrrho himself and by
the initiator of the later Pyrrhonist tradition, Aenesidemus;
Aristocles speaks of Aenesidemus (first century BCE, q.v.), as recent,
and is apparently not aware of any subsequent members of the
Pyrrhonist tradition. The chapter on Pyrrhonism opens with a brief
summary of the outlook of Pyrrho specifically, as reported by Timon
(14.18.1–5).
This convoluted transmission might lead one to doubt how much
authentic information can be extracted from the passage. But there is
no reason, first, to doubt Eusebius’ explicit claim to be quoting
Aristocles verbatim. Aristocles is not quoting Timon verbatim; some of
the vocabulary in this passage is clearly reminiscent of Aristocles’
own vocabulary in other chapters. However, other terms in the passage
are quite distinct both from Aristocles’ own normal usage and from any
of the terminology familiar to us from later Pyrrhonism, yet were in
use prior to Timon’s day; it seems easiest to account for these as
authentic reproductions of Timon’s own language. In addition, the
frequent mention of Timon either by name or by the word
phêsi, ‘he says’, suggests that Aristocles
is taking pains to reproduce the essentials of his account as
faithfully as possible. And finally, Aristocles’ other chapters, where
we are in a position to check his summaries against other evidence of
the views being summarized, suggest that he is in general a reliable
reporter of other people’s views, even views to which he himself is
strongly opposed—or at least, that he is reliable when he has
access to systematic written expositions of those views, as seems to
be the case here. As for Timon’s reliability as a source for Pyrrho’s
views, a word was said about this in the previous section; this
passage stands out from most of the surviving record from Timon in
that it appears to be based on a systematic account of the central
points of Pyrrho’s outlook. Thus, while we clearly cannot be sure that
every detail of the passage accurately reflects something that Pyrrho
thought, all the indications are that the passage deserves to be taken
seriously as evidence for Pyrrho’s philosophy.
Timon is reported as telling us that in order to be happy, one must
pay attention to three connected questions: first, what are things
like by nature? second, how should we be disposed towards things
(given our answer to the first question)? and third, what will be the
outcome for those who adopt the disposition recommended in the answer
to the second question? And the passage then gives us Pyrrho’s and
Timon’s answers to each of the three questions in order.
The answer to the question “what are things like by
nature?” is given by a sequence of three epithets; things are
said to be adiaphora and astathmêta and
anepikrita. Taken by themselves, these epithets can be
understood in two importantly different ways: they may be taken as
characterizing how things are (by nature) in themselves, or they may
be taken as commenting on human beings’ lack (by our nature) of
cognitive access to things. Adiaphora is normally translated
‘indifferent’. But this might be taken as referring either
to an intrinsic characteristic of things—namely that, in
themselves and by nature, they possess no differentiating features
— or to our natural inability to discern any such features. In
the latter case ‘undifferentiable’ might be a more
perspicuous translation. (Beckwith (2011) plausibly connects the focus
on differentiating features, or the lack of them, with the
Aristotelian notion of differentiae; on either of the readings to be
explored, Aristotle’s picture of the world and of our ability to
understand it would indeed be a prime example of the kind of view from
which Pyrrho is anxious to distance himself.)
Similarly, astathmêta might mean ‘unstable’
or ‘unbalanced’, describing an objective property of
things; or it might mean ‘not subject to being placed on a
balance’, and hence ‘unmeasurable’, which would
again place the focus on our cognitive
inabilities. And anepikrita might mean
‘indeterminate’, referring to an objective lack of any
definite features, or ‘indeterminable’, pointing to an
inability on our part to determine the features of things. The
statement as a whole, then, is either answering the question
“what are things like by nature?” by stating that things
are, in their very nature, indefinite or indeterminate in various ways
— the precise nature of the thesis would be a matter for further
speculation—or by stating that we human beings are not in a
position to pin down or determine the nature of things. Let us call
these the metaphysical and the epistemological interpretations
respectively.
It is clear that the metaphysical interpretation gives us a Pyrrho who
is not in any recognizable sense a sceptic. Pyrrho, on this
interpretation, is issuing a declaration about the nature of things in
themselves—precisely what the later Pyrrhonists who called
themselves sceptics were careful to avoid. On the epistemological
interpretation, on the other hand, Pyrrho is very much closer to the
tradition that took his name. There is still some distance between
them. To say that we cannot determine the nature of things
— as opposed to saying that we have so far failed to determine
the natural features of things—is already a departure from the
sceptical suspension of judgement promoted by Sextus Empiricus. And to
put it, as on this reading Pyrrho does put it, by saying that
things are indeterminable, is a further departure, in that it
does attribute at least one feature to things in themselves —
namely, being such that humans cannot determine them. Nevertheless,
the epistemological interpretation clearly portrays Pyrrho as a
forerunner—a naive and unsophisticated forerunner, perhaps
— of later Pyrrhonist scepticism, whereas the metaphysical
interpretation puts him in a substantially different light.
The natural way to try to choose between these two interpretations is
to see which of them fits best with the logic of the passage as a
whole. But here we encounter a further complication. The text of the
phrase that follows the words we have just been discussing is subject
to dispute. According to the manuscripts this phrase reads
“for this reason (dia touto) neither our
sensations nor our opinions tell the truth or lie”. Now, if this
reading is correct, the thought expressed seems to favor the
metaphysical interpretation; the idea is that, since things are in
their real nature indeterminate, our sensations and opinions, which
represent things as having certain determinate features, are neither
true nor false. They are not true, since reality is not the way they
present it as being; but they are not false either, since that too
would require that reality have certain determinate features, namely
features that are the negations of the ones that our sensations and
opinions portray it as having. By contrast, it is quite unclear how
the claim that the nature of things cannot be determined by us could
be thought to license the inference “for this reason neither our
sensations nor our opinions tell the truth or lie”. That claim
would seem at most to license the very different inference that
we cannot tell whether they tell the truth or lie.
But some scholars have suggested that the manuscripts are in error at
this point, and that what the text should say is “on account
of the fact that (dia to) neither our sensations nor our
opinions tell the truth or lie”. The change is justified on
linguistic grounds; it is alleged that the text in the manuscripts as
they stand is not acceptable Greek. The considerations for and against
this proposal are technical, and debate has yielded no consensus on
this question. However, it is clear that if one does make this small
alteration to the text, the direction of the inference is reversed;
the point about our sensations and opinions now becomes a reason for
the point about the nature of things, not an inference from it. And
this, it has been argued, points towards the epistemological
interpretation. The idea would then be that, since our sensations and
opinions fail to be consistent deliverers of true reports (or, for
that matter, false reports) about the world around us, there is no
prospect of our being able to determine the nature of things.
This is the crux on which the decision between the two main lines of
interpretation of Pyrrho’s philosophy turns. The remainder of the
Aristocles passage, and indeed the remainder of the evidence on Pyrrho
in general, can be read so as to fit with either the metaphysical or
the epistemological reading of his answer to the question about the
nature of things. The Aristocles passage continues with the answer to
the second question, namely the question of the attitude we should
adopt given the answer to the first question. We are told, first, that
we should not trust our sensations and opinions, but should adopt an
unopinionated attitude. On the epistemological reading, the
significance of this is obvious. But on the metaphysical reading, too,
we have already been told that our sensations and opinions are not
true, which is presumably reason enough for us not to trust them; and
the unopinionated attitude that is here recommended may be understood
as one in which one refrains from positing any definite
characteristics as inherent in the nature of things—given that
their real nature is wholly indefinite. (To the objection that this
thesis of indefiniteness is itself an opinion, it may be replied that
doxa, ‘opinion’, is regularly used in earlier
Greek philosophy, especially in Parmenides and Plato, to refer to
those opinions—misguided opinions, in the view of these
authors—that take on trust a view of the world as conforming
more or less to the way it appears in ordinary experience. In this
usage, the claim that reality is indefinite would not be a (mere)
opinion, but would be a statement of the truth.)
The passage now introduces a certain form of speech that is supposed
to reflect this unopinionated attitude. We are supposed to say
“about each single thing that it no more is than is not or both
is and is not or neither is nor is not”. There are a number of
intricate questions about the exact relations between the various
parts of this complicated utterance, and especially about the role and
significance of the ‘both’ and ‘neither’
components. But it is clear that this too is susceptible of being read
along the lines of either of the two interpretations introduced above.
On the metaphysical interpretation, we are being asked to adopt a form
of words that reflects the utter indefiniteness of the way things are;
we should not say of anything that it is any particular way
any more than that it is not that way (with ‘is’
being understood, as commonly in Greek philosophy, as shorthand for
‘is F’, where F stands for any arbitrary
predicate). On the epistemological interpretation, we are being asked
to use a manner of speaking that expresses our suspension of judgement
about how things are. Sextus Empiricus specifically tells us that
‘no more’ (ou mallon) is a term used by the
sceptics to express suspension of judgement, and its occurrence in the
Aristocles passage can be taken as an early example of the same type
of usage.
Finally, in answer to the third question, we are told that the result
for those who adopt the unopinionated attitude just recommended is
first aphasia and then ataraxia.  Ataraxia,
‘freedom from worry’, is familiar to us from later
Pyrrhonism; this is said by the later Pyrrhonists to be the result of
the suspension of judgement that they claimed to be able to
induce. The precise sense of aphasia is less clear. Beckwith
(2011) actually argues that the transmitted text is erroneous, and
that we should instead read apatheia, “lack of passion”. This
is an attractive suggestion; apatheia is indeed a term used
not infrequently of Pyrrho’s untroubled attitude (see section 5),
whereas a reference to aphasia would be unparalleled in the
other evidence on Pyrrho. However, the proposal is inevitably
speculative, and aphasia is a term in use in later
Pyrrhonism; it seems worth trying to elucidate it on the assumption
that the transmitted text is correct. It might mean
‘non-assertion’, as in Sextus—that is, a refusal to
commit oneself to definite alternatives; or it might mean, more
literally, ‘speechlessness’, which could in turn be taken
to be an initial reaction of stunned silence to the radical position
with which one has been presented (an uncomfortable reaction that is
subsequently replaced by ataraxia—the passage does say
that aphasia comes first and ataraxia comes
later). But the decision between these two ways of understanding the
term is independent of the broader interpretive issues bearing upon
the passage as a whole. For some form of ‘non-assertion’
is clearly licensed by either the metaphysical or the epistemological
interpretation; and on either interpretation, the view proposed might
indeed render someone (initially) uncomfortable to the point of
‘speechlessness’. The important point, though, is that
ataraxia is the end result; and this links back to the
introductory remark to the effect that the train of thought to be
summarized has the effect of making one happy.
We have, then, two major possibilities. On the one hand, Pyrrho can be
read as advancing a sweeping metaphysical thesis, that things are in
their real nature indefinite or indeterminate, and encouraging us to
embrace the consequences of that thesis by refusing to attribute any
definite features to things (at least, as belonging to their real
nature) and by refusing to accept at face value (again, as revelatory
of the real nature of things) those myriad aspects of our ordinary
experience that represent things as having certain definite features.
Or, on the other hand, Pyrrho can be read as declaring that the nature
of things is inaccessible to us, and encouraging us to withdraw our
trust (and to speak in such a way as to express our withdrawal of
trust) in ordinary experience as a guide to the nature of things. As
noted earlier, the second, epistemological interpretation makes
Pyrrho’s outlook a great deal closer to that of the later Pyrrhonists
who took him as an inspiration. But that is not in itself any reason
for favoring this interpretation over the other, metaphysical one. For
on either interpretation Pyrrho is said to promise ataraxia,
the later Pyrrhonists’ goal, and to promise it as a result of
a certain kind of withdrawal of trust in the veracity of our everyday
impressions of things; the connection between these two points aligns
Pyrrho with the later Pyrrhonists, and sets him apart from every other
Greek philosophical movement that preceded later Pyrrhonism. The fact
that this later sceptical tradition took Pyrrho as an inspiration is
therefore readily understandable whichever of the two interpretations
is correct (or whichever they thought was correct). It is also true
that, on the metaphysical interpretation of the passage, the grounds
on which Pyrrho advanced his metaphysical thesis of indeterminacy are
never specified; this too, like the precise character of the thesis
itself, must be a matter for speculative reconstruction. But
Aristocles only purports to be giving the key points of Timon’s
summary; the lack of detail, though disappointing, would not be
surprising.
The other evidence bearing upon Pyrrho’s central philosophical
attitudes does nothing to settle the dispute between these two
possible interpretations of the Aristocles passage. A number of texts
explicitly or implicitly represent Pyrrho’s outlook as essentially
identical to the sceptical outlook of the later Pyrrhonists. However,
all of these texts postdate the rise of later Pyrrhonism itself, and
none of them contains anything like the level of detail of the
Aristocles passage; there is no particular reason to suppose that any
of them represents a genuine understanding of Pyrrho as distinct from
the later Pyrrhonists.  There are also a few texts that appear to
offer a picture of Pyrrho’s thought that is congenial to the
metaphysical interpretation. The most significant of these is a
passage from near the beginning of Diogenes Laertius’ life of Pyrrho
(9.61); Pyrrho, we are told, “said that nothing is either fine
or ignoble or just or unjust; and similarly in all cases that nothing
is the case in reality (mêden einai têi
alêtheiai), but that human beings do everything by
convention and habit; for each thing is no more this than that”.
This looks as if it is attributing to Pyrrho a metaphysical thesis,
and a thesis according to which things have no definite features; it
does not seem to be portraying Pyrrho as an advocate of suspension of
judgement. However, the passage is undoubtedly in some way confused.
For immediately beforehand we are told that Pyrrho was the one who
initiated the type of philosophy consisting of
“inapprehensibility and suspension of judgement”; and the
previously quoted passage is then cited as confirmation of this. This
passage of Diogenes as a whole, then, fails to maintain any clear
distinction between epistemological and metaphysical readings of
Pyrrho’s thought, and cannot safely be used as evidence for
either.
Most of the remaining evidence about Pyrrho has to do with his
practical attitudes and behavior. There are a number of biographical
anecdotes, and there are a few fragments of Timon that purport to
depict Pyrrho’s state of mind. Some of the biographical anecdotes are
clearly polemical inventions. For example, Diogenes (9.62) reports
Antigonus as saying that Pyrrho’s lack of trust in his senses led him
to ignore precipices, oncoming wagons and dangerous dogs, and that his
friends had to follow him around to protect him from these various
everyday hazards. But he then reports the dissenting verdict of
Aenesidemus, according to which Pyrrho was perfectly capable of
conducting himself in a sensible manner. This reflects a longstanding
ancient dispute as to whether it is possible to live if one radically
abandons common-sense attitudes to the world (as, on either of the two
major interpretations outlined above, Pyrrho in some sense did).
Antigonus has transformed a hostile criticism of Pyrrho—that,
if one really were to adopt the attitudes he recommends, one
would be unable consistently to live as a sane human being
— into an account of how Pyrrho actually did act; but there is
no reason to take this seriously as biography. (It does, however,
raise the question of what it means to mistrust the senses—as
the Aristocles passage tells us, on either interpretation, that Pyrrho
did—if this is to be consistent with self-preservation in
one’s ordinary behavior; we shall return to this point at the end of
this section.)
But there are many other anecdotes, preserved in Diogenes and
elsewhere, that cannot be dismissed in this fashion. The dominant
impression that they convey as a group is of an extraordinary
impassivity or imperturbability; with rare exceptions (which he
himself is portrayed as regretting), Pyrrho is depicted as maintaining
his calm and untroubled attitude no matter what happens to him. This
extends even to extreme physical pain—he is reported not to
have flinched when subjected to the horrific techniques of ancient
surgery—but it also encompasses dangers such as being on a
ship in a storm. (This is not to say that he did not avoid such
troubles if he could, as suggested by the apocryphal stories mentioned
in the previous paragraph; it is just to say that he did not lose his
composure in the face of life’s inevitable hardships.) There is
another aspect to this untroubled attitude as well. In numerous
anecdotes Pyrrho is shown as unconcerned with adhering to the normal
conventions of society; he wanders off for days on end by himself, and
he performs tasks that would normally be left to social inferiors,
such as housework and even washing a pig. Here, too, the suggestion is
that he does not care about things that ordinary people do care about
— in this case, the disapproval of others. (The passage from
Diogenes quoted in the previous section, according to which Pyrrho
held “that human beings do everything by convention and
habit” is not necessarily in conflict with this; by ‘human
beings’ Pyrrho might have meant ordinary human beings,
among whom he would not have included himself.)
The fragments of Timon also emphasize Pyrrho’s exceptional
tranquillity, and add a further, more philosophical dimension to it.
Several fragments suggest that this tranquillity results from his not
engaging in theoretical inquiry like other philosophers, and with his
not engaging in debate with those philosophers. Other thinkers are
perturbed by their need to discover how the universe works, and their need to
prevail in arguments with their rivals; Pyrrho is unconcerned about
any of this.
Clearly it would be foolish to accept every detail of this composite
account. Timon’s picture is no doubt idealized, and the biographical
material surely includes a measure of embellishment. Collectively,
however, these fragments and anecdotes add up to a highly consistent
portrait; it does not seem overconfident to take this at least as
reflecting an ideal towards which Pyrrho strived, and which he
achieved to a sufficient degree to have attracted notice.
What connections can be drawn between this portrait of Pyrrho’s
demeanor and the philosophy expounded in the Aristocles passage? What
we have here, plainly, is a fuller specification of the
ataraxia that the Aristocles passage promised as the outcome
of the process of responding in the recommended way to the three
questions. But why should this process be thought to yield
ataraxia, and why should the outcome take the specific form
suggested by the material discussed in this section? Now is a
convenient point to address these questions (as we did not do in
initially examining the Aristocles passage). We may distinguish the
overall emotional tranquillity depicted in the biographical material
and the particular tranquillity, derived from the avoidance of
theoretical inquiry, that is emphasized in the fragments of Timon.
The most obvious explanation for the overall emotional tranquillity
would seem to be along the following lines. If one adopts the position
recommended in the answers to the Aristocles passage’s first two
questions, one will not hold any definite beliefs, about any object or
state of affairs, to the effect that the object or state of affairs
really is good, or valuable, or worth seeking—or, on the other
hand, bad or to be avoided. (This will be true on either the
metaphysical or the epistemological interpretations of the Aristocles
passage.) Hence one will attach far less importance to the attainment
or the avoidance of any particular objects, or the occurrence or
non-occurrence of any particular state of affairs, than one would if
one thought that these things really did have some kind of positive or
negative value; nothing will matter to one to anything like the same
extent as it matters to most people. If this is on the right lines,
then Pyrrho’s route to ataraxia closely resembles the one
described in several places by Sextus Empiricus (PH 1.25–30,
3.235–8, M 11.110–67); the account I have given is in fact
modeled after Sextus’ explanation of how suspension of judgement
produces ataraxia.  Indeed, it is difficult to see how else
the process is to be reconstructed. One difference, however, between
the practical attitudes of Pyrrho and Sextus is that Sextus attributes
an important role to convention in the shaping of one’s behavior; more
on this in a moment.
As for the avoidance of theoretical inquiry and debate, it is fair to
assume that Pyrrho will have regarded such inquiry and debate as
troublesome because it is necessarily fruitless and interminable. If
the real nature of things is indeterminable by us, as the
epistemological interpretation would have it, then to attempt to
determine the nature of things, and to provide cogent grounds for the
superiority of one’s own theories, is to attempt the impossible; such
matters are simply beyond our grasp. But if, as the metaphysical
interpretation would have it, the world is in its real nature
indefinite, then one is also attempting the impossible, though for a
different reason; one is attempting to determine a fixed character for
things that inherently lack any fixed character. Of course, the thesis
that reality is indefinite is itself a definite statement. But it
follows from this statement that any attempt to establish fixed and
definite characteristics for specific items in the universe is doomed
to failure. And it seems to be this kind of theoretical inquiry that
Timon represents Pyrrho as eschewing; as one fragment puts it
(addressing Pyrrho), “you were not concerned to inquire what
winds hold sway over Greece, from where everything comes and into what
it passes” (Diogenes Laertius 9.65). On this reading, then,
Pyrrho’s avoidance of inquiry and debate resembles the disdain for
physical speculation that is apparent in some writings of Plato (the
Phaedo for example); physical speculation is fruitless
because the physical world is not susceptible to rational inquiry.
Here another difference may be discerned from the Pyrrhonism of Sextus
Empiricus. For although Sextus certainly does not claim to have
definite answers of his own concerning the nature of things, he has no
qualms about engaging with his opponents in debate, or about pitting
them against one another. Indeed, the Pyrrhonism of Sextus depends on
a constant interplay of competing arguments on as many topics as
possible. One’s suspension of judgement results from one’s experience
of the ‘equal strength’ (isostheneia) of the
competing considerations on all sides of a given issue; but this
requires that one be regularly exposed to such competing
considerations, and the works of Sextus are themselves bountiful
sources for this. Sextus may agree with Pyrrho that such debates are
interminable, but they have an important role in later Pyrrhonist
practice nonetheless. Pyrrho’s own practice is quite different,
because his ataraxia flows not from an ongoing practice of
intellectual juggling, but from a conclusion about the nature
of things, as reported in the Aristocles passage—either that
it is indeterminable by us or that it is indefinite—that he
has arrived at once and for all.
We have seen that Pyrrho was unconcerned, or aspired to be
unconcerned, about things that most of us care about very deeply. But
how does one make any decisions at all, if one adopts this kind of
attitude? Unless we are to believe the stories of Pyrrho as a madman
depending on his friends to rescue him from precipices and dogs, we
are entitled to expect an answer to this question. There is some
evidence to suggest that the answer proposed—if not by Pyrrho
himself, then at least by Timon—was that one relies on the
appearances. If this is correct, we have another link, at least at a
general level, with the Pyrrhonism of Sextus, for whom appearances are
what he calls the “criterion of action”. One difference,
as mentioned earlier, is that Sextus lists laws and customs as one of
the four main varieties of appearances that one may use to guide one’s
behavior; on Sextus’ account, then, certain courses of action will
appear to one as desirable or undesirable given that they are approved
or disapproved of by the prevailing mores. But Pyrrho seems to have
been thoroughly unconventional in some aspects of his behavior. It is
impossible to say specifically what kinds of phenomena were included
for him and Timon under the heading of ‘the appearances’
— or whether they had anything very precise in mind
here. Nevertheless, it looks as if the early or proto-Pyrrhonist
answer to the question of how one acts and makes decisions is that one
does so in light of the way things appear to one. On the
epistemological interpretation, this will amount to “in light of
the characteristics that things seem to have (but, for all we know,
may not really have)”; on the metaphysical interpretation, it
will amount to “in light of the temporary and contingent
characteristics that things manifest on any given occasion (but that
are no part of how they really are, since how they really are
is indefinite)”. In either case, the way in which one mistrusts
sensations and common-sense opinions, as the Aristocles passage
recommends, is not that one pays no attention to them in one’s
everyday behavior; one mistrusts them simply in that one does not take
them as a guide to the underlying nature of things.
There is one further, highly problematic fragment of Timon that seems
to belong in the area of practical philosophy. This is a set of four
lines of verse that make reference to “the nature of the divine
and the good”. There is no consensus on how to translate these
lines, and different translations yield very different consequences
for interpretation. The first two lines can be rendered either
The second two lines can be rendered either
There are numerous other disputes over the translation, but these
alternatives put on display most of the central options for
interpretation.
The lines are quoted by Sextus Empiricus (M 11.20); there is
no further trace of them in the surviving record. The context in which
Sextus introduces them shows that he is inclined to understand the
first couplet according to reading (A) rather than reading( B); but he
suggests that he is not sure about this. The speaker into whose mouth
Timon put these lines is never identified, but it has generally been
assumed to be Pyrrho.
If one understands the second couplet according to reading (C), then
the speaker is apparently endorsing a position that attributes
definite natures to things; and this appears flatly inconsistent with
the Aristocles passage, on either the metaphysical or the
epistemological reading. The tension is especially bad if one reads
the first couplet according to reading (B), in which case the speaker
is insisting that he is in possession of the truth. But even on
reading (A), where the effect is to weaken the assertion to one about
what appears to the speaker to be the case, the statement about
“the nature of the divine and the good” seems strikingly
out of keeping with the rest of what we hear about Pyrrho’s
philosophy. It has been suggested that Pyrrho made an exception, in
the case of the divine and the good, to his general prohibition on
attributing definite natures to things; but it is hard to see the
motivation for such a move, and this interpretation has not been
generally accepted. It is true that Cicero speaks of Pyrrho as holding
that virtue is the sole good, and that no distinctions of value are to
be drawn among things other than virtue and vice. However, as was
mentioned earlier, Cicero always attributes this view to Pyrrho
alongside the unorthodox Stoic Aristo of Chios; he never gives any
details about Pyrrho’s thinking specifically. We know from other
sources that Aristo did hold this position; and, as we have seen,
there is good reason to think that Pyrrho did refrain quite generally
from attributing positive or negative value to ordinary objects of
concern (things other than virtue and vice), which is one part of the
position Cicero attributes to him and Aristo. So it looks as if Cicero
has been misled (probably by the sketchiness of the information in his
source) into thinking that Pyrrho agreed with Aristo in both parts of
his position rather than in just one part. At any rate, Cicero cannot
be regarded as offering any credible support for an interpretation of
Pyrrho that has him believing in a natural good; again, this is just
too discordant with the remainder of the evidence.
Reading (D) of Timon’s second couplet (which is due, with minor
modifications, to Burnyeat (1980)) is intended to eliminate the
troublesome reference to an eternal real nature. According to this
interpretation, the phrase “the nature of the divine and the
good” refers simply to a characteristic that is attributed to
Pyrrho, and labeled by poetic hyperbole as ‘divine’, in
another fragment of Timon, namely his extraordinary tranquillity; the
couplet as a whole, then, is saying that tranquillity is the source of
an even-tempered life. And if one combines this with the less dogmatic
reading (A) of the first couplet, this yields a set of remarks that
are not obviously in conflict with anything else in the record on
Pyrrho.
The acceptability of the translation in reading (D) is not beyond
question. There is also some question whether the claim that
tranquillity is the source of an even-tempered life is anything more
than vacuous. However, if one assumes that Pyrrho is the speaker of
these lines, then this interpretation or something close to it seems
to be the only way to rescue his thought (as reported by Timon) from
inconsistency. Another possibility, an interpretatively less
burdensome one, is to drop the assumption that Pyrrho is the speaker;
in this case, there is no reason to assume that the thought expressed
by the lines must be consistent with what we know of Pyrrho’s
philosophy. But if one takes this option, one must devise an
alternative explanation for why Timon would have written these
lines—including some account of who else the speaker might
be. This challenge has recently been taken up in Clayman (2010),
chapter 2. Clayman argues that the speaker is Timon himself, and that
the lines serve a programmatic function at the opening of the poem; in
light of parallel passages in other early Hellenistic poetry, the
reference to truth is understood as an allusion to poetic
verisimilitude rather than to anything philosophically problematic.
Finally, it has been suggested (in Svavarsson 2002)
that muthon, rendered in both readings (A) and (B) by
“word”, should rather be understood as “myth”
in the sense of “fiction” (and “of truth”
linked instead, as is linguistically quite possible, with
“standard”). In this case, again, there is no difficulty
in understanding the second couplet as expressing a dogmatic position;
indeed, such a reading is only to be expected, since the position is
being debunked, not advocated. Green (2017) has extended
Svavarsson’s suggestion by proposing that “word of
truth” and “correct standard” are to be understood
sarcastically rather than at face value, making fun of other
thinkers’ belief in these things (which would also render the
thought less dogmatic; it would not simply be a declaration of
falsehood). But whether the word muthos, all by itself, can
carry this weight of significance—or whether, if that is what
Timon had intended, he would not have chosen some less ambiguous means
of expressing it—is open to question. It is fair to say that no
resolution of these matters is in sight; the fragment continues to be
regarded as one of the most intractable pieces of evidence in the
corpus of material on Pyrrho and Timon.
Many different philosophical antecedents have been claimed for
Pyrrho. Since we know very little about which philosophical currents
Pyrrho may have been acquainted with, such claims are bound to be in
large measure speculative. There are, however, a couple of exceptions
to this; as noted at the outset, Pyrrho was associated with Anaxarchus
and was reported to have encountered some unnamed Indian thinkers. The
little that we know of Anaxarchus seems to suggest that his philosophy
had a good deal in common with Pyrrho’s. Diogenes Laertius (9.60)
ascribes to him an attitude of apatheia and eukolia,
‘freedom from emotion’ and ‘contentedness’; as
noted earlier,
apatheia is used in some sources to describe Pyrrho’s
attitude as well, and the combination of the two terms seems to
describe something close to the state cultivated by Pyrrho. We also
hear from Sextus Empiricus that Anaxarchus “likened existing
things to stage-painting and took them to be similar to the things
which strike us while asleep or insane” (M 7.88). This
has often been taken as an early expression of a form of
epistemological scepticism.  But it may also be taken as an
ontological comment on the insubstantiality of the world around us; it
is things (as opposed to our impressions of things) that are
assimilated to stage-sets and the contents of dreams and
fantasies. Either way, the remark looks like an anticipation of
Pyrrho’s position in the Aristocles passage; the first reading
conforms to the epistemological interpretation of that passage, and
the second to the metaphysical interpretation. It appears, then, that
Pyrrho may have borrowed to a considerable extent from
Anaxarchus. There is, however, no indication that Anaxarchus drew a
connection between his view of the nature of things and his attitude
of emotional contentment, such as we have seen that Pyrrho did.
We do not know the identity of the “naked wise men” whom
Pyrrho met in India, or what they thought. There are reports of other
meetings between Indian and Greek thinkers during Alexander’s
expedition, and these tend to emphasize the Indians’ extraordinary
impassivity and insensitivity to pain and hardship. It is not unlikely
that Pyrrho, too, was impressed by traits of this kind. Though
precedents for his ideal of ataraxia exist in earlier Greek
philosophy as well, his reported ability to withstand surgery without
flinching is exceptional in the Greek context (and quite distinct from
anything in later Pyrrhonism); if we believe this story, it is
tempting to explain it by way of some form of training from the
Indians. Some scholars have sought to establish more detailed links
between the thought of the Aristocles passage and various currents in
ancient Indian philosophy; and Beckwith (2015) finds in Pyrrho an
authentic representative of early Buddhism. But there is at least room
for debate about how far these similarities really go. From an
opposing perspective, some have suggested that the linguistic barriers
would have ruled out an interchange of any great philosophical
subtlety between the Indians and Pyrrho. But this may be overly
pessimistic; the expedition lasted a number of years, and some people
manage to learn new languages remarkably quickly.
Beyond these figures with attested connections to Pyrrho, it is
plausible to suppose a certain influence on Pyrrho from Democritus.
Pyrrho is reported to have had a special admiration for Democritus
(Diogenes Laertius 9.67, citing Pyrrho’s associate Philo); Democritus
is one of the few philosophers besides Pyrrho himself who seems to
escape serious criticism in Timon’s Lampoons; and Anaxarchus
belonged in the tradition of thinkers stemming from Democritus. The
influence may have been mainly in the ethical area; Democritus, too,
had an ethical ideal that is recognizably a forerunner to Pyrrho’s
ataraxia. If one adopts the epistemological interpretation of
Pyrrho’s philosophy, one may see an additional area of influence in
Democritus’ sceptical pronouncements about the prospects for knowledge
of the world around us.
Alternatively, if one interprets Pyrrho along metaphysical lines, one
may be inclined to look to Plato and the Eleatics as possible
influences. Timon’s verdicts on these figures in the Lampoons
are at least partially favorable; and, as was hinted at earlier on,
the dim view of sensibles that is suggested by a number of Plato’s
dialogues—but also anticipated by the Eleatics—seems
to have something in common with Pyrrho’s view of reality (on the
metaphysical interpretation) as indeterminate. The difference, of
course, is that Pyrrho does not suggest any higher level of reality
such as Plato’s Forms or the Eleatic Being.
Pyrrho’s relation to the later Pyrrhonists has already been
discussed. Given the importance of Pyrrhonism in earlier modern
philosophy, Pyrrho’s indirect influence may be thought of as very
considerable. But beyond his being adopted as a figurehead in later
Pyrrhonism—itself never a widespread philosophical movement
— Pyrrho seems to have had very little impact in the ancient
world after his own lifetime. Both Cicero and Seneca refer to Pyrrho
as a neglected figure without a following, and the surviving
testimonia do not contradict this impression. It is possible that he
had some influence on the form of scepticism adopted by Arcesilaus and
other members of the Academy; the extent to which this is so is
disputed and difficult to assess. It is also possible that the
Epicureans, whose aim was also ataraxia, learned something
from Pyrrho; there are indications of an association between Pyrrho
and Nausiphanes, the teacher of Epicurus. But if so, the extent of the
Epicureans’ borrowing was strictly limited. For them,
ataraxia is to be attained by coming to understand that the
universe consists of atoms and void; and the Epicureans’ attitude
towards the senses was anything but one of mistrust.