 Born in Aller, Somerset, Cudworth was educated at Emmanuel
College, Cambridge, where he was elected to a fellowship in 1639. His
academic career at the University of Cambridge advanced during the
upheavals of the English Civil War: he was appointed as Master of
Clare College (1645), Regius Professor of Hebrew (1645), and Master of
Christ’s College (1654). Although associated with the
interregnum regime, he retained both his college and university
appointments at the restoration of the monarchy in 1660, remaining in
post in Cambridge until his death in 1688 (Pailin 2020). His daughter,
Damaris, Lady Masham, who became a close friend of John Locke, was the
only one of his children to follow in his footsteps as a
philosopher.
The only philosophical work which Cudworth published in his lifetime
was The True Intellectual System of the Universe (1678)
(hereafter TISU). Two works were published posthumously:
A Treatise Concerning Eternal and Immutable Morality
(hereafter TEIM) in 1731 and Of Freewill (hereafter
FW) in 1838. A substantial body of manuscripts on
“Liberty and Necessity”, remain unpublished to this day,
though these may have circulated in the seventeenth century. Prior to
the publication of TISU, Cudworth’s philosophical ideas
were known primarily through a handful of sermons, the most notable of
which was the sermon preached before Parliament in 1647, which
anticipates the Platonising outlook of his philosophical writings, and
has come to be considered a classic for its message of peace and
reconciliation.
Cudworth’s philosophical project was planned to be a tripartite
work entitled The True Intellectual System of the Universe,
of which only the first part was published. The constituent books of
this never-completed project were to be 
This division of the subject-matter corresponds to what he regarded as
the essentials of both true philosophy and true religion, namely, the
existence of God (that there is “an omnipotent, understanding
being presiding over all…[which is] essentially good and
just”), the real existence of the principles of morality which
are grounded in divine goodness rather than divine will (that there
is, “something in its own nature, immutably and eternally just,
and unjust; and not by arbitrary will, law, and command only”),
and the moral autonomy of human beings (“that we are so far
forth principles or masters of our own actions, as to be accountable
to justice for them”) (TISU A45). Cudworth
explains the term “intellectual” in the title of this
system as being intended distinguish it from astronomical theories or
systems of the world. The term also indicates that his
“system” is conceived along Platonist lines as the
eternal, unchanging model or paradigm, of all things, the
“intellectual system” being the intelligible realm which
reveals the metaphysical framework of all existence. (In all
likelihood Plato’s Timaeus, was the inspiration here).
For Cudworth the system of nature is the intelligible product of
divine intellect. His system is true both in the sense that it is
philosophically true, and also because its philosophical principles
are compatible with religious truth.
TISU as published in 1678 is only the first of three volumes
which Cudworth had planned to write with the same over-all title, but
he defends it as a self-standing work. In it he seeks to provide an
anti-determinist defence of theism against scepticism, atheism and
materialism, and to demonstrate the compatibility of true philosophy
with true religion. In so arguing, he probably had in mind the
anti-atheist arguments of book X of Plato’s Laws. The
last chapter, in particular, contains many, often extensive, arguments
with his philosophical contemporaries (Descartes, Hobbes and Spinoza).
TISU also broaches a number of epistemological and ethical
themes which are more fully treated in the manuscript writings
unpublished at the time of his death.
TEIM (1731) was the first of Cudworth’s works to be
published posthumously. It was probably originally intended as a
propaedeutic to his unpublished writings on ethics. Although its title
suggests otherwise, it is in large part a work of epistemology,
containing the fullest treatment of nativist epistemology by any
British philosopher of the seventeenth century. Following Plato,
Cudworth argues that ideas and moral principles “are eternal and
self-subsistent things”, pitching his arguments against the
moral relativism and sense-based epistemology of Protagoras and
Hobbes. Cudworth's enduring legacy in moral philosophy, and as a moral
rationalist derives from this work (Raphael 1969, Schneewind
2003).
FW (1838) is the only one of the three manuscripts on the
subject of “Of Liberty and Necessity”, which were
unpublished when Cudworth died. These are drafts for the planned third
part of his system. Although these are by no means a complete draft of
this, they show that Cudworth was attempting something new, by
developing an anti-determinist moral psychology, the key features of
which are his conception of free will as self-determination, his idea
of the hegemonikon or ruling principle of the soul, and his
conception of consciousness.
Cudworth’s legacy of bulky and incomplete writings, testifies to
his comprehensive knowledge of both ancient, and contemporary
philosophy. He subscribed to the Renaissance view of philosophy as
philosophia perennis (perennial philosophy), which
presupposes a single timeless core of philosophical truth, which is
the shared goal of both ancient and modern philosophical enquiry. Heir
to the Renaissance Humanist recovery of almost the entire corpus of
ancient philosophy known today, his recourse to antique learning,
especially the philosophy of Plato and Plotinus, but also Stoicism, is
in many ways a typically Humanist move to ground authority in the
tried and tested wisdom of ancient philosophers (Aspelin 1942, Sellars
2011). However, he turned to ancient philosophy, especially Greek
philosophy, as a fund of pre-scholastic philosophical ideas and the
source for a new conceptual vocabulary. As one of the first to write
philosophy entirely in English, he coined many new terms, many of them
adapted from Greek.  Some (e.g., autexousion,
antitypous) have not stood the test of time, while others
(e.g., “Cartesianism”, “self-determinism”,
“consciousness”) are common currency in English philosophy
to this today. At the same time, his philosophy was deeply influenced
by contemporary philosophy, especially Cartesianism (Passmore 1951,
Sailor 1962). He had high regard for Descartes as “an acute
philosopher” and his philosophy registers the impact of
Descartes in multifarious ways. He admired Cartesianism as system of
philosophy combining physics with metaphysics, which posited both
corporeal and incorporeal substance. He accepted clear and distinct
perception as the criterion of epistemological certainty, and the
Cartesian account of sense perception. Sensation, for Cudworth, as for
Descartes, is a “passion” of the soul, at best a confused
perception (TEIM, 85). He embraced both the idea of
consciousness and the idea of God as a fully perfect, self-existing
being, and adopted Descartes’s conception of body as inert
extension. However, he was highly critical of Descartes on many
counts. He denied that mechanical rules of impact were sufficient to
explain natural causality and criticised Descartes’ repudiation
of final causes. He critiques Descartes’s proof of the existence
God “from his idea” as circular (TISU, 717) and
his voluntarist conception of God as conducive to scepticism. He
rejected Descartes’ machine-model of animals and denied that
conscious cogitation exhausted the properties of immaterial
substance.
 
Cudworth’s critique of Hobbes is the most extensive and
philosophical of contemporary responses to Hobbes, whom he attacks as
an atheist materialist (Mintz 1962, Zarka 1997). He accuses Hobbes of
“villanizing of human nature”, and treating morality is a
matter of convention.  He attacks his natural law theory as merely
“artificiall justice” without foundation in natural
goodness, charging that Hobbes’s negative conception of human
nature renders civil government a necessary evil, void of true
justice. He regarded Hobbes’s natural philosophy as a paradigm
case of deterministic materialism. And he attacked Hobbes’s
mechanistic account of mental operations, arguing that if all mental
activity reduces to matter in motion, we could never stop the flow of
thoughts, focus our minds on anything, or direct our attention. The
fact that we can do so tells against Hobbesian psychology and confirms
the agency non-material powers.
Cudworth’s main published work, TISU, consists in large
part of a critical survey of philosophy, in which the philosophers of
antiquity and some moderns (principally Descartes and Hobbes), are
classified according to the degree to which their philosophy
correlates with theism or atheism. As such it constitutes a
consensus gentium defence of the naturality of the idea of
God to all mankind, in which pagan polytheism is presented as corrupt
forms of monotheism, and atheism explained as a failure in
philosophical reason. Cudworth identifies four categories of atheist:
Hylopathian (materialism), “Atomical or Democritical”
atheism, Cosmo-plastic atheism (according to which the world-soul is
the highest power), and Hylozoist atheism (which attributes life to
matter) (TISU, 165). These have their latter-day
manifestations in philosophers such as Hobbes (an example of a
Hylopathian atheist) and Spinoza (a latter-day Hylozoist). The final
chapter of TISU, which takes up a third of its almost 900
pages, attempts a comprehensive survey and refutation of atheistic
arguments, which are grouped under fifteen subsections. Cudworth also
targets what he sees erroneous forms of monotheism which misconceive
the deity by emphasising divine power and will at the expense of
divine goodness and justice. Such voluntaristic conceptions of God
have far-reaching and destructive implications for both philosophy and
religion, since such a God could, by arbitrary fiat, decree falsity to
be true, and wrong to be right, resulting in false philosophy with
atheistic implications.
The taxonomical structure of TISU, is such that it may be
regarded as a history of philosophy, or compendium of the arguments of
the philosophers of antiquity—which is one reason why Locke
recommended it (Locke 1693 [1989: 247]). But to interpret the book
merely as a compendium of the arguments of other philosophers is to
miss the essentials of Cudworth’s metaphysics and natural
philosophy embedded in its heavily annotated pages, which reveal the
Platonist core of his philosophy. Central to Cudworth’s
metaphysics is the Platonist principle that mind is “first in
the order of nature”. Thus mind precedes the world and stands in
causal relation to it: “knowledge is older than all sensible
things; mind senior to the world, and the architect thereof”
(TISU, 847–8). The mind in question is the mind of God,
which “containeth its immediate intelligibles within it
self” as “the paradigm or platform according to which this
sensible world was made” (TISU, 734). The intellectual
is ontologically prior to the physical, as form to copy,
“archetype” to “ectype”. The sensible world,
or nature, is therefore “a living stamp or signature of the
divine wisdom” (TISU, 155). The ontological relation of
intellectual to physical structures his dualistic view of all being as
a descending hierarchy of entities, from angels and human beings, to
animals, plants and plastic nature.
The operative principles which distinguish immaterial from material
substances are activity and passivity (Passmore 1951,
Lähteenmäki 2010). The active principle is energeia
or energy, which is the principle of life (Hutton 2017).
This is an internal principle, or “self
activity”, capable of initiating movement or thought. Minds,
souls and mental powers are all forms of energy, as is Plastic Nature
(see below). All energies are in some sense cogitative, but different
energies have different the powers such as “the power of moving
matter”. Life may be either conscious or unconscious
(“Life or internal self-activity, is to be subdivided into such
as either acts with express consciousness and synaesthesis,
or such as is without it”, TISU, 159). Energy is
furthermore necessarily incorporeal and non-extended, since body, as
inert extension, is by definition incapable of originating
movement, life or thought.
Cudworth’s conception of body as passive extension
differentiated only by size, shape, position and motion, is drawn
largely from the new mechanical physics of Descartes. Cudworth also
attributes solidity or resistance to body, modifying the definition to
“resisting or antitypous extension”, TISU, 159).
The attraction of this new philosophy according to Cudworth is its
intelligibility, its explanatory simplicity, and the fact that it
presupposes the existence of an active, immaterial agency, since body
cannot initiate movement. He regarded it as a revival of ancient
atomist matter theory which he believed derived ultimately from
Pythagoras and Moses. Further attractions of the new physics for
Cudworth were that it dispensed with what he regarded as the
nonsensical clutter of Scholastic forms and qualities, and was
consistent with the observable phenomena of the physical universe.
A signature feature of Cudworth’s system is his hypothesis of
“Plastic Nature”, which he posits as an intermediary
causal entity between God and the natural world (Lähteenmäki
2010, Allen 2014). This is contained in a long section of
TISU entitled “Digression concerning the Plastick Life
of Nature”. Cudworth formulated his hypothesis in the light of
the inadequacies, as he saw them, of the mechanical philosophy, which,
he thought, could not explain movement and change, the union of soul
and body or life itself or the order and harmony of nature. Against
the Cartesian view that the essence of the soul is cogitation,
Cudworth objects that the operations of the soul include
life-processes which cannot be accounted for in terms of cogitation,
or referred to corporeal explanation. He argues that Descartes’
equation of cogitation with consciousness, is absurd since on such a
view we would be permanently conscious, even when asleep. 
Accordingly, Cudworth posits Plastic Nature as the instrument of God
for maintaining the mundane operations of the physical universe in an
orderly fashion, regulating the processes of life, in order to sustain
a conception of the natural world as an harmonious, unified and
purposive system which reflects the goodness and wisdom of the
architect. Plastic Nature is a kind of force or energy which infuses
material things, and combines efficient, final and formal causality,
while, at the same time allowing for contingency and the possibility
of error. By virtue of its imperfections Plastic Nature is liable to
error (“bungles”): although it is a copy of the divine
mind, it is only a faint one (“the mere umbrage of
intellectuality, a faint and shadowy imitation of mind and
understanding”, TISU, 172), and it operates without
awareness of its actions. (A major difference between the human mind
and Plastic Nature is that Plastic Nature operates unconsciously). In
this way Cudworth attempted to navigate a course between occasionalism
(which requires the direct intervention of God in the minutiae of
day-to-day operations of nature), determinism and chance.
Cudworth invokes other philosophers in support of his hypothesis,
including Aristotle whose conception of nature as art
(techne—Physics, 2.8) he interpreted as a
version of it. But his most important debt is to Plotinus, especially
for his idea of unconscious living nature, and his conception of
sympathy as a kind of bonding agent in the universe (see
Enneads 4.4)(Hutton 2021). The notion of an intermediary
causal agency in nature was not unprecedented in the seventeenth
century, especially in medical thought. There are strong affinities
between Plastic Nature and Henry More’s concept of the Spirit of
Nature. However, a main difference from More is that Plastic Nature is
not extended—for Cudworth extension is a property of body, not
immaterial entities
For Cudworth, the mind is active, and “formative of its own
cogitations”. The mind is not the passive recipient of knowledge
from outside itself, but actively engaged in cognition: 
knowledge is not a passion from anything without [i.e. outside] the
mind, but an active exertion of the inward strength, vigour, and power
of the mind, displaying itself from within. (TEIM, 74) 
He posits two kinds of cognition: sense perception and intellection.
Sense perception receives corporeal impressions passively, yielding
only a confused kind of knowledge. Intellection is a higher
“energy” of “noetical” part of the soul which
is independent of the body and yields true knowledge.
As the ectype of God’s wisdom, the human mind is an
intellectual microcosm, 
a kind of notional or representative world, as it were a diaphanous
and crystalline sphere, in which the ideas and images of all things
existing in the real universe may be reflected or represented.
(TEIM, 77) 
These “ideas and images” are not “the actual ideas
of all things”, but are contained “virtually and
potentially” by the mind, from which it is able to frame
“intelligible ideas or conceptions within itself of whatsoever
hath any entity or cogitability” (TEIM, 77). For
Cudworth ideas of things pre-exist their objects. These pre-existing
ideas of things are “anticipations” (for which Cudworth
uses the Stoic term prolepsis). Knowledge
“descends” from intellect to object, from universals to
particulars, and not the reverse, “as it were looking
downward” (TEIM, 58, 114).
Although knowledge can be generated by the intellect without reference
to the world outside, sense perception does have a role in cognition.
But it is only a secondary one, since, without the input of mind,
sense perceptions are unintelligible, rather as the shape of writing
on a page make no sense except to someone who knows how to read.
Cudworth explains our capacity to understand the external world by
means of correspondence, between the mind and nature, since both bear
the imprint (ectype) of God’s wisdom. It is this
“stamp of intellectuality”, manifest in the order and
relations of its constituent parts, which renders the external world
intelligible. Cognition is therefore is an act of recognition akin to
the process by which we recognise the portrait of a friend because we
have a prior idea of what he looks like (TEIM 106–7).
Thus recollection and reflection are also elements in the process of
cognition. In comprehending the external world, the mind focuses not
on the external appearance of things but the relational constants
which reveal their immutable essences. Cudworth illustrates this with
the example of a watch held up to a mirror (TEIM 85–6).
The difference between an observing eye and the mirror is that the
former is conscious of what is reflected in it. To the human mind,
however, the watch is not simply an assemblage of discrete metal
shapes (“different colours, figures, protuberencies, cavities,
sculptures, local motions”), but a unified whole, the
constituent parts of which these are designed and arranged for a
particular purpose. By comparing these elements in relation to each
other and in the light of the ideas it raises from within itself
(e.g., ideas of cause and effect), the mind is able to understand how
it works, and to recognise that the object is a time-piece (Passmore
1951, Hutton 2019b).
Cudworth’s moral philosophy reflects his concerns about
the moral implications of theological voluntarism, the doctrine of
liberty of indifference, Hobbesian command morality, and scholastic
faculty psychology. He repudiates moral conventionalism and denies
that the principles of morality can be deduced from sense knowledge,
arguing that moral principles are modifications of mind and therefore
more “real and substantial things than the modifications of mere
senseless matter” (TISU, 248. Cudworth grounds the
eternal unchanging nature of moral principles in the goodness and
justice in God. As “a being absolutely perfect”, God is
“the very idea or essence of good” (TISU, 204),
whose essential goodness is manifest in all things. Like Socrates in
Plato’s Euthyphro (10a) he argues that things are not
good because God wills them, but God wills them because they are
good. So “the goodness, or justice, or righteousness is
intrinsecall to the thing itself” (TISU, 897). Moral
principles are discernible by reason and available to all by virtue of
the mind’s “participation” in God. However, he
recognises that mere knowledge of the good is insufficient to
guarantee virtuous behaviour, and that account must be taken of moral
fallibility. Cudworth also argues that we are motivated by desire for
the good (“that which first moveth in us, and is the spring and
principle of all deliberative action, can be no other than a constant,
restless, uninterrupted desire, or love of good as such, and
happiness”, FW, 173). And we apprehend the good by
sensing it, that it is something which “touches and is felt in
us” (Cudworth MS, 4979, fol. 243). Of key importance in his
moral philosophy is the attention he gives to moral psychology, in
particular, his theory of moral autonomy grounded in his conception of
free will (Darwall 1995, Irwin 2008, Leisinger 2019).
The main discussion of Cudworth’s conception of free will is
contained in FW and the unpublished manuscripts on
“Liberty and Necessity”. A central the concern for
Cudworth is that to act morally, we must be accountable for our
actions. This would not be possible if we were not free to act, since
we are not accountable for actions determined by factors outside our
control—such as divine decrees, the dictates of tyrants, or
physical circumstances like illness or imprisonment. For Cudworth, an
essential pre-condition for moral accountability, and therefore for
virtuous behaviour, is the freedom to choose between one course of
action rather than another. At a minimum that means not being
constrained by external impediments from pursuing a particular course
of action. However, freedom of action requires more than absence of
constraint, and mere knowledge of the good is no guarantee of the
pursuit of virtue. To act virtuously requires that we are able to
pursue the course of action which we choose to follow. Accordingly,
Cudworth re-conceives the idea of freedom of the will as a power of
self-determination (Chappell, 2005). This “self-power” is
a ruling principle of the soul for which he adopts such Greek terms as
the autexousion or the eph hemin or the
hegemonikon. This ruling principle is self-power
both in the sense that it is a principle of action internal to the
soul which governs the whole composite of body and soul (“the
whole man”), and in the sense that it is the individual human
being who determines how it is exercised.
Cudworth’s conception of free will is an essential element of
the new moral psychology adumbrated in his unpublished manuscripts.
Dispensing with the traditional scholastic faculties of the mind, he
proposes a unitary conception of the soul, the operations of which
involve a complex interplay of active and passive powers associated
with. This conglomerate of powers or energies includes both rational
powers (intellection, deliberation and practical reason) along with
sense perception, desires, and appetites (FW, 193–4)
(Hutton 2017).  Like Plato’s Phaedran charioteer
(Phaedrus 246a–254e) the hegemonikon acts to
co-ordinate these various powers to make them work together. As the
unifying power of the soul (“the soul as comprehending itself,
all its concerns and interests, its abilities and capacities”),
the hegemonikon is the whole person—“that which is
properly we ourselves” (FW, 178). However, given the
complex interplay of active and passive powers, the scope free will as
self-determination is markedly circumscribed. It is therefore wrong to
consider Cudworth a libertarian. And the combination of both reason
and emotion in Cudworth’s account of moral action means that he
can’t be unproblematically classified as an ethical
rationalist.
Crucially, the exercise of freewill requires that the hegemonikon has
cognisance of the various powers of the soul and awareness of its own
operations, “comprehending all the other powers, energies, and
capacities of our soul”—in other words, consciousness (see especially Thiel 2011, Lähteenmäki 2010, Pécharman 2014, Leisinger forthcoming).
Cudworth conceives consciousness to be a state of inner awareness, or
inward sense whereby the soul is 
present with itself, attentive to its own actions, or animadversive of
them, to perceive itself to do or suffer, and to have a fruition or
enjoyment of itself. (TISU, 159) 
He agrees with Descartes, that when we think we are conscious of our
thoughts, and like Descartes, he construes cogitation broadly to
include all the operations of sense, imagination, intellect, and the
will (TISU, 831). Unlike Descartes, he does not accept that
the soul or mind is always conscious—as already noted, he argues
that many activities of the soul (e.g., those performed by Plastic
Nature) are performed unconsciously. Furthermore, even when conscious,
the soul does not always have clear and distinct awareness of its
thoughts. For Cudworth, there are different grades of consciousness,
appropriate to the different types of cogitative activity, from the
clear perception of “express consciousness” involved in
intellection, to the “drowsy and somnolent perception” of
the senses (TEIM, 56), to states of semi-consciousness
(“half asleep and half-awake”), or when we do things
without concentrating (“non-attendingly” or
“by Half a Cogitation”) (TISU, 160).
Cudworth’s theory of consciousness in fact owes more to Plotinus
than Descartes (Enneads 4.4). It is Plotinus who is the
source of his view of consciousness as inner perception or inward
sense—for which he adopts Plotinus’ term
synaesthesis or “con-sense” (as he translates
it). Synaesthesis is the highest form of consciousness, which
involves what Cudworth calls “duplication” or
doubling—a term which derives from his conception of the soul as
having “duplicity”, that is having upper and lower regions
corresponding respectively to its intellectual and sensible or plastic
powers. Synaesthesis is the act of self-reflection, in which
the hegemonikon overlooks the whole soul, by as it were, bending the
higher powers of the soul over the lower. The soul “redoubled
upon itself” in this way is “the soul as comprehending
itself, all its concerns and interests”, exercising
deliberation, “self-recollection and attention”
(FW, 178). In fact, Cudworth holds that only
“freewilled-beings” have this kind of consciousness,
because it is only the hegemonikon which is able to direct attention
and have a comprehensive over-view of the capacities of the soul.
Appropriately Cudworth describes the hegemonikon as the
“watchman” of the soul. The hegemonikon’s awareness
of its own operations which makes it “present with itself”
and able “to perceive itself” may reasonably be called
self-consciousness because the object of its awareness are
the powers that constitute it as the “whole person”. By
contrast, the powers and capacities of the lower soul are simple
energies with a correspondingly lower level of awareness.
Assessing the full extent of Cudworth’s influence is problematic
because very little of his epistemology and ethics was published in
his lifetime, and it is difficult to be sure whether his unpublished
writings circulated. Manuscript circulation of his philosophy would
certainly explain the intriguing echoes of some of Cudworth’s
ideas in both Locke and Shaftesbury—in particular Locke’s
ideas on consciousness and power, and Shaftesbury’s moral
sentimentalism.
Cudworth’s place in the history of philosophy is complicated by
the fact that prior to the publication of A Treatise of
Freewill in 1838, he was considered a rationalist in the manner
of Samuel Clarke, largely on the basis of TEIM—this is
how Hume viewed him, for instance. Since John Passmore’s seminal
study of his unpublished manuscript writings (Passmore 1951), such a
classification is no longer tenable. It is increasingly recognised
that Cudworth anticipates later developments in moral philosophy,
especially moral sentimentalism (Gill 2004, Hutton 2012). Nevertheless
Passmore’s insights have still not fed through fully to
assessments of Cudworth today, and he has also been mis-characterised
as primarily a theologian, as a libertarian, and even as a
mystic. Latterly Cudworth’s immense learning and
baroque wordiness tend to be viewed as obstructive encumbrances, and
modern readers are out of sympathy with the syncretic conception of a
perennial philosophy which frames his thinking. Nevertheless, from the
seventeenth through the nineteenth century, Cudworth’s
philosophy has attracted a distinguished array of philosophical
readers, among them Locke, Shaftesbury, Leibniz, Reid, Hume and other
philosophers of the Scottish Enlightenment. Newton made extensive
notes on Cudworth, preserved in his MS “Out of Cudworth”
(Newton, q.v.).  Richard Price’s Review of the Principal
Questions and Difficulties in Morals (Price 1758) is indebted to
Cudworth’s posthumous TEIM.  Cudworth’s admirers
also included Alexander Pope, Samuel Taylor Coleridge and the American
Transcendentalists. He was held in high regard by the Scottish
historian of philosophy, Dugald Stewart. His hypothesis of Plastic
Nature had a lengthy afterlife: it was the subject of a dispute
between Pierre Bayle and Jean Le Clerc (Rosa 1994, Simonutti 1993),
who defended Cudworth at the instigation of his daughter, Damaris. It
was taken up by the botanist, John Ray, included by Denis Diderot in
the Encyclopédie and defended by Paul Janet in the mid
nineteenth century.
Although never a best-seller, TISU was re-published
periodically across the centuries. Thomas Birch’s edition of
TISU in 1743, incorporated TEIM, and was reprinted
in 1820 and 1829. An edition was published in New York 1837–8,
and by John Harrison in 1845 (with Mosheim’s notes).
Cudworth’s philosophy was translated into Latin, French, and
Italian thereby ensuring his philosophy a European readership. The
Latin translation by German scholar Johan Lorenz Mosheim published in
Jena in 1733 (reprinted Leiden 1773) also included a translation of
TEIM. (A possible link to Kant through the Jena connection
remains to be explored). An abridged Italian translation of
TISU appeared in 1823/4. Extracts of TISU were
published in French by Jean Le Clerc in his Bibliothèque
choisie (1703–6). (It was probably this version which
Leibniz knew, although he also possessed a copy of the original given
to him by Cudworth’s daughter, Damaris Masham). In the
eighteenth-century Cudworth’s philosophy was also disseminated
in shortened form. Thomas Wise’s abridged version, A
Confutation of the Reason and Philosophy of Atheism was reprinted
three times between 1706 and 1732. It was only in 1838 when
FW was published that any of his unpublished manuscripts was
printed.