Reduction (reductionism) encompasses several, related philosophical
themes. At least three types can be distinguished: ontological,
methodological, and epistemic (Sarkar 1992; cf. Nagel 1998). Even
though arguments for and against reductionism often include a
combination of positions related to all three, these distinctions are
significant because no straightforward entailment relations obtain
between the different types of reduction (although tacit commitments
about these relations are prevalent).
(i) Ontological reduction is the idea that each
particular biological system (e.g., an organism) is constituted by
nothing but molecules and their interactions. In metaphysics this idea
is often called
 physicalism
 (or materialism) and it assumes in a biological context that
(a) biological properties
 supervene
 on physical properties (i.e., no difference in a biological property
without a difference in some underlying physical property), and
(b) each particular biological process (or token) is
metaphysically identical to some particular physico-chemical process.
This latter tenet is sometimes called token-token reduction, in
contrast to the stronger tenet that each type of biological process is
identical to a type of physico-chemical process. Ontological reduction
in this weaker sense is a default stance nowadays among philosophers
and biologists though the philosophical details remain controversial
(e.g., are there genuinely
 emergent properties?)
 Different conceptions of physicalism may yield different implications
for ontological reduction in biology (Dowell 2006). The denial of
physicalism by
 vitalism,
 the view that biological systems are governed by forces that are not
physico-chemical, is largely of historical interest. (Vitalism also
admits of various conceptions, especially with respect to how
non-physico-chemical forces are understood; see
 Section 2.)
 Some authors have argued vigorously for the significance of
metaphysical concepts in discussions of reductionism in biology
(Rosenberg 1978, 1985, 1994, 2006).
(ii) Methodological reduction is the idea that
biological systems are most fruitfully investigated at the lowest
possible level, and that experimental studies should be aimed at
uncovering molecular and biochemical causes (Andersen 2017). A common
example of this type of strategy is the decomposition of a complex
system into parts (Bechtel and Richardson 1993); a biologist might
investigate the cellular parts of an organism in order to comprehend
its behavior, or investigate the biochemical components of a cell to
understand its features. While methodological reductionism is often
motivated by a presumption of ontological reduction, this procedural
recommendation does not follow directly from it. In fact, unlike
token-token reduction, methodological reductionism can be quite
controversial. It has been argued that exclusively reductionist
research strategies exhibit systematic biases that overlook relevant
biological features, and that for certain questions a more fruitful
methodology consists in integrating the discovery of molecular causes
with the investigation of higher level features (Wimsatt 1980,
 2007).[1]
(iii) Epistemic reduction is the idea that the
knowledge about one scientific domain (typically about higher level
processes) can be reduced to another body of scientific knowledge
(typically concerning a lower or more fundamental level). While an
endorsement of some form of epistemic reduction can be motivated by
ontological reduction in combination with methodological reductionism
(e.g., the past success of reductionist research in biology), the
possibility of epistemic reduction does not follow directly from their
conjunction. Indeed, debates about reduction in the
 philosophy of biology
 have centered on this third type of reduction as the most
controversial issue (see
 Section 4),
 and therefore our discussion will focus primarily on issues related
to epistemic reduction. Prior to evaluating any reduction of one body
of knowledge to another, a conception of those bodies of knowledge and
what it would mean for them to be
 “reduced” must be explicated.
 A number of different models of reduction have been proposed. Thus,
the debate about reduction in biology has not only revolved around
whether epistemic reduction is possible, but also which notions of
epistemic reduction are operative in actual scientific reasoning. Two
basic categories can be distinguished: (a) models of theory
reduction maintain that one theory can be logically deduced from
another theory
 (Section 3.1);
 and, (b) models of explanatory reduction focus on
whether higher level features can be explained by lower level features
 (Section 3.2).
The philosophical study of reduction links up with several key issues
in the philosophy of science. As reduction involves relating (broadly
speaking) one “body of scientific knowledge” to another,
it presupposes an account of the relevant epistemic units to be
related (e.g.,
 theories,
 laws,
 models,
 mechanisms,
 concepts,
 or disciplines)—how should these be understood? Since the
reduction of one theory to another usually presumes that somehow the
reducing theory explains the principles of the reduced
theory, reduction is also related to the issue of
 scientific explanation.
 For example, if a more fundamental theory fully reduces another
theory or even reduces several theories,
 unification
 (of some sort) results. The situation where a historically earlier
theory is reduced to a later theory is an intuitive case in which
 scientific progress
 might occur. Arguments against the existence of this type of
historical reduction have maintained that terms occurring in both the
precursor and descendant theory have different meanings
 (“incommensurability”).
 This indicates that questions about reduction also connect to the
meaning of scientific terms and conceptual change. Therefore, accounts
of reduction often involve commitments made about other, coordinating
notions and their adequacy depends in many cases on these related
philosophical commitments. This has led some philosophers to pursue an
account of reduction in biology that is as uncommitted as possible
regarding the precise construal of general notions such as
“law” and “explanation” (Sarkar 1998; cf.
Brigandt 2013a), or to specifically highlight how a particular package
of general notions travels together and skews our perspective on the
shape of epistemic reduction in scientific practice (Godfrey-Smith
2008).
In philosophy of biology, reduction involves questions about how
different biological disciplines and theories are related, and how
biology is connected to physics and chemistry (e.g., is biology
autonomous, possessing its own theoretical principles, explanations,
and methods?). Over the past four decades, discussion has concentrated
primarily on the question of whether classical genetics can
be reduced to
 molecular genetics
 and biochemistry. This discussion was motivated by the increasing
significance of
 molecular biology
 within the life sciences, and revolved around specific accounts of
reduction in science, such as Nagel’s (1961) model. A less
central concern has been whether evolutionary biology and
ecology are autonomous disciplines or reducible to molecular
biology (Beatty 1990, Brandon 1996, Dupré 1993, Rosenberg
2006). For example, a notable issue in evolutionary contexts is the
relationship between functional explanation
 (“teleology”)
 and causal-mechanistic explanation (Wouters 2005). The
 levels of selection
 debate includes questions about whether all evolutionary explanations
can be cast in terms of genes and whether selection operates primarily
or exclusively on the genetic level (Okasha 2006). The main debate
about reduction in genetics has lost some intensity as many
philosophers developed a skeptical consensus regarding the possibility
of substantive theory reduction (but see Waters 1990). This decline
has been accompanied by increasing attention to models of explanatory
reduction (e.g., Kaiser 2015, Sarkar 1998, Weber 2005) across a wider
variety of domains in biology (e.g., development, ecology, evolution,
cell biology, and neuroscience). For example, the question of whether
developmental biology can be reduced to developmental
genetics and molecular biology has become salient due to recent
progress in developmental genetics and growing philosophical interest
in
 developmental biology
 (Love 2008b, Robert 2004, Rosenberg 1997, 2006). Less attention has
been given to the question of whether biology can be reduced to
physics (but see Rosenberg 2006). This has been an issue of concern to
many biologists (e.g., Mayr 2004), both with respect to methodology
(e.g., the adequacy of analyzing a system by dissecting it into
component parts) and whether modes of explanation from physical
science are inherently inappropriate for biological science (Love and
Hüttemann 2011).
Debates about reduction in biology have often been framed in terms of
“reductionism” vs. “anti-reductionism” (or,
more archaically, “mechanism” versus
“organicism” or “vitalism”). However, since
different models of reduction have been put forward, whether one takes
a reductionist or anti-reductionist stance about a particular
biological subdiscipline (e.g., classical genetics) depends on the
notion of “reduction” being utilized (Wimsatt 1976b, Hull
1979). Furthermore, this framing has tended to create a false
dichotomy between two extreme positions: reductionism as the idea that
molecular biology can in principle fully explain all
biological facts—making higher level biological theories
dispensable—and anti-reductionism as the idea that higher level
biological fields possess explanatory principles of their own and are
fully autonomous in the sense of not benefiting from
molecular biology. A variety of middle (and orthogonal) ground exists
between these extremes and has motivated the efforts seen in
alternative research programs in philosophy of science that address
questions about the nature and status of interdisciplinarity, such as
how data, standards, or explanations are integrated across biological
fields (see
 Section 5).
 Given that references to “reduction” in different areas
of biology pick out a variety of commitments in different contexts,
which makes pronouncements of both the success and failure of
“reduction” legitimate, the traditional assumption that
there is a unique and global notion in need of explication is
problematic (Hüttemann and Love
 2011).[2]
Undoubtedly, the growth and development of molecular biology over the
past half century has made reductionism in biology a central issue
(and DNA a household word). However, it would be wrong to assume that
different aspects of reductionism only gain traction in the wake of
the molecularization of biology juxtaposed with discussions of
reduction from a logical empiricist perspective (see
 Section 3.1).
 Besides a perennial concern with what makes
 life
 distinctive, we can distinguish at least two reductionist themes
throughout history relevant to the life sciences and its philosophy:
(1) the relation among different branches or domains of knowledge
and (2) the relation between
 parts and wholes
 (Grene and Depew 2004, Magner 1994). These two themes link up in a
complex fashion with both epistemic and ontological reduction.
(Questions about methodological reduction tend to coalesce around new
technologies that open up the possibility of pursuing reductionist
research methods, such as making observations at a lower level with
microscopy.) Additionally, these themes arise in the context of
specific domains of enduring interest: (a) the complex relations
among different animals and plants in natural environments, i.e.,
“ecology”, (b) the integrated relations among the
parts and whole of an organism, i.e., “physiology/functional
anatomy”, and (c) the dynamic relations among the
homogeneous components in the early stages of an embryo that
eventually beget a unified whole organism containing heterogeneous
parts in appropriate arrangement and connection, i.e.,
“development/reproduction”.
Aristotle
 is the foundation for both philosophical themes pertaining to
reductionism. He addressed the relationship between domains of
scientific knowledge in his concepts of superordinate and subordinate
sciences (Posterior Analytics I). Each science has a
distinctive subject genus, first principles, and set of predicates
that are commensurable with the subject genus (McKirahan 1978, 1992,
ch. 4–5). Though the relations among sciences are systematic,
they are not necessarily reductive because there is no most
fundamental science. These connections are relevant to relations
between parts and wholes because Aristotle utilized his science of
elements and their potentials (e.g., as seen in On Generation and
Corruption and Meteorology) to inform his description
and analysis of organism components in the History of Animals
and Parts of Animals. He treated three compositional
“levels”: elements and their potentials; uniform parts
such as blood and bone; and, non-uniform parts that include multiple
uniform parts, such as the face or hands. The primary domain here is
physiology/functional anatomy but development/reproduction is always
in view and addressed directly in the Generation of Animals.
Claims about “potentials” are buttressed by an account of
their contributions to material properties composing uniform parts
(Meteorology IV; see Lennox 2001, ch. 8; Popa 2005).
Complex dispositions (e.g., the fleshy, sinuous elasticity of the
esophagus) are postulated from these material substrates that have
relevance to, but do not determine the nature of, these organismal
parts because functional strictures ultimately govern them (the
fleshy, sinuous elasticity of the esophagus is for the sake
of repeated dilation during food ingestion).
The
 teleological
 orientation of Aristotle’s biology means that he is often
characterized as an ontological anti-reductionist (e.g., the elemental
potentials of lower levels of organization are for the sake of but do
not determine the uniform parts at higher levels of organization).
This blends with epistemic issues related to particular domains, such
as his rejection of Presocratic materialist (i.e., purely
“mechanistic”) explanations for the origin of animal
morphology during development. (Empedocles apparently claimed that
vertebrae arise during ontogeny solely as a consequence of a unified
cylindrical column physically breaking into the observable iterated
units of the backbone; see Parts of Animals I.1
[640a].) Yet Aristotle was attentive to issues of material
composition and constraints arising from the nature of properties
exhibited by animal parts, which often mark commitments to types of
ontological and epistemic reduction. His concept of hypothetical
necessity (Physics II; see Cooper 1987) permitted the use of
one kind of material in many different organismal parts. Galen, among
many others subsequent to Aristotle, also explored these issues,
whether from the perspective of how material complexes generate higher
level properties (Mixtures) or the relations among parts and
wholes in the context of development (The Construction of the
Embryo).
In the early modern period, William Harvey adopted an Aristotelian
stance in the context of both physiology and development (Lennox
2006). The relation between parts and wholes in ontogeny, including
relevant material properties, is constantly in view (Harvey 1981
[1651]). Although Harvey used “mechanistic” analogies,
referring to the motion of the heart in terms of interlocking gears or
to the heart itself as a pump (Distelzweig 2016),
 René Descartes
 famously disputed Harvey’s claims from the perspective of the
 “mechanical philosophy”.
 Descartes sought to explain the movement of the heart not in terms of
function but rather by appeal only to the matter in motion composing
the circulating blood that is heated and thus expands akin to
fermentation (Description of the Human Body). He also
attempted to explain embryology in terms of matter and motion alone;
e.g., tissue and organ origination is accounted for via matter slowing
down and aggregating in different regions of the embryo (Des Chene
2001, ch. 2; Smith 2006, Part II).
 Robert Boyle
 defended teleological explanations in anatomy and physiology
(specifically, the integrated relations among the parts and whole of
an organism) by laying out how they were compatible with and supported
by mechanistic explanations (Lennox 1983). Thus, he offered a version
of epistemic reduction in line with his conception of mechanical
philosophy, which included a heterogeneous methodology (reductionist
and non-reductionist) and concomitant reservations about ontological
reduction.
 Baruch Spinoza
 famously used the image of a worm in a bloodstream to engage the
theme of part-whole relations and their complexity in a 1665 letter to
Henry
 Oldenburg.[3]
Immanuel Kant
 explicitly articulated a dialectic between a teleological outlook on
organismal functioning (including ecological relationships,
physiology, and development specifically) and a mechanistic
understanding of causation modeled on Newtonian mechanics
(Critique of Judgment, Part II; see Mensch 2013, Zuckert
2010). Kant’s maintenance of this tension between the reciprocal
causal relations of parts in an organism (“teleology”) and
the linear-mechanical causality justified within his critical
philosophy was a way of splitting apart epistemological and
metaphysical issues. It can be characterized as a hybrid position with
elements of epistemic anti-reductionism (organismal processes have to
be understood in terms of their reciprocal contribution to a systemic
goal—an epistemological subordination of mechanism to teleology)
and ontological reductionism (all causation is ultimately
linear-mechanical). But Kant also understood linear-mechanical
causation as a category by which the mind frames experiences of the
world.Thus, his understanding of metaphysics differs from the realist
one underlying most contemporary accounts of ontological reduction. In
addition to the theme of reductive relations between parts and wholes,
Kant also addressed relations among different scientific domains in
his discussion of sciences having their own distinct concepts and
subject matter (Critique of Judgment, §68, 79).
Kant’s work was influential among those studying biological
phenomena, even if misinterpreted in various ways, and helped frame
the question of teleology versus mechanism in the early 19th century
(Lenoir 1982). His discussion stressed the significance of
methodological conclusions—it is necessary (a maxim or
regulative principle) to take organisms as natural purposes if we are
to investigate them scientifically. This encouraged speculations about
new forces, akin to those found in Newtonian mechanics, which would
explain biological phenomena “mechanistically” (e.g., the
formative force explaining embryonic development; see Look 2006,
Richards 2000). The Newtonian inspiration survived, with or without
Kantian traces, well into the 19th century and beyond. Comparative
anatomy (conceptualized broadly to include functional anatomy and
embryology) exploited methodological suggestions from successful
physical science. For example, Geoffroy St. Hilaire appealed to
Newton’s musings that animals are governed by similar principles
or laws as those found in mechanics (Le Guyader 2004). More typical is
Richard Owen’s discussion of matter and its properties within
living organisms, where he exhibits a clear anti-reductionist stance
and postulates something akin to emergent
 properties.[4]
 This perspective was shared by many comparative anatomists who used
an “analysis:synthesis” style of reasoning (Elwick 2007).
A related strand regarding reductionism winds its way through
physiological investigations of the 19th century. Here the Cartesian
mechanical-reductionist program is rejoined with an emphasis on the
animal machine (Canguilhem in Delaporte 1994, ch. 5, 8, 10, 12;
Coleman 1977, ch. 6). Despite clear metaphysical commitments to a form
of ontological reduction, methodological types of reductionism were
qualified because of their impact on experimental design (e.g.,
Bernard 1957 [1865]). Overall, there was a diversity of mechanist
(“reductionist”) and organicist
(“non-reductionist”) positions corresponding to
ontological, epistemic, and methodological types of reduction in the
19th century, similar to the philosophical diversity observable today
(see Sections
 3
 and
 5
 below).
In the late 19th and early 20th century the topic of development
returned with a vengeance in the controversy over
 vitalism
 (sometimes termed “organicism”). A general movement
towards more mechanistic or materialistic interpretations of living
systems was emerging at this time (e.g., Loeb 1912; cf. Allen 1975)
and disagreements about explaining development loomed large
(Maienschein 1991). However, the famous example of vitalism in Hans
Driesch’s interpretation of development and the autonomy of the
organism should be seen as an issue of epistemology as much as
metaphysics (Maienschein 2000). Instead of materialism versus vitalism
(i.e., ontological reduction questions), the explanatory conflict
involved the nature of differentiation in early ontogeny and to what
degree it is prespecified. The theme of order and organization in
living systems pervades many writings about methodological,
epistemological, and ontological types of reductionism at this time
(emphasizing both relations between physics and biology and between
parts and wholes). Examples include Joseph Needham’s Order
and Life (1936), Kurt Goldstein’s The Organism
(1934/1963), E.S. Russell’s The Interpretation of
Development and Heredity (1930), D’Arcy Thompson’s
On Growth and Form (1917), Ludwig von Bertalanffy’s
Modern Theories of Development (1933), and J.H.
Woodger’s Biological Principles (1929). Philosophers of
science who have had less influence on contemporary Anglo-American
philosophy were keenly aware of these discussions. For example,
 Ernst Cassirer
 (1950, Part II) explored reductionist themes related to causal
explanations of development, including the debates about mechanism and
vitalism surrounding Driesch, as well as the relations between
physical science and biology. These topics also appeared in the pages
of Philosophy of Science (e.g., Lillie 1934, 1942, 1948,
Singer 1934, 1946), although not necessarily utilizing the specific
terminology of reduction (Byron 2007).
Ernest Nagel’s general treatment of reductionism in chapters 11
and 12 of The Structure of Science (1961) canvassed many
different aspects of these perennial debates. Whereas the sections
concerning theory reduction have usually been in view (connecting with
the reductionist theme of relating domains of knowledge), Nagel also
interacted with biological literature addressing claims about parts,
wholes, and emergence, thereby addressing the second reductionist
theme that has been prominent since Aristotle (see Nagel 1961, 366ff).
He highlighted the polysemy of “wholes”,
“parts”, and “sums” inherent in claims about
success or failure in showing that the whole is just the sum of its
parts (pp. 380ff). Additionally Nagel treats the question of
evolutionary emergence, i.e., whether genuinely new entities arise in
the history of our universe and life on Earth (see Goudge 1961). He
dealt with the aforementioned theoretical biologists (e.g.,
Bertalanffy, Russell, and Woodger) on the topic of hierarchical
organization and reduction in living systems, especially as seen in
ontogeny (Nagel 1961, pp. 432ff). Nagel’s contemporaries
likewise treated reductionist themes, though their work has largely
been overlooked (e.g., Morton Beckner’s discussion of
“organization” and “levels of analysis” as
methodological and explanatory aspects of reduction; Beckner 1959, ch.
9).
Despite Nagel’s wide-ranging analysis, most subsequent
philosophical discussion has concentrated on his account of theory
reduction (see
 Section 3.1),
 and whether it serves as an adequate general characterization of
reductionism for all areas of scientific
 inquiry.[5]
 The biological case that has received the most scrutiny is the
relationship between classical and molecular genetics, in part because
the molecularization of genetics was palpable in this historical
period. The manifold difficulties encountered in applying Nagelian
theory reduction to genetics (see
 Section 4)
 encouraged the growth of
 philosophy of biology
 as an independent disciplinary specialty, in part because these
difficulties seemed to fit a recurring pattern—misconstruing
biological reasoning with philosophical accounts of science forged on
physical science examples (Hüttemann and Love 2011, Love and
Hüttemann 2011). Philosophical issues in biology seemed to
require distinct analyses that are more sensitive to empirical
research in biology (Brigandt 2011). Additionally, the rise of
 sociobiology
 and
 gene-centered
 evolutionary explanations provoked anti-reductionist stances among
biologists on the basis of social and political commitments (e.g.,
Levins and Lewontin 1985).
More recent attention to reductionism in situ within
different life science contexts has led many philosophers to revisit
the perennial aspects of reductionism, many of which were simply
tangential to controversies over theory reduction. A number of current
debates are actually unconscious returns to neglected issues, albeit
in different ways and in different contexts. That developmental
biology has returned to the center of discussions is not surprising
because of its enduring status as a biological topic inviting
reflection on reductionist themes. The same can be said for ecology
and functional anatomy, although they are at present more peripheral
for many philosophers. Socially and politically tinged aspects of
reductionist research in biology, such as racial categorizations based
on genetic profiles, also continue to provoke philosophical analyses
(see
 Section 5).
Most discussion in contemporary philosophy of science has centered on
the issue of
 epistemic reduction
 (rather than ontological or methodological reduction; see
Hoyningen-Huene 1989). The basic idea that the knowledge (or other
epistemic units) pertaining to one scientific domain can be reduced to
another body of knowledge (or its epistemic units) has been spelled
out in different ways. It is useful to group different approaches to
reduction into two basic categories: (1) models of
 theory reduction,
 which maintain that a higher level theory can be logically deduced
from a lower level theory, and, (2) models of
 explanatory reduction,
 which focus on whether representations of higher level features can
be explained by representations of lower level features, typically by
decomposing a higher level system into parts (Sarkar 1992).
 Models of theory reduction
 were of primary interest in post-positivist philosophy of science
that emerged in the 1960s and have received the most sustained
attention (Schaffner 1993). More recently, accounts of explanatory
reduction have been developed to remedy the inadequacies of theory
focused accounts, so that theory reduction has been displaced as the
central issue by competing accounts of explanatory reduction (but see
Dizadji-Bahmani et al. 2010).
According to theory reduction, theory
TA reduces
TB (e.g., Atomic physics reduces
Biology) if TA logically entails
TB. Given a deductive-nomological account
of
 explanation
 (Hempel and Oppenheim 1965 [1948]), theory reduction as deduction
from theoretical principles is an instance of explanation. In
particular, TA logically entails and
explains the laws of TB. Compare this
with the logically weaker notion of reduction put forward by Kemeny
and Oppenheim (1956), which includes instances of theory
replacement. The Kemeny-Oppenheim model concerns the situation
where the observable predictions made by
TA include (at least) all observable
predictions of TB. In this case
TA can explain everything that
TB explains, but
TA need not encompass the theoretical
principles of TB (as in genuine theory
reduction), which allows for the possibility that
TB contains inadequate theoretical
notions and is replaced by TA.
Many models of theory reduction derive from the account of reduction
due to Ernest Nagel (1949, 1961). Working within the philosophical
framework of logical empiricism, Nagel construed reduction as a
logical relation between theories, where a theory is understood as a
system of statements, containing laws, formulated in a first-order
formal language. The reducing theory
TA reduces the reduced theory
TB if the laws of
TB can be logically derived from
TA, which Nagel called the
“condition of derivability”. However, if
TB contains scientific terms that do not
occur in the language of the reducing theory
TA (“organismal reproduction”
is not an expression of biochemistry), then derivability presupposes
that the primitive expressions of TB (in
particular, its predicates) can be logically related to the language
of TA. Nagel made this explicit by a
“condition of connectability”: reduction presupposes that
there are statements (e.g., conditionals) that contain expressions
both from TA and
TB, such that
TA together with these statements entails
the laws of TB. These connectability
statements are often called bridge principles (or
correspondence rules, or reduction functions), and have been
interpreted diversely. Nagel rejected the idea that bridge principles
are analytic statements, but did not take a stand as to whether they
are factual or conventional. Some philosophers have required that
bridge principles are laws (rather than accidental generalizations),
whereas others have maintained that they should express metaphysical
identities between entities, properties, and processes (e.g.,
identifying cells with collections of molecules, in line with
ontological reduction). Nagel himself construed reduction as an
epistemic notion without ontological commitment; he did not require
that bridge statements be biconditionals—mere conditionals when
conjoined with TA sometimes logically
entail TB. (The Kemeny-Oppenheim notion
of reduction / theory replacement is weaker than Nagelian reduction as
it does not require such bridge principles connecting
TA and
TB.)
 This account covers interlevel theory reduction. For
instance, Oppenheim and Putnam (1958) argued for a hierarchical or
layered model of scientific disciplines that assumes each layer or
level corresponds to a theory. Each discipline is reducible to the
theory on the next lower level, e.g., sociology to organismal biology,
organismal biology to molecular biology, molecular biology to
chemistry, and chemistry to microphysics (see also Brooks 2014,
Hüttemann and Love 2016, Walter and Eronen 2011). Another way to
apply Nagel’s general model is successional theory
reduction, where a historically earlier theory is reduced to a
later, more mature theory, so that reduction can be an instance of
theoretical progress (Nickles 1973). In both cases Nagel held that
theories needed to be indexed to a particular time: “The
question whether a given science is reducible to another cannot in the
abstract be usefully raised without reference to some particular stage
of development of the two disciplines” (1961, 361).
 Paul Feyerabend
 (1962, 1965a, 1965b) and
 Thomas Kuhn
 (1962) criticized successional theory reduction and especially
Nagel’s connectability condition. Feyerabend argued that an earlier
and later theory might use the same theoretical term with a different
meaning (e.g., “mass” in classical and relativistic
mechanics). This
 incommensurability
 of meaning makes the connectability of these theories’
expressions, and thus the logical derivation of one theory from
another, impossible. Whether or not genuine incommensurability obtains
is controversial (see, e.g., Sankey 1994).
Nagel’s model was revised and applied in a specifically
biological context—the reduction of classical genetics to
biochemistry—by Kenneth Schaffner (1967, 1969, 1976; see
Schaffner 1993 for his mature account). Schaffner’s
“General Reduction Model” addresses a key drawback of
Nagel’s account, first noted by Feyerabend: even though the
theory to be reduced may be approximately true, it might contain
empirically false statements, especially if it is a historical
precursor of the more mature reducing theory (e.g., the inheritance
“laws” of classical genetics have exceptions). If the
theory to be reduced (TB) contains false
statements then it  cannot possibly be deduced from
TA. For this reason, Schaffner considers
instead TB*, which is a
corrected version of the theory to be reduced in that
TB* makes more adequate
predictions than TB. On this model,
reduction occurs if TA and
TB* can be related by
reduction functions (bridge principles) and
TB* follows logically from
TA enriched by the reduction functions.
(While Nagel focused on the laws of TB
being deducible from TA, Schaffner
requires that all statements of
TB/TB*
be deducible from TA.) Schaffner’s
central tenet about reduction in biology is that the success of
 molecular biology
 shows that classical genetics and traditional fields of experimental
biology are in the process of being reduced to biochemistry. Although
this reduction has not been completed yet, a logical derivation of
traditional experimental biology from a (completed) theory of
biochemistry is in principle possible and will be achieved
eventually. Schaffner’s account has an ontological aspect in
that he interprets the reduction functions as synthetic statements
expressing identities between the entities and processes of the two
domains related (in line with Sklar 1967 and Causey 1972a, 1972b),
though he does not argue that these identities are metaphysical
necessities. The Nagel-Schaffner approach to theory reduction assumes
a syntactic account of
 theory structure
 such that they are axiomatized systems formalizable in first order
predicate calculus. A variety of other models of theory reduction
exist, some of which use a semantic (i.e., theories as families of
 models)
 rather than a syntactic account of scientific theories (see Balzer
and Dawe 1986a,b, Hooker 1981, Suppes 1957, Woodger 1952).
 Schaffner’s account provided the motivation and point of
departure for much of the reduction debate in philosophy of biology,
which was conducted primarily in the 1970s and 80s and revolved around
the issue of whether (and in which sense)
 classical genetics can be reduced to molecular genetics
 or biochemistry. Three criticisms pertaining specifically to the
Nagel-Schaffner model bear mentioning.
 (Section 4
 reviews the main objections to different models of reduction more
generally.)
(a) Michael Ruse (1971) and David Hull (1974) have argued that the
relation between classical and molecular genetics is one of theory
replacement, not reduction in Schaffner’s sense. Although
Schaffner’s account permits a correction of the theory to be
reduced (TB* instead of
TB), it is not clear when a modified
version TB* (corrected
“classical genetics”) still counts as being largely
similar to TB (classical genetics). This
leaves an ambiguity of whether one should conclude that
TB was reduced because
TB* is similar enough or that
TB has been replaced by another theory
because the two are so dissimilar (Hull 1976, Ruse 1976). Schaffner
only requires that TB and
TB* are “strongly
analogous” (1993, 429), without offering a specification of how
much similarity is required for reduction rather than replacement
(Winther 2009). William Wimsatt (1976b) emphasizes that while
interlevel, compositional reductions are transitive, successional
reductions through history are intransitive, so that a continuum
between genuine successional reduction and replacement obtains. Any
sequence of successive reductions can be expected to evolve into an
instance of replacement given enough time.
(b) Nagel and Schaffner relied on a
 syntactic construal of theories,
 which assumes that a theory is a set of statements in a formal
language, including laws (Kitcher 1984). Yet it has been argued that
molecular biology as the reducing theory does not consist of a small
body of laws, so that a covering-law model of explanation and
reduction is not applicable (Culp and Kitcher 1989, Kitcher 1984,
Sarkar 1998). If molecular biology or other biological fields are
inadequately represented as consisting of a clearly delineated theory,
reconstructed as a set of statements in a formal language, then an
account of reduction that presupposes this construal of scientific
theories is problematic.
(c) Hull (1976), Wimsatt (1976a, 1976b), and Sahotra Sarkar (1992,
1998) have objected that Schaffner focuses too much on formal
considerations about reduction, rather than substantive issues. His
account construes reduction as a logical relation that is “in
principle” possible even though it is not occurring in practice.
If reduction in this sense is not occurring in biology, then there are
significant questions about whether it best fits biological knowledge
and practice. Nagel claimed that premature attempts at reduction could
retard scientific progress, thus implicitly decoupling methodological
demands from epistemological ones (Nagel 1961, 362–3). Schaffner
(1974, 1993) acknowledges that reductionism in his sense has been
peripheral to the practice of molecular biology, but maintains that
his formal model of reduction captures the reduction relation between
theories. Wimsatt (1979) suggests that Nagel’s and
Schaffner’s focus on in-principle considerations and the context
of justification, to the exclusion of in-practice considerations and
the context of discovery, leads to misunderstandings about the nature
of reductionism debates, including historical and current controversy
among scientists (see
 Section 2).
 Reduction may obtain between classical and molecular genetics, but
not in the sense of Nagel’s or Schaffner’s logical
empiricist approach (Hull 1974).
A variety of explanatory reasoning patterns used by life scientists
are now under scrutiny in philosophy of biology and theory reduction
is no longer the primary focus. Various models of explanatory
reduction focus on reductive explanation and differ from theory
reduction (which is also a kind of explanation on the
deductive-nomological notion of explanation) in two important
ways:
(a) Whereas theory reduction assumes that reduction is a relation
between theories, models of explanatory reduction permit other
features as the relata of a reductive explanation, such as fragments
of a theory, generalizations of varying scope, mechanisms, and even
individual facts. One approach pursued along these lines is due to
Kenneth Waters (1990, 1994, 2000). Instead of construing theory
relations in terms of the Nagel-Schaffner model, he identifies a key
principle of inference operating in classical genetics and molecular
genetics: the “difference making principle” (gene
differences cause differences in phenotypes). This principle can be
ascribed to
 genes
 in both classical and molecular genetics. An explanatory reduction is
achieved between them because their causal roles correspond. Waters
(2008) extends this account by emphasizing how the investigative
practices of classical genetics were “retooled” by
developments in molecular genetics, which accounts for the success of
the corresponding explanations.
Another example of explanatory reduction is due to Marcel Weber
(2005). In line with models of theory reduction, Weber maintains that
biochemical (“physico-chemical”) laws carry the
explanatory force, but that a fact or basic generality about
biological mechanisms (rather than a genuine law or a whole theory),
such as the mechanism of action potentials in neurotransmission, is
what is explained. By permitting reference to higher level structures
in the explanans, such as axons, he does not require that a
reductive explanation contain exclusively biochemical expressions.
(b) A characteristic difference between theory reduction and
explanatory reduction stems from the fact that the
former—focusing on the epistemic notion of logical
deduction—does not incorporate the historically ubiquitous
ontological idea that a reduction explains the whole in terms of its
parts (see, e.g., Winther 2011). Models of explanatory reduction
typically assume that reductive explanation is
 causal explanation,
 where a higher level feature is explained by the interaction of
constituent parts. Stuart Kauffman (1971) gave an early expression of
the idea that the search for explanations in experimental biology
proceeds by decomposing an overall system into interacting parts.
Wimsatt (1976b) also recognized that this mapped more naturally onto
the language of biologists, especially the practice of discovering and
elucidating mechanisms (see also Bechtel and Richardson 1993).
Mechanism approaches have now developed into a robust alternative to
theory reduction (see
 Section 5).
 Since many philosophers of biology and neuroscience conceive of
explanation as the description of
 mechanisms,
 accounts of explanatory reduction can rely on the notion of a
mechanistic explanation (e.g., Delehanty 2005).
Models of explanatory reduction avoid several problems facing theory
reduction (see
 Section 3.1).
 Since explanatory reduction is not committed to the relata of an
explanation being theories involving laws, it can defend the
possibility of reduction without formally reconstructing a clearly
delineated theory of molecular biology or classical genetics. Its
focus on reduction as explanation of a whole in terms of its parts
captures a feature of actual molecular explanations. Whereas accounts
of theory reduction have to acknowledge that reduction (in this sense)
has not yet been achieved and must appeal to its “in
principle” possibility, accounts of explanatory reduction
comport well with the piecemeal nature of actual scientific research.
Experimental and molecular biology can offer reductive explanations
even if many facts remain unexplained and existing explanations still
require more details to be filled in. Current biology effectively
explains individual facts and generalities of smaller scope, and the
explanans can be a mere fragment of a theory (see, e.g.,
Schaffner 2006 on “patchy and fragmentary” reductions).
Finally, given that mechanistic explanations in experimental biology
are preceded by and closely tied to the discovery of mechanisms
(Craver and Darden 2013), explanatory reduction provides an account of
reduction that can be related to scientific discovery, while
approaches of theory reduction have to separate the context of
justification (reduction and explanation) from the context of
discovery.
An early model of explanatory reduction due to William Wimsatt (1976b)
assumes that reduction is the causal explanation of an individual
event (rather than a generality), involving a
“compositional redescription” of a higher level state of
affairs into some of its component features. This model is related to
Wesley Salmon’s (1971) account of statistical explanation, which
uses the notion of
 screening off
 to explicate the idea of one property being statistically more
relevant (and thus more explanatory) than another one. Wimsatt
replaces Salmon’s statistical relevance with the idea of causal
relevance (as explanatory reduction in biology involves the search for
causally relevant factors), and he develops the notion of
“effective screening off”. Compositional redescription and
explanation in terms of lower level properties can have a greater
“cost” of explanation (e.g., by being more complicated)
than the description in terms of the higher level property that is
effectively screened off. A consequence of the epistemic
“cost” requirement is that an explanatory reduction that
effectively screens off a described higher level feature does not make
it irrelevant and thus eliminable (as in Salmon’s account)
because it can be retained for pragmatic purposes.
 Sahotra
 Sarkar’s (1998) detailed discussion of reductionism and
genetics offers several relevant conceptual clarifications. Focusing
on substantive issues about reduction in genetics (especially
representation, see
 Section 4.3),
 rather than formal considerations in a theory of reduction, Sarkar
develops a view of explanatory reduction that is not committed to a
particular account of explanation. Two such basic types of reduction
are “abstract hierarchical reduction” and “strong
reduction” (or spatial hierarchical reduction), where the
latter—unlike abstract hierarchical reduction—requires
that entities of a lower hierarchical level are physical parts of
higher level entities. (Each type of reduction can come in stronger
and weaker forms as different kinds of approximations are involved in
different explanations.) Sarkar argues that explanations in
classical genetics, which explain phenotypic patterns in
terms of classical genes, are abstract hierarchical reductions. The
entities involved in this case are alleles, loci, linkage groups,
genotypes, and phenotypes, which stand in hierarchical relations
(e.g., alleles A and a form genotype Aa),
with individual alleles occupying the lowest level. However, this is
an abstract rather than a spatial hierarchy; the assumption that
A and a map to Aa at the next higher level
does not require Aa to be a physical entity that has
A and a as its spatial parts. Furthermore, the
genotypic entities in this hierarchy are governed by various
transformations and regularities (principles of inheritance), such as
segregation, linkage, and mutation, which help to explain phenotypic
patterns of inheritance. While this abstract hierarchy can be
interpreted as a spatial hierarchy by viewing classical genes as being
parts of chromosomes, Sarkar’s point is that the various
practices in classical genetics, such as segregation and linkage
analysis, did not require a physical interpretation of genetic maps,
and that explanations in terms of an abstract hierarchy can be genuine
reductions since they invoke a lower and thus more fundamental
hierarchical level.
Regarding spatial hierarchical reduction, Sarkar argues that this
regularly occurs in molecular biology, where certain cellular
features are explained by molecular biology, more precisely
macromolecular physics. The various components of cells form nested
part-whole relations, resulting in a spatial hierarchy. Many
mechanisms of classical genetics can be reductively explained by the
physical principles governing the behavior of macromolecules (though
approximations are still necessary). Explanatorily relevant principles
for the physics of macromolecules include weak interactions, hydrogen
bonding, hydrophobic bonding, allosteric transformations, lock-key
fit, and the idea that structure determines function. Sarkar’s
central tenet is that the elucidation of the molecular mechanisms of
replication, recombination, and cell division provide reductive
explanations of the principles of classical genetics. While classical
genetics offered an account of gene transmission and could rely on
cytological explanations, these accounts did not yield a complete
explanation of how and why recombination occurs. Molecular biology
filled in this gap and corrected classical genetics.
Other models of explanatory reduction have been put forward by
philosophers, many with an explicit eye to capturing how reduction
occurs in scientific practice (e.g., Bickle 2003, 2006, 2008). In some
ways the most unique defense of explanatory reduction is found in the
recent work of Alex Rosenberg (2006), which departs from his earlier
critical focus on theory reduction (1978, 1985, 1994). First, strict
laws (universal, exceptionless, spatio-temporally unrestricted) are
required for explanation and the only candidate law in biology is the
principle of natural selection (PNS). Second, why-necessary
explanations are better than how-possible explanations in historical
sciences such as biology, but why-necessary explanations are only
available at the molecular level because structure becomes decoupled
from function above this level. Therefore, all how-possible
explanations in “functional biology” (i.e., non-molecular
biology), even those invoking the PNS, and any descriptions from
functional biology involving higher levels of organization get
explained (why-necessarily) by the PNS operating on the molecular
level (often occurring at some relatively distant point in
evolutionary
 history).[6]
Marie Kaiser (2011, 2015) has recently given a thorough analysis of
reductive explanation, including a systematic treatment of
metaphilosophical issues that underlie different approaches (see 2015,
Chapter 2). Instead of arguing for or against reduction, she both
articulates the advantages of an explanation being reductive and
indicates that many biological phenomena cannot be explained in this
way. On Kaiser’s account, an explanation is reductive if it has
three characteristics: (1) lower-level, (2) internal, and
(3) parts-in-isolation. “Lower-level” means that the
explanation relies only on features that are at a lower level than the
phenomenon being explained. Similar to Sarkar’s hierarchical
account, a reduction does not have to be a molecular or lowest-level
explanation because Kaiser wants to capture reductive explanations
throughout biology, including ecology. Explanations with this
characteristic provide an epistemically important unidirectional
“flow” of explanation from the lower to the higher level,
even if some of the relevant lower-level entities are not spatial
parts of the explanandum phenomenon. However, Kaiser secondly
requires that reductive explanations appeal only to physical parts
(“internal”) of the explanandum phenomenon or
system. Additionally, to fully qualify as reductive, an explanation
must represent each part it invokes in isolation—not in
isolation from any context, but rather in isolation from a
part’s original complex context. This
“parts-in-isolation” characteristic is associated with a
system being near-decomposable; upon decomposition, a part’s
actual functioning can be understood in isolation. The whole
system’s operation then can be recomposed from the parts
interacting in a largely sequential and linear fashion (Bechtel and
Richardson 1993). Using these three characteristics, one can classify
different explanations and distinguish a reductive explanation from a
mechanistic explanation from a part-whole explanation (Kaiser
2015).
Different accounts of theory reduction and explanatory reduction face
several potential problems. Some critiques of (epistemic) reductionism
emphasize that the effects of molecular processes strongly depend on
the context in which they occur, so that one molecular kind
can correspond to many higher level kinds
 (Section 4.1).
 Another significant challenge to reductionism stems from the fact
that higher level biological structures and processes can be (and
typically are) realized by different kinds of molecular processes, so
that many molecular kinds can correspond to one
higher level kind
 (Section 4.2).
 Finally, because biological processes must be represented before they
can be explained (Sarkar 1998), two further features become salient as
issues for explanatory reduction: temporality and intrinsicality
 (Section 4.3).
One key challenge for reduction stems from the fact that the effect of
a molecular entity or mechanism may depend strongly on the
context in which it occurs (Hull 1972, 1974, 1976; see also
Wimsatt 1979, Gilbert and Sarkar 2000, Laubichler and Wagner 2001).
Classical geneticists were fully aware of the fact that a phenotype is
brought about by the interaction of several (many) classical
genes—the same allele may lead to two different phenotypes if
occurring in two individuals with a different overall genotype (Waters
2004). Although one-many phenomena have been known for some time, it
is now a robust empirical generalization that a molecular pathway may
have different effects in different cellular contexts; the same
pathway can be involved in different functions in different species or
in different parts of an individual (Gilbert and Sarkar 2000,
Laubichler and Wagner 2001, Burian
 2004).[7]
 These different contexts include developmental and physiological
history, which condition the behavior of molecular pathways (Brigandt
2006, Kirschner 2005). Even the amino acid sequence produced by a
molecular gene may depend on both DNA elements outside of the gene and
non-genetic factors, which means the same gene can code for distinct
products in different cells or different states of a cell (Griffiths
and Stotz 2013, Stotz 2006a,b). Thus, there are one-many relations
between molecular kinds and higher level kinds: a molecular mechanism
can causally lead to or be part of different higher level states
depending on the
 context.[8]
A common conclusion drawn from these one-many relations is that the
parts and molecular components of an
 organism
 have to be understood in terms of the organized whole in which they
occur (recall Kant’s regulative principle;
 Section 2).
 Although biologists view the decomposition of a system into
lower-level parts as reductionist (an instance of methodological
reduction, see
 Section 1),
 they often construe the attempt to understand how the parts are
organized to bring about the system-level properties as a synthetic,
non-reductionist endeavor (Bechtel 2010, 2013). Paying attention to
context and organismal organization is a valid methodological
recommendation; however, it is less clear why this is an argument
against epistemic reduction. Proponents of theory reduction,
such as Nagel (1961) and Schaffner (1976), have replied that a
molecular reduction can take the relations of parts and the context of
molecular processes into account. For example, one can specify the
relevant context as initial conditions in the molecular premises from
which the higher level state is to be deduced (Frost-Arnold 2004).
Context-dependence is primarily a problem for models of theory
reduction; some models of explanatory reduction take the organismal
context for granted without being committed to reducing it molecularly
(as seen in explanations offered in developmental biology). Sciences
can avail themselves of
 causes as difference makers
 relative to a given causal context (Waters 2007, Woodward 2003). Both
experimental investigation and explanation can focus on one among many
causes, relegating everything else to the context or background (which
is often held fixed in experimental studies). For example, if the loss
in function of a particular gene leads to an abnormal phenotype in a
knock-out experiment, this gene is one causal factor
implicated in the development of the normal phenotype. Explanations
appealing to this gene—as a salient causal factor relative to a
context—are genuinely explanatory even if other genes involved
in the phenotype are unknown and the cellular context for the gene is
not yet understood (Waters 1994, 2007). If molecular biologists
discover that the same mechanism produces different effects in
distinct contexts and only one of these effects is the target of
inquiry, a part of the mechanism’s context becomes epistemically
relevant and can be included in the explanation (Delehanty 2005).
In contrast, an account of theory reduction such as the
Nagel-Schaffner approach is committed to deducing a description of the
higher level phenomenon from purely molecular premises. In order to
deduce even a single higher level statement (a fortiori a
total higher level theory on Schaffner’s account), the premises
must contain (in addition to the lower level laws) a specification of
the total lower level context—every feature that has
some causal impact. This includes features internal to an
organism and some parts of its environment. While explanatory
reduction can appeal to particular causes relative to a background
that is not molecularly specified, a logical deduction (as required by
theory reduction) can go through only if the total causal context is
contained in the
 premises.[9]
 A molecular characterization of the total context is in principle
possible due to ontological reduction: for any higher level state
there is always a total molecular configuration that determines this
higher level phenomenon. However, this entails a retreat to the
“in principle” possibility of a molecular derivation; not
only is a molecular specification of the total context currently
unavailable but it may not be forthcoming in the future (Hull 1972,
1974,
 1976).[10]
 In this respect accounts of explanatory reduction have a clear
advantage over models of theory reduction because the former are
committed neither to formal derivation nor the assumption that the
explanans of the reductive explanation involves only
molecularly characterized notions.
Although context-dependence is not a problem for many models of
explanatory reduction, issues can arise for some models of mechanistic
explanation. A mechanistic approach decomposes a system into
components and scrutinizes the functioning of each component in
isolation (where possible). However, a mechanistic explanation must
also epistemically “recompose” the mechanism behavior (the
explanandum) from these component functions (Bechtel 2010).
There are molecular systems consisting of highly interconnected and
functionally integrated networks whose complex organization does not
permit a recomposition of the system behavior from the component
functions studied in isolation (Green et al. 2017, Kaiser 2015). The
functioning of individual components is transformed by the many
influences of the other components. This empirical situation also is
important because it stands behind many instances where molecular
biologists claim a limit of “reduction”—these
complex system interactions lead to emergence in some sense. This
highlights that biologists frequently attempt to account for mechanism
functioning or system dynamics and not just mereological or structural
constitution (e.g., reducing the Mendelian kind “gene” to
biochemical kinds).
Jason Robert’s (2004) treatment of explanation and methodology
in
 developmental biology
 describes what is probably the main valid point stemming from the
context-dependence of molecular features. While acknowledging the
legitimacy of reductionist research strategies that isolate molecular
causes relative to a background held fixed for experimental purposes,
Robert emphasizes that this methodology does not license an inference
to an exclusively reductionist position where all explanatorily
relevant causes are molecular. That developmental genetics uncovers
various differences between individuals that are due to differences in
gene expression does not entail that genes are the only factors
relevant in ontogeny. Since genetic research holds other cellular and
organismal factors fixed, the causal influence of these non-genetic
resources is simply not assessed by this research method. It
begs the question against those who maintain that some explanations of
development must invoke higher level features to assert that the
organismal context can always be described molecularly. For example,
an appeal to developmental genetics research success alone is
inadequate for reducing cellular context to molecular causes because
the discovery of genetic causes occurs against a fixed organismal
background (Robert 2004). The dependence of molecular features on
cellular and organismal contexts poses problems for theory reduction
approaches maintaining that higher level phenomena can be deduced from
purely molecular premises. (It is also a problem for claims that the
embryo can be computed from a purely molecular specification of the
fertilized egg, as endorsed by Rosenberg 1997; see Keller 2002, ch.
9.) Thus, there are boundaries on the kinds of explanatory inferences
that can be drawn from reductionist research strategies. What remains
missing from many philosophical discussions critical of reduction is
an explicit account of methodological strategies and epistemological
frameworks that both capture actual scientific reasoning and offer an
alternative to reductionism (Love 2006, 2008; see
 Section 5).
In addition to the one-many relation between molecular and higher
level kinds, Hull (1972, 1974, 1976) also pointed to the existence of
many-one relations as a challenge for reductionism. The same higher
level phenomenon (e.g., a Mendelian trait such as coat color) can be
produced by several different molecular mechanisms or a higher level
phenomenon is realized by different kinds of molecular configurations
 (multiple realization).
 This is a potential problem for both theory reduction and explanatory
reduction (though to differing degrees). In defense of his model of
theory reduction, Schaffner (1976) replies that it is sufficient to
specify one such molecular situation. The higher level situation,
which is determined by the molecular constellation, then can be
derived logically from this molecular specification of the higher
level situation. However, one has to be clear about the nature of the
explanandum in a reductive explanation (i.e., what is the
consequent of a reductive deduction). Is it a type of higher
level phenomenon (described by higher level predicates) or merely a
token phenomenon (an instance of a higher level phenomenon)?
Theory reduction is the idea that a whole theory (such as classical
genetics) can be reduced, or at least that its laws can be reduced.
For example, the Mendelian principle of segregation is a law
describing a phenomenon occurring in all sexually reproducing
organisms, not just a token phenomenon, so this general
principle—covering various lower level realizations—would
have to be explained/deduced molecularly.
Consider the example that Schaffner (1993) offers in support of the
possibility of reduction: the Mendelian concept of
“dominance”. On his account, given classical genes
a and b, the property “allele a is
dominant (relative to allele b)” can be expressed in
molecular terms as follows. Assume that genotype aa yields
phenotype A and genotype bb corresponds to phenotype
B, while ab yields A (because of
dominance). We ascertain that gene a consists of DNA sequence
α and gene b consists of DNA sequence β, and that
phenotype A is brought about by protein א while
phenotype B is brought about by protein ב. This yields
the following supposed reduction:
Although Schaffner explicitly claims to have shown that the
predicate (or concept of) “dominance” can be
reduced to the language of biochemistry, his evidence actually shows
how a single instance of dominance (allele a is
dominant to allele b) could be brought about by states on the
molecular level. But epistemic reduction requires reducing higher
level concepts and, since Mendelian dominance can be brought about by
different kinds of molecular situations, this higher level
predicate corresponds to many molecular predicates,
which makes any reductive translation of higher level concepts very
complex. (In addition to translating such concepts into molecular
terms, theory reduction also requires deducing higher level
generalizations involving such concepts.) A similar issue can apply to
explanatory reduction. Biology attempts to explain kinds of
phenomena occurring in different contexts and organisms: reductive
explanations must molecularly explain kinds of phenomena in
addition to single instances.
Subsequent discussion based on ideas in metaphysics and
 philosophy of mind
 has clarified how one conception of the many-one relation between
molecular and higher level kinds can bear on epistemic reduction. In
his general treatment of reduction in psychology and social science,
Jerry Fodor (1974, 1975, 1997) distinguishes between token-token
reduction and type-type reduction (or between token
physicalism and type physicalism). Token-token reduction is the idea
that each token higher level property or process is
metaphysically identical to a token physico-chemical property or
process (the weak sense of ontological reduction that is
uncontroversial: see
 Section 1).
 The dispute centers on how much more than token-token reduction is
possible. A substantially stronger idea is that each type of
higher level phenomenon corresponds to one type of lower
level phenomenon. Type-type reduction yields a bold version of
epistemic reductionism where higher level concepts and
knowledge about higher level phenomena could be immediately reduced to
molecular notions. Yet Fodor argues that type-type reduction
(regarding mental and social kinds in particular) is empirically
false. Consider a simple law or causal principle of a higher-level
science relating two kinds, S and T, such that
∀x(Sx → Tx),
which can be read as “all Ss are Ts” or
“all events of type S bring about events of type
T”. (Some laws or principles might be of a more complex
logical form.) As a matter of fact, a higher level kind is often
realized by several different kinds on the physical level; different
instances of the higher level kind are of a different type on the
molecular level. If kind S is realized by the lower level
kinds M1, M2, …,
Mi, the bridge principle (reduction
function) is of a disjunctive form:
T is likewise multiply realized, say by the molecular kinds
N1, N2, …,
Nj. Fodor’s point is that the lower
level basis of the higher level law
∀x(Sx → Tx)
consists in several laws that reduce different higher level instances,
such as:
Thus, while on the higher level there is one unified law
∀x (Sx → Tx),
its translation into molecular terms is a disjunctive
statement:
This disjunctive statement has the appearance of being a gerrymandered
combination rather than a genuine law. Therefore, the higher level law
cannot be reduced to a unified lower level law. Token-token
reduction obtains, but since the natural kinds (to which laws apply)
of the higher level science cross-cut the kinds of the lower level
science, type-type reduction fails and the law-based explanation from
the higher level cannot be replaced by a unified law-based explanation
on the lower level. Steven Kimbrough (1978) argues that this situation
also applies to the relation between classical and molecular genetics:
ontological (token-token) reduction is possible, but not epistemic
(type-type)
 reduction.[11]
The multiple realizability of higher level kinds is typically viewed
as an obstacle to reduction (e.g., Kincaid 1997), and many have
interpreted the many-one relation between molecular and higher level
phenomena in a similar way. Rosenberg’s earlier discussions that
criticized theory reduction in light of multiple realization (1978,
1985, 1994) used
 Donald Davidson’s
 (1970) notion of
 supervenience,
 which is another way to spell out an idea of ontological without
epistemic reduction
 (non-reductive physicalism).
 Higher level facts supervene on physical facts if any difference
between two higher level situations implies a difference in the
physical basis. Yet this is consistent with two distinct physical
situations corresponding to the same higher level state (many-one).
Since biological properties such as fitness supervene on physical
properties, fitness can be nothing more than a combination of physical
properties, even though no such property complex is necessary for
having a particular fitness value. Higher level theories abstract away
from irrelevant variation in lower level features and thereby arrive
at generalizations that are explanatory precisely because they do not
include features irrelevant to explaining the phenomenon (Putnam 1975,
Strevens 2008). From this perspective, theory reduction of classical
to
 molecular genetics
 is impossible as the many–many relations between classical and
molecular kinds make any reductive account radically disjunctive. At
the same time, the notion of supervenience implies that classical and
molecular genetics are not incommensurable, and that molecular
genetics can shed light on the exceptions of classical genetics.
A related critique of reductionism in genetics is due to Philip
Kitcher (1984). It is not that the complexities of any reduction due
to many-one relations between molecular and higher level kinds exceed
our cognitive capacities. Rather, the reductive, molecular
account does not adequately explain because it does not involve the
natural kinds that underlie the appropriate causal relations.
Principles of classical genetics (e.g., segregation) are explained by
cellular processes (e.g., the behavior of chromosomes in meiosis)
because the higher level kinds picked out by cytology are causally
relevant. Rephrasing these cellular processes in molecular terms leads
to an account that mentions various disjunctive combinations of
molecular kinds, while failing to exhibit the unified kinds that are
the causes of the cellular process. A key aspect of Kitcher’s
argument is that an epistemic account of reduction fails for
ontological reasons: it does not capture the natural kind structure of
chromosomal phenomena studied by classical genetics.
Schaffner’s reply to the multiple realization objection (1993,
463–6) emphasizes that the same DNA sequence can be present in
many individuals, which means that molecular biology studies more than
token phenomena; molecular generalizations apply to
restricted types. This is true but fails to address the core
issue. Critics of reductionism do not argue that each higher level
type corresponds to several lower level tokens (which is
trivially true) or that molecular biology can study token phenomena
only. Rather, the point is that a higher level type corresponds to
several lower level types, and for each of these lower level
kinds a distinct molecular account obtains. Thus, a unified (as
opposed to disjunctive) causal explanation of the higher level
phenomenon appears impossible.
Waters (1990) challenges the commitment to unification that implies
there is explanatory loss in appealing to the multiply realized
“gory details” of molecular biology. In some cases,
disjunctive explanations at a lower level seem to explain better than
unified explanations at higher levels. Elliott Sober (1999) extends
this line of argument: an explanation in terms of higher level kinds
can be more unified or general by encompassing heterogeneous lower
level kinds, but this same heterogeneity exhibits important
differences in scientifically interesting properties. Only the lower
level science can account for such differences and therefore, in this
sense, offers a deeper explanation than the higher level science.
Explanations are not better or worse along a one-dimensional scale.
There are several epistemic virtues an explanation can possess, such
as generality, depth, or specificity. Sometimes a lower level
explanation is better relative to one epistemic virtue, while a higher
level explanation is preferable relative to another, such as
unification. And unification itself can be explicated differently in
terms of functional or structural features of biological systems (see,
e.g., Weiskopf
 2011).[12]
Many contemporary accounts of explanatory reduction focus on
 mechanisms
 and the study of
 model organisms.
 One reply to the multiple realization objection from this perspective
argues explicitly for token-token reduction, discussing how the causal
description of a token mechanism explains (Delehanty 2005). Weber
(2005) acknowledges that higher level features are multiply realizable
but notes that this does not hamper the reducibility of token systems
or individual organisms: “the fact that chemotactic behavior is
multiply realizable does not affect the reductionistic explanation of
this organism’s behavioral biology” (48).
However, this stratagem ignores the key point of contention because
token-token reduction is uncontroversial. The focus on token phenomena
or individual organisms fails to address an important epistemological
feature of scientific knowledge: explanations often cover
types of phenomena. In many biological contexts, such as
 developmental biology,
 the intellectual aim is to explain phenomena instantiated in
many organisms and the use of model organisms is predicated on this
 aim.[13]
 Any version of epistemic reductionism has to address this feature of
scientific explanation to be adequate. Explaining development—as
understood by many developmental biologists—means to have an
account of ontogeny exhibited by individual organisms belonging to a
larger group (e.g., understanding the developmental principles that
govern vertebrate or amphibian development). As the
same morphological structure may develop in different species by means
of different processes and based on the action of different genes,
multiple realization obtains and is relevant for such explanations
(Laubichler and Wagner 2001).
Moreover, even if the aim is to explain a feature of a single
organism, it does not follow that an explanation should appeal
exclusively to factors on the lowest level. An explanation should only
include factors that are explanatorily relevant; an irrelevant factor
is one whose omission from (or modification in) the explanation does
not prevent the explanandum from following (Strevens 2008).
This also holds for mechanistic explanation, which should cite those
features as components of a mechanism whose modification would make a
causal difference to the explanandum phenomenon (Craver
2007). For instance, chromosomes are relevant parts of the mechanisms
needed to explain Mendelian patterns of inheritance (Darden 2005), but
this particular explanation will apply regardless of the lower level,
molecular composition of the chromosomes (e.g., whether or not the
various genes have similar or very different DNA sequences).
In the context of developmental biology, even during the development
of a single organism, a structure may be present across time and have
a stable developmental-functional role, but its underlying molecular
and cellular basis may change (Brigandt 2006, Kirschner 2005).
Entities above the molecular level can be more robust so that when
some molecular processes change or break down these higher level
entities are not modified or removed. Knocking out a gene need not
have any impact on ontogeny due to genetic redundancy, while
eliminating a particular cell or group of cells may dramatically
interfere with normal development (Brigandt 2013a, 2015, Mitchell
2009). A higher level causal connection can be more salient in that
the regular operation of the mechanism strongly depends on the
presence of this kind of causal relation. Such a higher level causal
relation is realized by molecular entities and their interactions
(i.e., supervenience obtains), but if relevant higher level processes
are less sensitive to disturbance or intervention than certain
molecular causes, the more powerful mechanistic explanation can be the
one that appeals to more robust, higher level causal connections. This
is one reason why some biological sciences preferentially invoke
higher level entities and processes in the face of multiple
realization, explaining in terms of higher level natural kinds and
causes.
In summary, the level(s) of organization a successful explanation
addresses often depends on the particular explanandum. If the
aim is to explain a type of phenomenon, multiple realization issues
(many-one relations) are likely pertinent. In the explanation of a
token phenomenon, the explanation should include lower level factors
only to the extent that they are explanatorily relevant for that
particular explanandum.
Sarkar’s (1998) account of explanatory reduction draws attention
to the requirement of representation: natural phenomena must be
symbolized, embodied, pictured, or designated through media such as
equations, scale miniatures, or abstract diagrams. Every reductive
explanation in science involves representations of the systems or
features to be related by reduction. (Note that this is not the
question of how theory structure is represented; see, e.g., Schaffner
1996.) Almost all of the discussion surrounding one-many
 (Section 4.1)
 and many-one problems
 (Section 4.2)
 for theory and explanatory reduction assume or presume particular
representations that directly impact the arguments offered (e.g., they
involve approximations of different kinds). Sarkar distinguishes three
representational criteria for a reductive explanation:
(i) fundamentalism: the explanation of the phenomena relies
entirely on features that pertain to a more fundamental realm;
(ii) abstract hierarchy: the system is represented as a
hierarchy, where the lower levels are regarded as more fundamental;
and, (iii) spatial hierarchy: the abstract hierarchy is rendered
physical by the requirement that the entities on the lower level are
(spatial) parts of the entities at higher levels (see
 Section 3.2).
 Whether or not there are one-many or many-one relations between
different hierarchical levels turns on the nature of the hierarchy
invoked and how it is characterized. The decomposition of a system is
not a univocal enterprise and, depending on the principles utilized,
can generate both competing and complementary sets of part
representations from the same system (Craver 2009, Kauffman 1971,
Wimsatt 1974, Winther 2011). Certain governing principles are often
visible, such as functional versus structural decompositions (Bechtel
and Richardson 1993, Winther 2006). Therefore, prior to determinations
of whether reductive explanations succeed or fail, questions of
representational choice and adequacy need to be addressed
explicitly.
These representational issues are not idle with respect to differing
explanations, both past and present, because the same line of argument
about the non-independence of organismal parts constituted reasons for
treating the organism from a non-reductionist standpoint (Aristotle,
Parts of Animals II.3; Owen, Hunterian Lectures [1837] in
Sloan 1992, 213–4). Individuation of parts and their explanatory
relationship to wholes is critically dependent on the principles
utilized in representing them (Love 2012). Wimsatt (1974, 1986, 1997,
2007) has claimed that reduction and emergence are compatible within
the context of explaining organizational complexity in living systems,
going so far as to argue that reductionist methodology can identify
emergence when specific conditions of aggregativity are delineated.
Different failures of aggregativity result when different conditions
are not met, which yields a subtle taxonomy of compositional
relations, as well as highlighting that different decompositions
produce distinct fulfillments and/or violations of those conditions
that can be methodologically exploited by scientists for the purpose
of causal discovery.
In addition to individuation, two other issues related to
representation are germane: temporality and intrinsicality
(Hüttemann and Love 2011). In most discussions of epistemic
reduction, both theoretical and explanatory, no explicit distinction
has been drawn between constitutional or spatial relations
(arrangements) and causal or temporal relations (dynamics; but see
Mitchell 2009, 2012). One source of the focus on spatial relations is
the objection to reductionism from structural organization (Polanyi
1968; cf. Delehanty 2005, Frost-Arnold 2004, Schaffner 1993, ch. 9.2),
which is related to the “context” objection
 (Section 4.1).
 Moreover, physical science models that serve as templates for
thinking about reduction emphasize spatial composition questions
rather than causal relations (Love and Hüttemann 2011). As
Schaffner has remarked: “Biological theories are usually given
in the form of a series of temporal (and frequently causal) models. In
physics, time is usually eliminated by making it implicit in
differential equations, whereas in biology a temporal process …
is the rule” (1993, 83–4; cf. Kellert 1993, 93). Nagel
presciently recognized differences between spatial and temporal
organization in his discussion of teleological explanation (in part
because he was reading the literature on explaining ontogeny by
theoretical biologists; see
 Section 2).
Kitcher also glimpsed the potential significance of temporality for
reductive explanation in the context of embryology: “Because
developmental processes are complex and because changes in the timing
of embryological events may produce a cascade of effects at several
different levels, one sometimes uses descriptions at higher levels to
explain what goes on [later] at a more fundamental level” (1984,
371).
A very different distinction utilizing time, which is agreed upon by
diverse participants, distinguishes between the historical succession
of theories via reduction (“diachronic reduction”) and
current attempts to relate parts to wholes, such as in explanatory
reduction or interlevel theory reduction (“synchronic
reduction”; see
 Section 3.1).
What this distinction misses is the possibility of diachronic aspects
of part-whole or interlevel relations. Scientific explanations
commonly invoke dynamic (causal) processes involving entities on
several levels of organization (Craver and Bechtel 2007). This is one
of the core reasons why development is a persisting biological topic
for reductionism. During ontogeny there are causal interactions over
time among parts and activities (both homogeneous and heterogeneous)
to bring about new parts and activities (both homogeneous and
heterogeneous), eventually generating an integrated adult (whole)
organism.
Temporality can be added as a fourth criterion on representations for
reductive explanations: (iv) temporal hierarchy: for an abstract
hierarchy embedded in an explanation, the entities and their behaviors
on the lower level are temporally prior to the entities and their
behaviors at the higher levels (Hüttemann and Love 2011).
Although temporal or process hierarchies have not received the same
attention as spatial hierarchies (such as in Wimsatt’s
aggregativity criteria), their importance is seen in explanations that
invoke higher level features (e.g., tissue interactions during
ontogeny) at an earlier time to causally explain lower level features
at a later time (e.g., gene expression patterns). For example, a study
of the developmental origin of aortic arch asymmetry involves a
mixture of reductionist and non-reductionist representations according
to the criterion of temporality (Yashiro et al. 2007). The explanation
depicts several events in a sequential process. First, fundamental
level properties (gene expression) change non-fundamental level
properties (arterial structure), which alters blood flow dynamics
(thereby fulfilling the temporality condition). These new dynamics
induce a subsequent change in gene expression (thereby violating the
temporality condition). This altered gene expression then produces the
non-fundamental property of interest, aortic arch asymmetry (thereby
fulfilling the temporality condition). Thus, depending on how time is
represented and which temporal partitions are utilized, an explanation
may be reductive, non-reductive, or both. This is a good example of
how ontological and epistemic reduction can yield strikingly different
answers. A biologist using a higher level feature at an earlier time
to explain a lower level feature at a later time (a non-reductionist
explanation by the criterion of temporality) is not denying that this
higher level feature is composed of lower level features (e.g., cells
and molecules), nor the possibility that the higher level feature was
caused by a different set of lower level features at some more distal
point in time.
Another example is found in protein folding within molecular biology
(Hüttemann and Love 2011, Love and Hüttemann 2011).
Functional proteins are folded structures composed of amino acid
components linked together into a linear chain. If we ask whether the
folded protein is mereologically composed of its amino acid parts
given current representations in molecular biology, then the
affirmative answer seems to favor explanatory reduction with respect
to the spatial hierarchy. But if we ask whether the linear amino acid
chain folds into a functional protein (a causal process with a
temporal dimension) purely as consequence of its linked amino acid
parts, then the answer is less clear. Empirical studies have discerned
a necessary role for other folded proteins to assist in the
proper folding of newly generated linear amino acid chains (Frydman
2001). That the linked amino acid components alone are insufficient
causally, even if they are sufficient constitutionally, allows for a
more explicit appreciation of the significance of temporality and
dynamics (Mitchell 2009), especially because the relations of interest
concern only molecular biological phenomena (as opposed to higher
levels of organization, such as cells or anatomy).
A final representational feature is intrinsicality, i.e., how what is
“internal” and “external” are explicitly or
implicitly distinguished in reductive explanations. Wimsatt (1980)
drew attention to the fact that every investigation must divide a
system from its environment and that methodological reductionism
favors attributions of causal responsibility to internal parts of a
system rather than those deemed external (see also Wilson 2004). In
the protein folding case, it appears that the failure of temporally
indexed explanatory reduction involves the causal powers of something
extrinsic to (an instance of) the process under scrutiny
(i.e., the folding of a single amino acid chain). The presumption of
atemporal, compositional relationships has encouraged a neglect of
this distinction because nested part-whole relations are predicated on
a prior individuation of a system from its environment (Hüttemann
and Love 2011, Love and Hüttemann 2011). Kaiser’s (2015)
idea that a reductive explanation must (among other things) represent
each lower-level part of the explanation “in isolation”
from other parts is one explicit attempt to engage representational
questions related to intrinsicality
 (Section 3.2).
 Overall, this line of thought relates to the context-dependency
objection
 (Section 4.1),
 but emphasizes the importance of functional dependency relations
uncovered by attending to temporality in addition to structural
organization.
Recognizing temporal aspects of reductive explanations found in
biology alongside other representational issues like intrinsicality,
both of which are not captured by a focus on mereology alone,
strengthens the argument in favor of talking about different
kinds of reductionism rather a unified account of reduction
or overarching dichotomies of “reductionism” versus
“anti-reductionism” (or “holism”). Once we
incorporate distinctions about different types of reduction
(ontological, epistemic, and methodological), the different
interpretations of these types (e.g., theoretical versus explanatory
epistemic reductions), the different representational features
involved (spatial, temporal, etc.), and the distinct biological topics
to which philosophers have applied them (e.g., development or
functional anatomy), any single conception of reduction appears
inadequate to do justice to the diversity of phenomena and reasoning
practices in the life sciences. The multiplicity and heterogeneity of
biological subdisciplines only reinforces this argument and suggests
to some that we should move beyond reductionism entirely.
Much of the past discussion about reduction presupposes a unitary view
of the scientific enterprise that involves a close relation between
natural kinds, laws, counterfactual dependence, explanation, and
confirmation (Godfrey-Smith 2008). One of the ubiquitous features of
modern biology that is prima facie incompatible with many
methodological and epistemological reductionist theses is the
proliferation and flourishing of diverse biological subdisciplines,
molecular and otherwise. Despite the purported “hegemony of
molecular biology” (Kitcher 1999a), biological subdisciplines
focused on higher levels of organization have not disappeared:
“Special sciences: still autonomous after all these years”
(Fodor 1997). For some time this feature of biological research, along
with many of the problems associated with theoretical reduction
(especially its inapplicability to scientific practice, but also the
difficulties in identifying clear-cut and distinct
“levels” to relate reductively; Brooks 2014), has prompted
philosophers to reject “reduction” as the appropriate (or
only) relation among concepts and explanations from different
 domains.[14]
 Instead, relations of coordination driven by a commitment to
unifying, integrating, or synthesizing aspects of scientific knowledge
have been offered (Bechtel and Hamilton 2007, Brigandt 2013b,
Potochnik 2011).
Lindley Darden and Nancy Maull were at the forefront of this
discussion with the concept of an
 inter-field theory
 (Darden and Maull 1977, Maull 1977). For example, the advent of the
chromosome theory of inheritance in the 1910s bridged the previously
unrelated fields of Mendelian genetics (which studied phenotypic
patterns of inheritance across generations) and cytology (which dealt
with the material contents of cells). This interfield theory effected
a kind of unification, but Mendelian genetics and cytology were not
reduced to each other, nor did the interfield theory reduce both
fields. More recent work has articulated interfield relations without
relying on the notion of a theory (Bechtel 1986, Burian 1993, Grantham
2004a, 2004b, Mitchell 2002). This parallels the trend in models of
explanatory reduction of moving away from theories as the only
epistemic units of interest
 (Section 3.2),
 but the emphasis is on relata such as coordination, integration,
synthesis, or reciprocal interaction (Bechtel 2013, Love and Lugar
2013, Plutynski 2013). A rationale for these relata emerges from the
demand for multidisciplinary research; the explanatory task involves
coordinating diverse epistemic resources, which amounts to an implicit
rejection of the “fundamentality” of one particular
discipline producing the most empirically adequate explanations.
In this context, Alan Love (2005, 2008, 2014) uses the notion of a
problem agenda to argue that some scientific problems not only
motivate interdisciplinary research but also provide structure for the
requisite intellectual coordination (see also Brigandt 2010, 2012,
Brigandt and Love 2012). Problem agendas consist of numerous component
questions that stand in systematic relations and are tied to
associated standards of explanatory adequacy. These standards imply
what epistemic resources and different disciplines are needed to
address the problem. The relations among component questions of the
problem agenda (i.e., its internal structure) foreshadow how various
contributions can be coordinated to generate an adequate explanatory
framework. Building on this perspective, Ingo Brigandt (2010) suggests
that there is no single, linear hierarchy among scientific fields
(e.g., Oppenheim and Putnam 1958; see Hüttemann and Love 2016),
but that the relationships among theories and disciplinary approaches
are determined by and vary with the scientific problem being
addressed. These philosophical accounts align with general research on
interdisciplinarity, which has identified the presence and
articulation of a complex question as a prerequisite (Repko 2008,
Szostak 2002, 2009). Thus, instead of unification being a regulative
ideal with biologists seeking as much unity as possible in their
explanations of the complex natural world (e.g., Kitcher 1999b), an
erotetic perspective suggests that particular problems determine the
need for and degree of any integration (Brigandt 2010). William
Bechtel’s (1993, 2006) studies of cell biology document how the
formation of new subdisciplines generates both integration among
approaches and some disintegration due to new specializations.
Bechtel’s attention to the institutional underpinnings of
biology also meshes with sociological analyses of disciplinary
organization (Gerson 1998, 2013).
Recently, accounts of explanation revolving around
 “mechanisms”
 have been widely discussed (e.g., Baetu 2015, Bechtel 2006, 2008,
Bechtel and Abrahamsen 2005, Craver 2006, 2007, Darden 2006, Glennan
1996, Machamer et al. 2000). Many philosophers view experimental
biology as fundamentally concerned with the discovery of mechanisms
(Craver and Darden 2013, Darden and Craver 2002, Tabery 2004), where
mechanisms are understood as akin (though not equivalent) to machines
with interconnected, organized parts operating to produce regular or
expected outcomes. Conceiving of biological explanation in terms of
mechanisms provides a philosophical framework that closely tracks
biological practice and does not rely on the notion of a theory.
Besides providing new models for explanatory reduction
 (Section 3.2),
 mechanisms also have been used to demonstrate integration among
different fields. Darden (2005) argues that both reduction and
replacement fail to capture the relations between classical and
 molecular genetics.
 Both fields deal with different mechanisms that occur at different
periods of the cell cycle and involve different working entities:
classical genetics focuses on meiosis and involves chromosomal
behavior; molecular genetics focuses on gene expression and involves
various molecular entities such as nucleotide sequences. Relations
between the two fields are manifested as differential attention to
distinct aspects of a larger, temporally extended mechanism.
The mechanisms framework has proved particularly fruitful in capturing
explanations that appeal to entities at several levels of organization
(Darden 2016). An instructive example is Carl Craver’s (2005,
2007) discussion of multilevel and multifield explanation in the
context of neuroscientific studies of learning. While the
cellular-molecular process of long-term potentiation is critical for
memory formation, it is not merely a molecular counterpart of memory.
Long-term potentiation is a lower-level component of an overall,
multilevel mechanism. Reductionist accounts have neglected the
phenomenon of disciplinary integration at the same level of structural
organization and invested too heavily in finished reductive
explanations, ignoring the dynamic changes in research strategy that
precede them (Craver 2005). In addition to searching for molecular
correlates of higher-level phenomena (“downward-looking”
episodes), there also have been attempts to understand the role of
molecular mechanisms in complex higher-level phenomena
(“upward-looking” periods of research). Sometimes progress
has been achieved independently of or by abandoning reduction as an
explanatory goal. This need to change strategies depending on the
research context is ubiquitous in mechanistic research (Bechtel 2010),
which serves as another reminder for philosophers to attend to actual
scientific practice. Even though a mechanism is temporally extended,
philosophical analyses of mechanisms may not capture all aspects of
temporality (see
 Section 4.3).
 While discussions have focused on the representation of time relative
to a mechanism (e.g., Bechtel 2006, Machamer et al. 2000), not all
aspects of the dynamics of biological systems are well represented as
mechanisms involving entities and activities. Some might be better
modeled using equations (Bechtel 2012, Bechtel and Abrahamsen 2010,
2011, Brigandt 2015, Weber 2008), and in other cases time might be
represented independently of the mechanisms being
 investigated.[15]
Complexity also has been a source for articulating non-reductionist
epistemological accounts of biological reasoning (Wimsatt 1974, Hooker
2011). Sandra Mitchell (2003, 2009) has argued that different forms of
biological complexity block standard reductionist perspectives.
Multiple (idealized) causal models must be integrated from different
disciplinary approaches to adequately represent this complexity,
including our uncertainty in predicting its behavior, which has
implications for any social policy derived from these models. She
specifically draws attention to the phenomenon of self-organization,
which refers to how system behaviors or patterns emerge from
non-specific interactions among lower-level components (Camazine et
al. 2001, Kauffman 1993), such as the collective behavior of social
insects. (Self-organizing phenomena are also relevant to reductionism
in physical science; see, e.g., Goldenfeld and Kadanoff 1999,
Whitesides and Ismagilov 1999.) Although decomposing a system into
parts is important for claims about self-organization, there is no
localization of causal responsibility to individual components
(Bechtel and Richardson 1993, ch. 9). Instead, the system behavior is
a function of generic patterns of component interaction, which
foregrounds how complexity emerges from dynamics rather than
constitution (see
 Section 4.3).
 For example, gene networks and human social networks may exhibit
isomorphic patterns of self-organization due to their interactive
structure, which is unrelated to whether genes or humans are the
components. Thus, self-organizing phenomena occupy an odd place in the
reductionism discussion because even though components are used to
explain the behavior of the system, it is the nature of their
interactions (not their specific characteristics) that generate
patterns of behavior. These patterns are often referred to as
 emergent properties
 of the system (see also Grantham 2007, Mitchell 2012).
The philosophical import of biological complexity is underscored by
recent trends in systems biology (Boogerd et al. 2007, Green 2015,
2017, Green et al. 2015, Mazzocchi 2012, Noble 2006, O’Malley
and Soyer 2012). In addition to the mathematical modeling of
system-wide behavior, systems biology has a wealth of data about
various molecular components of cells stemming from functional
genomics, transcriptomics, proteomics, and metabolomics methods.
Downward looking strategies in systems biology attempt to analyze
systemic dynamics into different components, whereas upward looking
strategies aim to synthesize how the quantitative interactions among
individual molecules result in higher-level behavior (Green et al.
2017, Krohs and Callebaut 2007). Despite the focus on molecular
components and their interactions, non-reductionist themes tied to
complexity are motivated by non-linear interactions and feedback loops
that generate emergent behaviors, distributed control, and system
robustness (Brigandt 2015, Bruggeman et al. 2002, Westerhoff and Kell
2007).
Another distinct strand of discussion about reductionism is found in
critical analyses of methodology and explanation from the perspective
of
 feminist philosophy of science
 and studies of the
 social aspects of science
 (e.g., Fehr 2004, Longino 1990, 1996).
 Feminist philosophy of biology
 has related reductionism and pluralism to other philosophical,
scientific, and social issues. One core idea in these discussions is
that forms of reductionism are involved in mutually reinforcing
feedback loops with other factors, such as socioeconomic status or
expectations about gender (Keller and Longino 1996, Levins and
Lewontin 1985). Thus, reductionism, whether ontological, epistemic, or
methodological, can be understood as the manifestation of more diverse
commitments (e.g., political ideology) than much of the philosophy of
biology literature on reductionism would suggest—the history of
biology points in this direction as well (see, e.g., Allchin 2008).
This line of criticism also suggests that the interrelations between
reductionism in biology and the social sciences should be treated more
explicitly. Elisabeth Lloyd (2002) has argued that medical research
should not be restricted simply to molecular biological investigation
because higher levels of social organization that are culturally
sanctioned have unrecognized causal effects on health. As the social
sciences and medicine attempt to apply different life science
reasoning strategies, similar philosophical issues predictably
transfer, but with the potential for more socially damaging
consequences.
A shared feature of many alternatives to reductionism is an emphasis
on pluralist dimensions of epistemology in biology that situate
methodological or explanatory reduction as one among many necessary
components (Dupré 1993, Kellert et al. 2006, Longino 2000,
2002, 2013, Mitchell 2003). In different ways, these positions stress
how the scientific investigation of biological phenomena demands
diverse epistemic tools without a requirement to tie it all together
into fundamental physics, macromolecular chemistry, or even
 molecular biology.
 Thus, ontological reduction becomes more or less unhinged from
epistemological reduction because there is no need to demonstrate how
each and every domain of scientific inquiry is anchored in physical
stuff. Scientists are epistemologically profligate, even if they are
largely metaphysically frugal (see Dupré 1993 and van Fraassen
2002 for differing perspectives on science and metaphysics). The
plurality of biological research motivates a philosophical
 pluralism
 about biology, both in terms of the many meanings available for
different methodological and epistemological types of reduction, and
the need to have multiple dimensions of reductionism in order to
secure empirical adequacy with respect to modeling biological
phenomena (Grantham 1999, Kellert et al. 2006, Looren de Jong 2006,
Morange 2006, Sullivan 2009, van der Steen 1999, Wylie 1999).
It is clear that these different kinds of “alternatives”
to reductionism successfully capture a number of features left
untreated or ignored by theory reduction. However, it is an open
question whether they supplant discussions of reduction or bear some
complex relation to them (Craver 2005). Reasons in favor of the latter
position include the continued use of “reductionist”
language (for and against) in biological research, as well as the fact
that a near universal reason for rejecting reduction and choosing an
alternative is the problematic nature of theory reduction,
which only represents a small space of the philosophical
possibilities. One interpretation of some alternatives to reduction is
that they are responding to the complexity of reduction that has
become more apparent over the past two decades (e.g., seeing
explanations as inherently interlevel), and the fact that
biologists’ use of the term “reductionism” refers to
different specific commitments in different cases and research
contexts. Thus, for example, mechanisms approaches are another way to
treat the heterogeneity of explanation (including reductive and
non-reductive aspects), which was largely ignored in the literature on
theory reduction, which assumed that a few select examples from
biological research were representative. This heterogeneity is a
pervasive feature of the history of biology; philosophical
alternatives to reduction are responding in part to long-standing
controversies among life science investigators about the legitimacy of
reductionist research strategies and modes of explanation (see
 Section 2).
 The compatibility or conflict among these various alternatives and
different accounts of explanation in biology is still being probed
(e.g., Bechtel 2006, 40–44), but the traditional philosophical
project of articulating a single notion of reduction to capture most
essential aspects of theory structure and explanation across biology
is unlikely to succeed.
Arguably, discussions of reductionism in biology are becoming more
rather than less philosophically interesting. This is a consequence of
recognizing the diverse conceptual landscape carved out over past
decades, one that is much larger than that conceived of when only
Nagelian theory reduction was in view. Biological science is now more
specialized than ever, but disciplinary proliferation brings with it
issues relevant to any analysis of reduction: using the same terms
differently, disparate methodologies, distinct explanatory norms, and
divergent interests in “levels” of biological
organization. It also includes an acknowledgment that certain enduring
biological topics like development still engender difficult questions
about reductionism and new fields of inquiry reinvigorate these
discussions (e.g., synthetic biology’s appeal to molecular
components as Lego-like building blocks in the
 Registry of Standard Biological Parts).
 Philosophers need to recognize that a criterion of adequacy on
accounts of reductionism in biology involves interpreting why
scientists make pronouncements about the failure of reductionism in
different areas of life science (see, e.g., De Backer et al.
 2010).[16]
There also is increasing contact between neuroscience and
psychologically oriented investigations (Bechtel 2008, Boogerd et al.
2002, Craver 2007, Sullivan 2016). A potential prospect related to the
contact between molecular neurobiology and psychology is the injection
of epistemic considerations into philosophy of mind
discussions (Godfrey-Smith 2008). More attention to issues of
representation, decomposition, and temporality could alter the nature
of these debates. At the same time, a more explicit evaluation of
metaphysical components imported from philosophy of mind into
philosophy of biology is warranted. Mediated by the work of Jaegwon
Kim, Rosenberg incorporated the concept of supervenience from Davidson
four decades ago (Rosenberg
 1978).[17]
 Rosenberg subsequently redeployed Kim’s (1998) causal exclusion
argument in support of reductionism in biology (Rosenberg 2006; cf.
Eronen 2011, Sachse 2007). Discussions of the status of downward
causation and realization in biological systems are relevant for a
better understanding of the intersection between epistemological and
metaphysical components of reduction (Craver and Bechtel 2007, Love
2012, Robinson 2005, Wilson and Craver 2007). For example, an interest
in the context sensitivity of realization in philosophy of mind
(Wilson 2004, ch. 6) invokes issues pertaining to the context
objection, individuation, temporality (especially causation versus
constitution), and intrinsicality. These analyses can then be imported
into biological contexts to argue for or against particular aspects of
reductionism (see, e.g., Wilson 2005).
More work is needed in how to relate different kinds of hierarchies to
questions of reductionism. Biological hierarchies are diverse (Grene
1987, Korn 2002, 2005), and some areas of biological research, such as
paleontology and systematics (Valentine and May 1996, see also
Grantham 1999, 2004a, 2004b, 2007), have been ignored when
reductionism comes into view. Paying attention to temporality
encourages the exploration of functional or control hierarchies in
more detail (Salthe 1985, 1993, Wimsatt 2002). The limitations of
representing biological systems in terms of hierarchies should be
explored in more depth as well (Brooks 2014, O’Malley et al.
2014, Potochnik and McGill 2012).
All of these possibilities suggest more scrutiny of disciplinary
heterogeneity in biological investigation relevant to reductionism.
Although ecology has received some treatment (Dupré 1993, ch.
5; Mikkelson 2004), issues of decomposition and representation have
not yet received wide attention (Lafrançois 2006). Other topics
connected to explanatory reduction and mechanisms in experimental
research are cancer (Bertolaso 2013, 2016, Bizzarri et al. 2008, Moss
2002, Plutynski 2013, Soto and Sonnenschein 2005, 2006) and stem cells
(Fagan 2013, Laplane 2016). Because of the diversity of explanations
found in these different disciplines, the nature of scientific
explanation returns with a vengeance (Schaffner 2006). Although only a
few reductionists demand that explanation be strictly nomological
(Rosenberg 2006, Weber 2005), the subtle interplay between explanation
and reduction must be treated when ranging over diverse biological
subdisciplines. Additionally, as more attention is given to the
diversity of investigative reasoning (or “scientific
practice”) in and among these disciplinary contexts, the
interplay between different aspects of methodological and epistemic
reduction will become more salient.
A final prospect concerns whether discussions of reduction in
different sciences will interact fruitfully. Although questions about
reduction in philosophy of physics have largely diverged from those in
philosophy of biology, some connections have been drawn
(Hüttemann and Love 2016). For example, Sarkar has approached
quantum mechanics using his account of reductionism that was forged in
a biological context (Jaeger and Sarkar 2003). A potential
intersection between these discussions arises around the relations
between parts and wholes or temporality, which have come under
scrutiny from philosophers focused on the physical sciences
(Hüttemann 2004, Love and Hüttemann 2011, Rueger 2000,
Rueger and McGivern 2010). Another area worthy of more attention is
reductive explanation in chemistry, which has been ignored in large
part by philosophers of biology (see, e.g., Bishop 2010, LePoidevin
2005, Ramsey 1997, Scerri 1994, 2000).
In all these cases it seems clear that debates about reductionism in
biology have not reached a denouement but rather portend vigorous
philosophical discussion as the heterogeneity of issues related to its
ontological, epistemological, and methodological types are brought to
bear on perennial biological topics. The task of philosophers focused
on reductionism in biology will be to analyze these promiscuities of
reasoning and seek to develop accounts of reduction that capture what
scientists actually do and contribute to more general perspectives on
biological knowledge and scientific inquiry.