The method of reflective equilibrium consists in working back and
forth among our considered judgments (some say our
“intuitions,” though Rawls (1971), the namer of the
method, avoided the term “intuitions” in this context)
about particular instances or cases, the principles or rules that we
believe govern them, and the theoretical considerations that we
believe bear on accepting these considered judgments, principles, or
rules, revising any of these elements wherever necessary in order to
achieve an acceptable coherence among them. The method succeeds and we
achieve reflective equilibrium when we arrive at an acceptable
coherence among these beliefs. An acceptable coherence requires that
our beliefs not only be consistent with each other (a weak
requirement), but that some of these beliefs provide support or
provide a best explanation for others. Moreover, in the process we may
not only modify prior beliefs but add new beliefs as well. There need
be no assurance the reflective equilibrium is stable—we may
modify it as new elements arise in our thinking (Schroeter 2004). In
practical contexts, this deliberation may help us come to a conclusion
about what we ought to do when we had not at all been sure earlier.
(Scanlon 2002). We arrive at an optimal equilibrium when the component
judgments, principles, and theories are ones we are un-inclined to
revise any further because together they have the highest degree of
acceptability or credibility for us. An alternative account retains
the importance of revisability and emphasizes the positive role of
examining our moral intuitions, but rejects the appeal to coherentism
in favor a treating our intuitive moral judgments as the right sort to
count as foundational, even if they are still defeasible (McMahan
2000, Nichols 2012). 
The method of reflective equilibrium has been advocated as a coherence
account of justification (as contrasted with an account of truth) in
several areas of inquiry, including inductive and deductive logic as
well as both theoretical and applied philosophy. The key idea
underlying this view of justification is that we “test”
various parts of our system of beliefs against the other beliefs we
hold, looking for ways in which some of these beliefs support others,
seeking coherence among the widest set of beliefs, and revising and
refining them at all levels when challenges to some arise from others.
For example, a moral principle or moral judgment about a particular
case (or, alternatively, a rule of inductive or deductive inference or
a particular inference) would be justified if it cohered with the rest
of our beliefs about right action (or correct inferences) on due
reflection and after appropriate revisions throughout our system of
beliefs. By extension of this account, a person who holds a principle
or judgment in reflective equilibrium with other relevant beliefs can
be said to be justified in believing that principle or judgment.
Because we are expected to revise our beliefs at all levels as we work
back and forth among them and subject them to various criticisms, this
coherence view contrasts sharply with a variety of many
foundationalist approaches to justification. In ethics, some
foundationalist approaches take some subset of our moral beliefs as
fixed or unrevisable. Other foundationalists at least claim that some
subset of our moral beliefs are immediately or directly justified
(perhaps even “self-evident”) or warranted (leaving aside
the issue of revisability) and serve as the basis on which all other
beliefs are justified. Still others take some subset of our beliefs as
at least justifiable independently of any other moral beliefs, even if
they are justifiable in light of either necessary or contingent views
of the person or human nature or through appeals to the logic of moral
discourse (Timmons 1987). Reflective equilibrium is unlikely to single
out any such group of privileged or directly justified beliefs,
distinguishing itself from all these forms of foundationalism. Rawls
(1974) thought it highly unlikely, but not impossible, that moral
principles could be formulated so compellingly (be
“self-evident”) that we would favor them and their
consequences over all our previously held considered moral judgments;
he thus leaves foundationalism a slim possibility, a point seized on
by some who are willing to ignore Rawls’s probability claim that
such foundationalism is not probable at all. If we take this
probability judgment seriously, then the warrant for a belief lies
(with high probability) in its coherence with other beliefs and not in
its resting on beliefs for which foundationalist claims are made. 
Because it is not foundationalist in these ways, reflective
equilibrium also avoids some other problematic distinctions or claims
that are part of an effort to show how some beliefs can be directly
justified or warranted. For example, some foundationalists view
particular moral judgments as fixed; others might think it is our
moral principles or some deeper theoretical beliefs from which such
principles might be derived that are fixed and unrevisable. Some
proponents of both approaches have even claimed that a moral sense or
faculty reveals these directly justified beliefs to us. For others, we
can discover the foundational beliefs in some deep moral belief
structure that is revealed to us through a careful examination of
moral judgements and that is arguably a priori. A considerable part of
contemporary work in substantive ethics treats appeals to moral
intuitions or considered judgments in this way (Thompson 1976, McMahan
2000, G.A. Cohen 2007). Some who work in this fashion cite Rawls
(1974) when they embrace reflective equilibrium. We return to the
topic of intuitionism again later in this entry.
In contrast, advocates of reflective equilibrium need tell no
controversial stories about credentials for a special subset of
beliefs that is directly justifiable. Where such advocates credit some
initial beliefs with strong initial acceptance, as Rawls (Rawls 1971)
does when he refers to some beliefs as initial “fixed
points,” the beliefs remain revisable; in any case, they are not
taken to be points we believe independently of other moral and
non-moral beliefs we hold, and so they have no special foundations
(Harman 2003). This revisability of the initial beliefs and their
dependence on other beliefs when reasons for them are requested means
that no such special epistemological story has to be told about
them.
As we shall see, however, an important point of controversy,
especially in ethics, is not that reflective equilibrium allows for
the revision of all moral judgments but, rather, that it involves
giving some initial justificatory weight to them at all.
This approach to the justification of rules of inductive
logic—without the label “reflective
equilibrium”—was proposed by Nelson Goodman in his classic
Fact, Fiction, and Forecast (Goodman 1955). Goodman's idea
was that we justify rules of inference in inductive or deductive logic
by bringing them into reflective equilibrium with what we judge to be
acceptable inferences in a broad range of particular cases. No rule of
inference would be acceptable as a logical principle if it was not
compatible with what we take to be acceptable instances of inferential
reasoning. In this sense, our beliefs about acceptable rules of
inference are constrained by the “evidence” provided by
what we believe to be good or correct examples or instances of
inferential reasoning. At the same time, we should correct or revise
our views about particular inferences we initially might think are
acceptable if we come to see them as incompatible with rules that we
generally accept and refuse to reject because they, in turn, best
account for a broad range of other acceptable inferences.
Some have criticized this account as giving too much weight to our
actual inductive practices (Stich 1990, Kelly and McGrath 2010).
Obviously, not all elements of the everyday reasoning practices of all
individuals are justifiable. For example, many of us, to our chagrin,
have had to confess committing the error of the gamblers fallacy in
our own betting on games or on the events of life. Quite generally,
psychological studies reveal widespread errors in reasoning in a broad
range of contexts. More recently, others have suggested that
reflective equilibrium is problematic as a form of justification of
inductive reasoning because it is fragile as a method, allowing some
features of our beliefs to trigger significant changes in the
equilibrium they reach, and it provides inadequate assurance about its
reliability, as a way of telling us what beliefs to replace with other
beliefs (Harman and Kulkarni 2006).
Though Goodman thinks justification of our reasoning practices depends
on what inferences we accept when we reason inductively and
deductively, he is not simply seeking to systematize whatever
inferences we happen to find people
sometimes—unreflectively—make. Instead, he insists that
practice can and should be corrected as we work back and forth from
tentative principles to practice, revising where appropriate,
presumably eliminating the sorts of inconsistencies that some
psychological studies, and our everyday experiences, reveal. But, some
critics ask (Siegel 1992), if practice should be revised, why should
we view “fit” with practice as at all justificatory?
A more generous reading of Goodman's proposal would widen the
reflective equilibrium he proposes to include some of the beliefs
about standards for acceptable inference that logicians develop
(though some think that wide reflective equilibrium does not overcome
the reliability problem noted above). Such standards are themselves
not independent of all inferential practice. They have been developed
to reflect views about what counts as good practice in light of the
kinds of inferences that people abandon when they are made aware of
their inconsistency with other inferences they will not give up. It is
against this wider set of beliefs, including the articulation of such
standards, that we can identify some inferences as performance errors
or otherwise deviant patterns and correct those practices. Some
changes in belief in dialogical contexts may well be best explained by
noting that some individuals grasp the insights of others. Individuals
working with the method of reflective equilibrium may thus see the
point of criticisms of previous views they had accepted. This is where
some dialogical and individual uses of the method coincide. (We turn
to the distinction between wide and narrow reflective equilibrium
shortly.)
Despite the fact that the origins of reflective equilibrium (minus the
name) lie in mid-twentieth century discussions about the justification
of inductive logic, its principal development through the rest of the
century lies primarily in ethics and political philosophy.
Specifically, the method was given prominence (and the name by which
it is known) by John Rawls's description and use of it in A Theory
of Justice (Rawls 1971). (Rawls 1951 had much earlier articulated
a slightly different version of the view.) Although accounts of the
justification of empirical knowledge have been developed that share
with reflective equilibrium its coherentist approach, they generally
do not make explicit use of the terminology of reflective equilibrium,
and we shall not discuss them here. Instead, we concentrate on the use
of reflective equilibrium in ethics and political philosophy, where it
has been deployed and criticized.
Rawls (Rawls 1971) argues that the goal of a theory of justice is to
establish the terms of fair cooperation that should govern free and
equal moral agents. On this view, the appropriate perspective from
which to choose among competing conceptions or principles of justice
is a hypothetical social contract or choice situation in which
contractors are constrained in their knowledge, motivations, and tasks
in specific ways. Because this choice situation is fair to all
participants, Rawls calls the conception of justice that emerges from
this choice “justice as fairness.” Under these
constraints, he argues, rational contractors would choose principles
guaranteeing equal basic liberties and equality of opportunity, and a
principle that permitted inequalities only if they made the people who
are worst off as well off as possible.
Instead of simply accepting whatever principles contractors would
choose under these constraints on choice, however, Rawls imposed a
further condition of adequacy on them. The chosen principles must also
match our considered judgments about justice in reflective
equilibrium. If they do not, then we are to revise the constraints on
choice in the contract situation until we arrive at a contract that
yields principles that are in reflective equilibrium with our
considered judgments about justice. This restriction constitutes a
further assurance that the outcomes of the deliberation about fair
terms of cooperation in the choice situation (the Original Position)
actually count as focusing on justice rather than on some other
domain. In effect, the device of the contract must itself be in
reflective equilibrium with the rest of our beliefs about justice. The
contract helps us determine what principles we should choose from
among competing views, but the justification for using it and
designing it so that it serves that purpose must itself derive from
the reflective equilibrium that it helps us achieve.
The method of reflective equilibrium thus plays a role in both the
construction and justification of Rawls's theory of justice (Daniels
1996; Scanlon 2002). Its role in construction is an example of its use
as a form of deliberation. Critics of Rawls's theory and his method of
reflective equilibrium, especially utilitarians, challenge the
prominence the method gives to moral judgments or intuitions. Building
a theory—constructing it—out of such initial judgments is
building it on easily discredited bases, for are not many of our
beliefs just the result of historical accident and bias, even
superstition? Indeed, some argue that there is no justificatory force
to the contract itself if we “rig” the contract so that it
yields principles that match our intuitions (Hare 1973). Despite these
and other criticisms, defenders of the method have elaborated it and
extended its use in broad areas of ethics. Later in this article we
shall consider some of the criticisms of this method and some of its
extensions in more detail. Before doing so, however, it is necessary
to describe it more fully.
A reflective equilibrium may be narrow or wide (Rawls 1974). All of us
are familiar with a process in moral deliberation in which we work
back and forth between a judgment we are inclined to make about right
action in a particular case and the reasons or principles we offer for
that judgment. Often we consider variations on the particular case,
“testing” the principle against them, and then refining
and specifying it to accommodate our judgments about these variations.
We might also revise what we say about certain cases if our initial
views do not fit with the principles we grow inclined to accept.
Such a revision may constitute a moral surprise or discovery (Daniels
1996). Suppose, for example, that we are considering whether we should
ignore age in the distribution of medical treatments. Many initially
believe that age is a “morally irrelevant trait,” just
like race, and they would insist that rationing medical services by
age is just as unacceptable as rationing by race. On considering a
variety of cases, however, it might become apparent that we all age,
although we do not change race. This difference means that the
different treatment of people at different ages, if systematically
applied over the lifespan, does not create inequalities between
persons, as it would in the case of race. We might be led by this
realization to think that age rationing might be acceptable under some
conditions when race rationing would never be, and this would be a
moral surprise for many who changed their view.
To the extent that we focus solely on particular cases and a group of
principles that apply to them, and to the extent that we are not
subjecting the views we encounter to extensive criticism from
alternative moral perspectives, we are seeking only narrow
reflective equilibrium. Presumably, the principles we arrive at in
narrow equilibrium best “account for” the cases examined.
Others, however, may arrive at different narrow reflective equilibria,
containing different principles and judgments about justice. Indeed,
one such narrow equilibrium might be characterized as typically
utilitarian, while another is, we may suppose, Kantian or perhaps
Libertarian. As a result, we still face an important question about
justification unanswered by the method of narrow reflective
equilibrium: which set of beliefs about justice should we accept?
Because narrow reflective equilibrium does not answer this question,
it may seem to be a descriptive method appropriate to moral
anthropology, not a normative account of justification in
ethics. In fact, Rawls (Rawls 1971) at one point suggested that
arriving at the principles that match our moral judgments in
reflective equilibrium might reveal our “moral grammar” in
a way that is analogous to uncovering the grammar that underlies our
syntactic ability as native speakers of a language to make judgments
about grammatical form. In support of the analogy, some contemporary
theorists who systematically examine our moral intuitions, often
through hypothetical as opposed to real cases, believe they are
uncovering an underlying moral structure of principles (see Kamm
1993), perhaps one that is a priori.
Uncovering a syntax, however, is a descriptive and not a justificatory
task. Once we can identify the grammar or rules that best account for
a person's syntactic competency, we do not ask the question, Should
that person have this grammar? We are satisfied to have captured the
grammar underlying a person's idiolect. In ethics and political
philosophy, in contrast, we must answer that justificatory question,
especially since there is often disagreement among people about what
is right, disagreement that is not resolved simply by pursuing narrow
reflective equilibrium.
In A Theory of Justice (1971, revised edition 1999), Rawls
does not use the terminology of narrow and wide reflective
equilibrium, an omission he remarks about with regret in Justice
as Fairness: A Restatement (2001, p. 31). Still, he comments that
seeking a reflective equilibrium that merely irons out minor
incoherence in a person's system of beliefs is not really the use of
the method that is of true philosophical interest in ethics, just as
we saw it might not be in the case of justifying logical inferences.
Rather, he says, to be of interest to moral philosophy, a reflective
equilibrium should seek what results from challenging existing beliefs
by arguments and implications that derive from the panoply of
developed positions in moral and political philosophy (Rawls A Theory
of Justice 2nd Edition, 1999, p. 43). Such a reflective equilibrium
would be the response to considerable critical pressures on the
original beliefs. This effort would have the character of searching
deliberation about what is right. It is this much broader form of
challenge that Rawls labels the method of wide reflective
equilibrium.
Rawls's proposal is that we can determine what principles of justice
we ought to adopt, on full reflection, and be persuaded that our
choices are justifiable to ourselves and others, only if we broaden
the circle of beliefs that must cohere. Indeed, we should be willing
to test our beliefs against developed moral theories of various types,
obviously not all such views (as Arras 2007, Strong (2010) comment,
Kelly and McGrath 2010), or we would never arrive at a conclusion, but
at least against some leading alternatives. (We often do so in
discussion or deliberation with others. How conclusive an argument or
deliberation is may depend on what alternative views are considered or
on who is included in the deliberation.) In effect, Rawls's (Rawls
1971) pair-wise comparison of justice as fairness with utilitarianism
is just such an exercise at seeking wide reflective equilibrium. In a
wide reflective equilibrium, for example, we broaden the
field of relevant moral and non-moral beliefs (including general
social theory) to include an account of the conditions under which it
would be fair for reasonable people to choose among competing
principles, as well as evidence that the resulting principles
constitute a feasible or stable conception of justice, that is, that
people could sustain their commitment to such principles. Rawls's
argument is that justice as fairness, rather than utilitarianism, is
what emerges in wide reflective equilibrium.
For example, the constraints on choice in Rawls's contract situation,
such as the veil of ignorance that keeps us from knowing facts about
ourselves and our specific preferences, require justification. Rawls
needs to show that these constraints are “fair” to all
contractors (thus “justice as fairness” is his label for
this procedural account of how we find out what is just.) To provide
such justification, Rawls appeals to beliefs about the fundamental
“moral powers” of “free and equal” agents
(they can form and revise their conceptions of what is good and they
have a sense of justice). He also appeals to the ideal of a
well-ordered society in which principles of justice play a particular
role as public principles for reconciling disputes. Rawls must even
provide us with an account of “primary social goods,”
necessary if agents who do not know their own actual preferences are
to decide what principles would be better for them to choose.
The device of the contract is thus in reflective equilibrium with
certain background theories that themselves contain moral beliefs.
These are theories, or crucial beliefs, about the nature of persons,
the role of morality or justice in society, and beliefs about
procedural justice. The contract is not simply based on
uncontroversial assumptions about human rationality, although it
describes a rational choice problem within the constraints it imposes;
nor is it based on formal considerations about practical reasoning or
the logic or semantics of moral discourse. If Rawls were trying to
justify the structure of the contract by appeal to theories that
themselves were completely non-moral, then he would be offering the
kind of independent justification for the principles that would
characterize them as foundational (Daniels 1996, Timmons 1987), so the
claim that the background theories are themselves moral is part of the
rationale for concluding that Rawls is clearly rejecting
foundationalism. (Some philosophers, as noted earlier, argue that
reflective equilibrium is compatible with foundationalism, citing
Rawls in this regard though they ignore his probability judgment that
such a compatibility exists in principle and is highly unlikely to be
met.) Without acceptance of that wider circle of moral beliefs,
Rawls's construction lacks support, and if that construction were
modified, some of his arguments against utilitarianism would be
weakened.
Our beliefs about justice are justified (and, by extension, we are
justified in holding them) if they cohere in such a wide reflective
equilibrium. Obviously, the method of wide reflective equilibrium is
here only illustrated by appeal to the detail of Rawls's use of it. If
we abstract from that detail, we see that there is a complex structure
and interaction of beliefs, at many levels of generality, that bear on
the construction of an account of justice. We shall later return to
this point when we talk about some of the criticisms of method and
about implications of this method for work in ethics.
In A Theory of Justice, Rawls seemed to think that all people
might converge (but see Kelly and McGrath 2010) on a common or
shared wide reflective equilibrium that included
“justice as fairness,” the conception of justice for which
he argues. Wide reflective equilibrium thus played a role in the
construction of the theory, helping “us”—any and all
of us—to articulate its key features in ways that led to
principles that matched “our” considered judgments. At the
same time, wide reflective equilibrium constituted an account of
justification. Shared agreement on that wide equilibrium would produce
a well-ordered society governed by principles guaranteeing equal basic
liberties, fair equality of opportunity, and the requirement that
inequalities be arranged to make those who are worst off as well off
as possible.
In his later work, Political Liberalism (Rawls 1993), Rawls
abandons the suggestion that all people might converge in the same,
shared wide reflective equilibrium that contains his conception of
justice. This important change comes about because of what Rawls calls
“the burdens of judgment.” Complexity, uncertainty, and
variation in experience lead human reason, when exercised under
conditions of freedom, of the sort protected by the principles of
justice as fairness, to an unavoidable pluralism of comprehensive
moral and philosophical views. (The need to find agreement in the form
of an overlapping consensus of views arises domestically under
conditions of liberty and the burdens of judgment and is evidenced
further by the different perspectives that we might get from a global
view of issues.) This unavoidable fact of reasonable pluralism makes
one key feature of justice as fairness untenable, namely the account
Rawls gave of the stability of his preferred conception of justice. A
further feature of Rawls's late work is his clear eschewal of any
account of truth, so the fact that wide equilibrium is offered as an
account of justification, not truth, makes it compatible with the
refusal to discuss moral truth (see Little 1984).
Rawls had imposed three basic conditions on the principles of justice.
First, they must be chosen over alternatives under conditions fair to
all contractors. Second, what contractors choose must match
“our” considered moral judgments and other beliefs in
(wide) reflective equilibrium. But third, the principles must comprise
a feasible or stable conception of justice. The test for stability is
to ask if people raised under this view would conform to it over time
with less strain of commitment than other conceptions would face. In
effect, passing the test shows it is worth adopting this view because
it will not prove so fragile that it is not worth the effort to
institutionalize.
The problem facing Rawls because of reasonable pluralism is that his
earlier efforts to show justice as fairness was stable depended on
special views about the importance of autonomy that would be held only
by some people and could not be assumed to be shared. His argument for
stability had turned on appealing to the good of autonomy in ways that
might not be acceptable to people holding certain comprehensive views.
Stability was not demonstrated.
To address this problem, Rawls recasts justice as fairness as a
“freestanding” political conception of justice on which
people with different comprehensive views may agree in an
“overlapping consensus.” The public justification
of such a political conception involves no appeal to the philosophical
or religious views that appear in the comprehensive doctrines that
form this overlapping consensus. Instead, we might think of this
process of working back and forth among the key shared ideas in the
public, democratic culture and the articulated features of the
political conception of justice as a political reflective equilibrium
(Daniels 1996). (We can imagine the process being carried out by
individuals, for example, as citizens thinking about an issue of basic
justice or judges about a matter of constitutional essentials, or as a
collective process, in public deliberation. As noted in Table 1 below,
people with different comprehensive world views may draw the boundary
between public and private slightly differently and not all questions
about basic justice will be settled in a way that rules out ongoing
disagreement. Thus disagreements about some aspects of reproductive
rights or the separation of church and state may remain contested
features within public reason.) The goal of this exercise of what
Rawls calls “public reason” is the articulation of such a
political reflective equilibrium.
Still, there is no convergence on a shared wide reflective equilibrium
that contains the political conception of justice. The political
reflective equilibrium is not a shared wide reflective
equilibrium, for it avoids appealing to the broad range of beliefs
that would be included in many wide reflective equilibria.
Nevertheless, wide reflective equilibrium still plays a critical role
in justification even when justice is political in this way.
For individuals to be fully justified in adopting the
political conception of justice, the conception articulated in the
political reflective equilibrium, they must incorporate it within a
wide reflective equilibrium that includes their own comprehensive
moral or religious doctrine. It will count as a reasonable view for
them only if the public conception of justice coheres with their other
(religious and philosophical) beliefs in wide reflective equilibrium.
(Individuals within a religion may find a religious basis for
accommodating their religion to concerns of public reason, though this
outcome is unusual unless the religious hierarchy in their religion
has found such accommodation as well.) Individuals, whatever groups
and associations they belong to, must be able to embark on the
deliberative process called wide reflective equilibrium that leads
them to endorse, from their own perspective, the content of the
political reflective equilibrium, including its injunctions about
using only public reason in thinking about certain basic features of
justice or the constitution.
We can imagine use of wide reflective equilibrium if we modify
slightly Rawls image of an overlapping consensus in which a shared
political conception is a point of convergence among otherwise
different comprehensive world views. Convert each reasonable
comprehensive world view—for example, a Kantian, Millian, or a
Protestant religious view that endorses a notion of free
faith—into a wide reflective equilibrium that is reached by all
who hold that view. These distinct wide equilibria now share a module,
the political reflective equilibrium, though each wide equilibrium
will justify the features of that module in light of beliefs that may
not be acceptable in other wide equilibria.
To help see what has happened to the content of the wide reflective
equilibrium when we shift from the picture in A Theory of
Justice to that in Political Liberalism, consider 
Table 1 below. 
The first row of the table indicates the content of justice as
fairness, including the background views that support the construction
of the original position. This “module” is contained in
both versions of a wide reflective equilibrium that justifies justice
as fairness. In Theory, as the second row indicates, shared
philosophical arguments justify key elements of the module, but in
Liberalism, the rationale for each of these elements must
derive from the distinctive features of the different comprehensive
views. Thus, as Cohen suggests (1994, p. 1527), a Kantian, a Millian,
and a religious person who believed in free faith might all support,
but for quite different reasons, the idea that agents were free in the
sense of being capable of forming and revising their conceptions of
the good life. 
As the third and fourth rows suggest, full justification of a
political conception of justice requires acceptance of an account of
the burdens of judgment that explain why pluralism is a fact of life.
A comprehensive view capable of reaching accommodation with that
pluralism and with the political reflective equilibrium it shares with
other reasonable views must also develop a rationale for the specific
way in which it draws a boundary between public and nonpublic spheres.
Different comprehensive views, however, might vary in just how they
draw that public/private boundary and there may be persistent
controversy about how permeable it is. Nevertheless, the freestanding
public conception of justice as fairness, for example, will be fully
justified for anyone in any of these different wide reflective
equilibria.
It would be natural to object that if we require that full
justification for individuals includes appeal to the varied religious
and philosophical beliefs they hold, then overlapping consensus is
indeed harder to achieve. Remember, Rawls has abandoned a shared wide
reflective equilibrium for just such reasons. Overlapping consensus is
possible, however, because groups sharing comprehensive views modify
the content of their comprehensive views over time in order to
cooperate within shared democratic institutions. This process, on
Rawls's view, involves philosophical reflection, which often draws on
the complex resources of a tradition of thought in which disagreements
had flourished. It also crucially depends on the moderating influence
of living under democratic institutions that are governed by the
shared conception of justice. The effect of both institutions and
reflection about internal disagreements about doctrine is that
reasonable comprehensive world views can find room, from within their
own perspectives, for a wide reflective equilibrium that includes the
elements of public reason (the political reflective equilibrium) and a
willingness to engage in public methods of justification for them.
In sum, even though pluralism requires that we refrain from appealing
to comprehensive world views in certain areas of political
deliberation with others, wide reflective equilibrium remains at the
center of Rawls account of individual moral deliberation about
justice. It survives as the coherentist account of “full
justification” he defends.
Key criticisms of the method of reflective equilibrium have challenged
the role it ascribes to moral intuitions, Rawls's incorporation of
empirical facts (e.g., about human nature, such as the role of
incentives in motivation), and its coherentism. We take these up in
turn. 
Rawls does not talk about moral intuitions as the starting material
for the method of reflective equilibrium; instead he talks about
considered moral judgments. Some commentators think the whole issue of
the relation between the method of reflective equilibrium and moral
intuitions is resolved by noting that Rawls does not identify
considered moral judgments with an appeal to moral intuitions. But
this ignores the criticism that can be focused on considered moral
judgments as well as on moral intuitions. Central to the method of
reflective equilibrium in ethics and political philosophy is the claim
that our considered moral judgments about particular cases carry
weight, if only initial weight, in seeking justification. This claim
is controversial. Some of the most vigorous criticism of it has come
from utilitarians, and it is instructive to see why.
A traditional criticism of utilitarianism is that it leads us to moral
judgments about what is right that conflict with our
“ordinary” moral judgments. In response, some utilitarians
accept the relevance of some of these judgments and argue that
utilitarianism is compatible with them. Thus Mill argued for a
utilitarian foundation for our beliefs about the importance of
individual liberty. Some utilitarians have even argued that key
features of our “common sense morality” approximates
utilitarian requirements and we have acquired these beliefs just
because they do, unconsciously, reflect what promotes utility; they
reflect the wisdom of a heritage.
An alternative utilitarian response to the claim that utilitarianism
conflicts with certain ordinary moral judgments is to dismiss these
judgments as pre-theoretical views—whether they are referred to
as “intuitions” or “considered judgments” that
probably result from cultural indoctrination and thus reflect
superstition, bias, and mere historical accident. On this view,
neither moral intuitions nor judgments should have evidentiary
credentials and should play no role in moral theory construction or
justification. Indeed, the prominent 20th-Century utilitarians Richard
Brandt (Brandt 1979) and Richard Hare (Hare 1973) argued against
Rawls, simply making “coherent” a set of beliefs that have
no “initial credibility” cannot produce justification,
since coherent fictions are still only fictions. Indeed, the
conditional that Rawls describes under the process that we solicit
considered moral judgments, namely that people be calm and have
adequate information about the cases, do not by themselves do anything
to assuage the utilitarian worries. Brandt (Brandt 1990) reaffirms his
early criticism when he claims that considered judgments lack
“evidential force” regarding a moral order and therefore
coherence in reflective equilibrium has only a kind of persuasiveness
that comes from coherence among many elements being more convincing
than the conviction that comes from any of its parts.
This criticism has some—but not decisive— force, since two
standard ways of supplying credentials for initial judgments are not
available. One traditional way to support the reliability of these
judgments or intuitions is to claim, as 18th century theorists did,
that they are the result of a special moral faculty that allows us to
grasp particular moral facts or universal principles. Modern
proponents of reflective equilibrium reject such mysterious faculties.
Indeed, they claim moral judgments are revisable, not
foundational.
A second way to support the initial credibility of considered
judgments is to draw an analogy between them and observations in
science or everyday life. For example, what counts as observational
evidence in science depends on theory, and theory may give us reasons
to reject some observations as not constituting counter-evidence to a
scientific law or theory. In this way we might see an analogy between
the revisability of moral judgments and observations.
Developing this analogy, however, seems to require that we also tell
some story about why moral judgments are reliable
“observations” about what is right. The foundationalist
view of moral intuitions held by McMahan (2000) and perhaps other
recent theorists who draw extensively on moral intuitions in their
work in substantive ethics also demands some story about their
reliability and so does not avoid this difficulty, even if the view
also allows for defeasibility of some of the foundational intuitions.
Perhaps we might need something like the causal story that some
theorists of knowledge offer to explain the reliability of
observations. Since no such story is forthcoming, opponents argue,
proponents of reflective equilibrium must reject the requirement or
give up the analogy. Proponents of reflective equilibrium might reject
the requirement by suggesting it is premature to ask for such a story
in ethics or by claiming that we can provide no analogous causal story
for credible judgments we make in other areas, including mathematics
or logic. So the utilitarian objection is not conclusive.
It might seem that the burden of argument has shifted to advocates of
reflective equilibrium to show why “initial credibility”
should be ascribed to moral judgments or intuitions. Defenders of
reflective equilibrium may nevertheless reject this burden, arguing
that critics, especially utilitarian critics, actually face the same
problem. For example, Richard Brandt argues that “facts and
logic” alone, and not moral intuitions, should play a role in
moral theory construction and justification. On Brandt's view, we
should choose moral principles when they are based on desires that
have been subjected to maximal criticism by facts and logic alone (he
calls it “cognitive psychotherapy”). We should avoid any
appeal to moral intuitions that might infect this critique.
The desires that Brandt appeals to, however, are themselves shaped and
influenced by the very same social structures that utilitarians
complain have biased and corrupted our moral judgments. Nothing in the
process of critique by facts and logic alone can eliminate this source
of bias. If this utilitarian claim is right, it undercuts the
suggestion that we can step outside our beliefs to arrive at some more
objective form of justification. Instead, we may be better off
recognizing that our process of critique—in the method of wide
reflective equilibrium—is explicit about exposing the sources of
bias and historical accident to criticism and revision, rather than
fooling ourselves into thinking that desires are some sort of
morally-uninfluenced layer of “facts.”
Rawls claims that his view of justice is constructivist, meaning that
he appeals to some general claims about the nature of persons as well
as some empirical facts about human behavior or institutions as part
of the justification for the principles of justice (or the choice
situation that leads us to pick them). G.A. Cohen (2008) criticizes
constructivism, so understood, as not being capable of articulating
the content of what justice itself requires and instead being suited
only for selecting rules of regulation for society. The problem, he
argues, is that constructivism combines considerations of justice with
other considerations (both empirical and moral). As a result, it does
not tell us what justice itself requires. Specifically, he argues that
if considerations of justice plus other values and some empirical
facts suggest that we should adopt certain rules to regulate our
institutions, those rules cannot be principles of justice, since other
considerations than justice contribute to our thinking that we should
adopt them. A possible reply to Cohen is that his view about
constructivism collapses into his controversial metaethical claim that
principles of justice cannot rest on general facts about human
behavior or anything else, if the other values that we consider are
appropriately focused on determining what we think about justice. Then
the other considerations that continue to play a role are appeals to
empirical facts.
To understand why the objection to constructivism collapses into
Cohen's metaethical view, if any values relevant to choices in the
Original Position are relevant to determining what justice requires,
consider the following. Cohen claims that, if we appeal to reflective
equilibrium as a justification of what justice requires, we need to
strip away from it any appeal to empirical facts and include only
moral intuitions about justice itself (Cohen 2007: p. 243, n. 19).
Specifically, he is saying that we might choose the right account of
justice itself through appeal to a narrow reflective equilibrium that
avoids any empirical considerations, and this is true even if the
account of justice that applies to our world does involve some
relevant facts. This restriction on reflective equilibrium implies
that we would have to revise the account of the role of wide
reflective equilibrium that we earlier attributed to Rawls,
specifically that it, and not narrow reflective equilibrium, plays a
justificatory role in supporting justice as fairness. For example, we
would have to abandon the argument made earlier that inadequate
critical considerations play a role in narrow reflective equilibrium
as compared with wide reflective equilibrium.
Rawls insists that the principles that emerge from the Original
Position must fit with our considered judgments about justice in wide
reflective equilibrium. This constraint on the outcome of the Original
Position is aimed at showing that these principles are really
principles of justice. On Cohen's view this constraint could not show
what Rawls intends--the outcome for him of the choices made in the
Original Position are rules of regulation, not principles of justice.
But if Cohen is wrong (as the objection we are examining implies)
about a broader set of values than justice being in play in the
choices made in the Original Position, then his objection to
constructivism collapses into his metaethical view, for it is an
objection to appealing to the facts that are part of the wide
reflective equilibrium to which Rawls does appeal. Similarly, Rawls's
overall account of justification makes the relative stability of a
conception of justice (given facts about human nature and behavior)
part of the justification for his principles of justice as fairness,
but Cohen concludes that this role is inappropriate.
If Cohen is right, then wide reflective equilibrium is not relevant to
choosing between Rawls's account of justice and some other theory
(such as luck egalitarianism), because we must restrict ourselves to a
different, much narrower, version of reflective equilibrium to justify
principles of justice. It would be odd to make such a substantive
issue depend on a metaethical claim that Cohen himself says is not a
substantive claim about which principles of justice are to be believed
or accepted.
Other criticisms of reflective equilibrium in ethics have focused on
points familiar from discussions in epistemology more generally. One
important complaint concerns the vagueness of the concept of
coherence. If we simply take logical consistency as the criterion for
coherence, we have much too weak a constraint. What account can we
give of a stronger notion?
More has to be said about how some parts of the system of beliefs
“support or explain” others than is provided in the
account above. Critics of Rawls's requirement that the contract
situation be adjusted, if necessary, to yield principles that are in
reflective equilibrium with our judgments about justice complained
that this was a “rigged” contract and that it did no
justificatory work beyond reflective equilibrium. If, however, the
moral judgments that play a role in discussions of fair process, the
well-ordered society, and the moral powers of agents are somewhat
independent of the considered judgments about justice, then we get the
kind of independent support for the principles that add justificatory
force. Little work has actually been done, however, to flesh out a
stronger account of coherence in ethics as opposed to epistemology
more generally, where coherentism has been defended and
elaborated.
A second line of objection derives from anti-coherentist accounts of
justification rooted in the theory of knowledge. Some insist, for
example, that coherence accounts of justification cannot be divorced
from coherence accounts of truth. On the other hand, Rawls view fits
with the claim by some contemporary theorists of knowledge that a
coherence account of justification is distinguishable from a coherence
account of truth and defensible when so separated.
This separability of justification from claims about truth is
important to Rawls, even more so in his later work than in A
Theory of Justice. In his earlier work, Rawls never claimed that
what emerged from his contract and other justificatory conditions were
“truths” of justice. (Arras’s (2007) conclusions
emphasize the point that the method of reflective equilibrium does not
assure us of truth—but the point was made explicit by Rawls
himself decades earlier.) Rather, the method of reflective equilibrium
suggested ways in which convergence might be achieved among those who
began with disagreements about justice (of course, as Arras (2007) and
Kelly and McGrath (2010) emphasize, the method of reflective
equilibrium does not guarantee convergence either). By drawing
attention to the many features of a comprehensive theory on which
argument and evidence could be brought to bear, the method of wide
reflective equilibrium held out promise that more convergence might
result than if people had only considered judgments and principles to
agree and disagree about. Convergence did not imply that truth was
reached. A proponent of moral truth might still hope, however, that
convergence could be taken as evidence for truth, just as it commonly
claimed in non-normative areas of inquiry, contrary to the phenomenon
that believing may yield seeing.
Once Rawls took the “burdens of judgment” and reasonable
pluralism seriously, that is once he “politicized” justice
in his later work, it became much less plausible to talk about
convergence on a shared wide equilibrium that might contain moral
truth. Comprehensive philosophical views, including those about moral
truth, were barred from playing a role in seeking the political
reflective equilibrium involved in overlapping consensus. Even if we
converged in an “overlapping consensus” on a conception of
justice, individuals and groups would be able to claim they are fully
justified in accepting that conception of justice only if it cohered
with the perspectives of their distinct wide reflective equilibria. It
became more important for Rawls to suggest how claims about justice
could be “objective” without presupposing moral truth.
These developments in Rawls's account thus appear to move him farther
away from those who would seek to give a realist account of moral
truth. Thus when Arras (2007) concludes that reflective equilibrium
cannot be a theory of truth, he does not disagree with Rawls, as noted
earlier. More challenging is his conclusion that reflective
equilibrium fails to provide a basis for intersubjective agreement if
we take seriously the importance of giving reflective equilibrium a
global scope, since starting points are so different. 
Arras’s point may be a version of a claim about human rationality. A
starting point for this line of argument is the complaint that people
who have different starting points as their initial set of beliefs,
say with different degrees of credence given to their beliefs, may
arrive at different reflective equilibria points—a specific
version of which is Arras's point about the global scope of claims of
intersubjectivity. This possibility undercuts the suggestion that
critical pressures alone deriving can produce convergence. A more
general form of this worry is that the model of reflection involved in
reflective equilibrium, in which we are to produce coherence among all
our beliefs, overemphasizes and idealizes human rationality. The
suggestion is that we would be better off presupposing a more minimal
form of rationality. A specific version of this complaint is that the
method involves an information burden that cannot be met. Yet another
version of this criticism is that we should allow for much less
“rationalist” forms of modification of our views,
recognizing “conversion” experiences like those involved
in “paradigm shifts” may affect any account of coherence.
Another line of argument emphasizes the information burden of the
method—how can we be sure all appropriate theoretical views have
been addressed. The suggestion (Arras 2007) is that wide reflective
equilibrium is not action guiding in that it does not tell us which
views to save and which to revise and so it does not lead to
justification or truth.
A full defense of reflective equilibrium as a method would require a
more developed response to many of these lines of criticism than
exists in the literature.
Despite these criticisms, some philosophers have argued for a broader
understanding of the relevance of the method of reflective equilibrium
to practical ethics. In thinking about the course of right action in a
particular case, we often appeal to reasons and principles that are
notoriously general and lack the kind of specificity that make them
suitable to govern the case at hand without committing us to
implications we cannot accept in other contexts. This requires that we
refine or specify the reasons and principles if we are to provide
appropriate justifications for what we do and appropriate guidance for
related cases. Philosophers who have focused attention on the
importance of specification have drawn on the method of reflective
equilibrium for their insights into the problem.
In practical ethics, especially bioethics, there has been a vigorous
debate about methodology. Some argue that we must root all claims
about specific cases in specific ethical theories, and the hard work
is showing how these theories apply to specific cases. Others argue
that we may disagree about many aspects of general theory but still
agree on principles, and the hard work of practical ethics consists in
fitting sometimes conflicting principles to particular cases. Still
others argue that we must begin our philosophical work with detailed
understanding of the texture and specificity of a case, avoiding the
temptation to intrude general principles or theories into the
analysis.
A grasp of the method of wide reflective equilibrium suggests a way
around this exclusionary nature of this debate. Wide reflective
equilibrium shows us the complex structure of justification in ethics
and political philosophy, revealing many connections among our
component beliefs. At the same time, there are many different types of
ethical analysis and normative inquiry.
This suggests a more eclectic view of the debate about method. Work in
ethics requires all levels of inquiry proposed by the disputants, not
always all at once or in each case, but at some time or other.
Sometimes it is true that we cannot resolve disputes about how to
weigh conflicts among principles unless we bring more theoretical
considerations to bear (these considerations need not involve
comprehensive ethical theories). Sometimes we can agree on relevant
principles and agree to disagree on other theoretical issues, still
arriving at agreement about the rightness of particular policies or
actions and their justification in light of relevant reasons and
principles. Sometimes we must see what is distinctive about particular
cases and revise or refine our reasons and principles before we can
arrive at understanding of what to do. Finally, and of the greatest
significance, the method of wide reflective equilibrium should make it
clear that work in ethical theory cannot be divorced from work in
practical ethics. We must test and revise theory in light of our
considered judgments about moral practice. The condescending attitude
of many who work in ethical theory toward work in practical ethics
thus is incompatible with what wide reflective equilibrium establishes
about the relationship between these areas of ethical inquiry.
The method of wide reflective equilibrium makes it plausible that all
such “methods” should be seen as appropriate to some tasks
in ethics and are but parts of a more encompassing method.