The label “relativism” has been attached to a wide
range of ideas and positions which may explain the lack of consensus
on how the term should be defined. The profusion of the use of the
term “relativism” in contemporary philosophy means that
there is no ready consensus on any one definition. Here are three
prominent, but not necessarily incompatible, approaches:
A standard way of defining and distinguishing between different
types of relativism is to begin with the claim that a
phenomenon x (e.g., values, epistemic, aesthetic and ethical
norms, experiences, judgments, and even the world) is somehow
dependent on and co-varies with some underlying, independent
variable y (e.g., paradigms, cultures, conceptual schemes,
belief systems, language). The type of dependency relativists propose
has a bearing on the question of definitions. Let us take some
examples.
Each of (a)–(c) exhibits a relation of dependence where a
change in the independent variable y will result in variations
in the dependent variable x. However, of the three examples
cited above, normally only (a) and (b) are deemed relevant to
philosophical discussions of relativism, for one main attraction of
relativism is that it offers a way of settling (or explaining away)
what appear to be profound disagreements on questions of value,
knowledge and ontology and the relativizing parameter often involves
people, their beliefs, cultures or languages.
The co-variance definition proceeds by asking the dual
questions: (i) what is relativized? and (ii) what is it relativized
to? The first question enables us to distinguish forms of relativism
in terms of their objects, for example, relativism about
truth, goodness, beauty, and their subject matters, e.g., science,
law, religion. The answer to the second question individuates forms of
relativism in terms of their domains or frames of
reference—e.g., conceptual frameworks, cultures, historical
periods, etc. Such classifications have been proposed by Haack (1996),
O’Grady (2002), Baghramian (2004), Swoyer (2010), and Baghramian
& Coliva (2019). The following table classifies different
relativistic positions according to what is being relativized, or its
objects, and what is being relativized to, or its domains.
Table 1:
Domains of Relativization (y)
Table 1 reflects the availability of fine-grained distinctions
between different forms of relativism as functions of both objects
(x) and domains (y) of relativization. In practice,
however, much contemporary discussions of relativism focus on
subjectivism, historicism, cultural relativism and conceptual
relativism, along the axis of y, and cognitive/epistemic
relativism, ethical or moral relativism and aesthetic relativism,
along the axis of x. As we shall see
in §5, New Relativism, where
the objects of relativization (in the left column) are
utterance tokens expressing claims about cognitive norms,
moral values, etc.  and the domain of relativization is the standards
of an assessor, has also been the focus of much recent
discussion. 
A second approach to defining relativism casts its net more widely
by focusing primarily on what relativists deny. Defined
negatively, relativism amounts to the rejection of a number of
interconnected philosophical positions. Traditionally, relativism is
contrasted with:
Absolutism, the view that at least some
truths or values in the relevant domain apply to all times, places or
social and cultural frameworks. They are universal and not bound by
historical or social conditions. Absolutism is often used as the key
contrast idea to relativism.
Objectivism or the position that cognitive,
ethical and aesthetic norms and values in general, but truth in
particular, are independent of judgments and beliefs at particular
times and places, or in other words they are (non-trivially)
mind-independent. The anti-objectivist on the other hand, denies that
there is such thing as simply being ‘true’,
‘good’, ‘tasty’ or ‘beautiful’ but
argues that we can coherently discuss such values only in relation to
parameters that have something to do with our mental lives.
 Monism or the view that, in any given area
or topic subject to disagreement, there can be no more than one
correct opinion, judgment, or norm. The relativist often wishes to
allow for a plurality of equally valid values or even truths.
 Realism, when defined in such a way that
it entails both the objectivity and singularity of truth, also stands
in opposition to relativism.
Relativism in this negative sense is a prominent feature of the
work of the relativists malgré eux such as Richard
Rorty (1979) and Jacques Derrida (1974). What justifies the
appellation ‘relativist’, rather than
‘skeptic’, is not only these philosophers’ suspicion
of the possibility of objectivity but their insistence on the role of
socio-historical, psychological and textual contexts in accounts of
‘truth’ and ‘knowledge’ claims.
What also binds various forms of relativism is an underlying idea
that claims to truth, knowledge or justification have an implicit,
maybe even unnoticed, relationship to a parameter or domain. Gilbert
Harman (1975), Robert Nozick (2001), and Crispin Wright (2008b) are
among the philosophers to propose versions of this thesis. Paul
Boghossian summarizes the position this way:
 the relativist about a given domain, D,
purports to have discovered that the truths of D
involve an unexpected relation to a parameter. (Boghossian
2006b: 13)
To take an example, moral relativism, according to this approach, is
the claim that the truth or justification of beliefs with moral
content is relative to specific moral codes. So the sentence “It
is wrong to sell people as slaves” is elliptical for “It
is wrong to sell people as slaves relative to the moral code
of …”.  Or alternatively, as Kusch (2010) formulates the
idea on behalf of the relativist: “It
is wrong-relative-to-the-moral-code-of-…” to
sell people as slaves. The resulting sentence(s) turns out to be true,
according to the relativist, depending on how we fill in the
“…”. So, “It is wrong to sell people as
slaves” comes out true relative to the moral code of the United
Nations Charter of Human Rights and false relative to the moral code
of ancient Greece. The justifying thought is that judgments about the
morality of slavery, or any other ethical issue, are based on
differing conventions, and there is no universal or objective
criterion for choosing among differing competing socio-historically
constituted conventions. Moreover, as a corollary of this approach,
there is no truth of the matter of whether it is wrong to sell people
as slaves, independently of the specification of some
standard. Thus on the hidden parameter account, a consequence is that
the relevant claims will be true, if at all, only relative to some
parameter.
This particular approach to relativism is often expressed in
explicitly linguistic terms and is favored by philosophers interested
in the semantic dimensions of relativism. The claim is that predicates
such as “is true”, “is rational”, “is
right”, “is good” etc. in a natural language have
the apparent logical form of one-place predicates, but their surface
grammatical form is misleading, because upon further investigation
they prove to be elliptical for two-place predicates such as “is
true relative to…”, “is right according to”,
etc., (of course, where such predicates are available).  Relativism,
according to this approach, is the claim that a statement of the form
“A is P” within a given domain (e.g.,
science, ethics, metaphysics, etc.) is elliptical for the statement
“A is P in relation to C”,
where A stands for an assertion, belief, judgment or
action, P stands for a predicate such as “true”,
“beautiful”, “right”, “rational”,
“logical”, “known” etc., and C stands
for a specific culture, epistemic framework, language, belief-system,
etc.
The three approaches outlined here are compatible and sometimes
complementary. A relativistic thesis as captured by the approach
outlined in §1.1 for instance, will also
be relativistic in at least one of the negative senses outlined
in §1.2. Moreover, as we shall see, since
various subdivisions of relativism appearing
in table 1 could, with appropriate modification,
be expressed as claims about the truth of sentences falling
in a particular domain, then the hidden predicate approach is
applicable to them as well.  (See §5 for a
more detailed way to give expression to the hidden parameter insight
within recent work in the philosophy of language.)
A further consideration relevant to defining relativism is its
scope.
The basic idea of global relativism is captured by the oft-repeated
slogan “all is relative”. The claim is that all beliefs,
regardless of their subject matter, are true only relative to a
framework or parameter.  Local relativists, by contrast, limit their
claim of relativization to self-contained areas of discourse, e.g.,
ethics, aesthetics and taste but argue that, for instance, scientific
truths are not suitable candidates for a relativistic understanding
(but also see §4.4.3).  It is worth
noting that local relativisms, typically, are endorsed on the basis of
philosophical considerations connected to the kinds
of features that are claimed to be relative (e.g., aesthetic
standards, epistemic principles), or relatedly, semantic
considerations to do with discourse where such features are
attributed. Global relativism, by contrast, seems to be motivated not
so much by considerations about particular features, but by more
general considerations about truth itself. 
As we will see, global relativism is open to the charge of
inconsistency and self-refutation, for if all is relative, then so is
relativism. Local relativism is immune from this type of criticism, as
it need not include its own statement in the scope of what is to be
relativized. Unsurprisingly, local rather than global relativism is
much more common within contemporary debates. There is also a question
mark on whether we could apply relativism to all truths in a
completely unrestricted way; for instance, Kölbel (2011) has
argued that claims such as “an object is beautiful and not
beautiful” and “an object is identical to itself”
have to be excluded.
A further distinction is made between weak and strong
forms of relativism.  Strong relativism is the claim that one and
the same belief or judgment may be true in one context (e.g., culture
or framework or assessment) and false in another.  Weak
relativism is the claim that there may be beliefs or judgments
that are true in one framework but not true in a second simply because
they are not available or expressible in the second. Bernard
Williams’ “relativism of distance” (Williams 1985)
and Ian Hacking’s (1982) defense of variability in styles of
reasoning are instances of weak relativism. Williams argues that
certain concepts are only available to people who live a particular
form of life. These are concepts that are not a part of what Williams
calls the “absolute conception of the world” and do not
express truths that any rational creature, regardless of her culture,
would in principle acknowledge. Truths that require these concepts for
their formulation are expressible only in languages whose speakers
take part in that particular form of life. Such truths need not be
true in a relativized sense—true relative to some parameters,
false relative to others; rather, such truths are perspectival: real
but visible only from a certain angle, i.e., for people who adopt a
certain way of life. This weaker form of relativism, in so far as it
denies the universality of certain truth claims, is captured more
readily by the negative definition (§1.2)
of relativism.
Interest in relativism as a philosophical doctrine goes back to
ancient Greece. In more recent decades, however, relativism has also
proven popular not only as a philosophical position but also as an
idea underwriting a normative—ethical and political-outlook.
(see Bloom 1987, in particular the Introduction, and Kusch (ed.)
2019). A number of philosophical considerations as well as
socio-historical developments explain the enduring interest in and the
more recent popularity of relativism. 
Data regarding diversity of belief systems, conceptual frameworks
and ways of life have frequently been used by philosophers and
anthropologists alike to give credibility to philosophical arguments
for relativism (For example see Hollis & Lukes 1982 and Wilson
1970). The mere fact of empirical diversity does not lead to
relativism, but, relativism as a philosophical doctrine, has often
been taken as a natural position to adopt in light of
empirical diversity, in part, because relativism helps to make sense
of such diversity without the burden of explaining who is in
error.
Descriptive relativism, an empirical and methodological position
adopted by social anthropologists, relies on ethnographic data to
highlight the paucity of universally agreed upon norms, values and
explanatory frameworks. From polygamy to cannibalism, from witchcraft
to science we find major differences between the worldviews and
outlooks of individuals and groups. Descriptive relativism is often
used as the starting point for philosophical debates on relativism in
general and cultural relativism in particular. The observed radical
differences among cultures, it is argued, show the need for a
relativistic assessment of value systems and conceptual commitments.
Some anti-relativist universalists, on the other hand, argue that
underlying the apparent individual and cultural differences, there are
some core commonalities to all belief systems and socio-cultural
outlooks (e.g., Nussbaum 1997). But the relativistically inclined
respond by first pointing to the seeming incommensurability of various
ethical and conceptual frameworks and the variability of cognitive
norms and practices in difference cultures, and then, on this basis,
maintain that the so-called “commonalities” belie
significant differences. The anti-relativist may concede the point and
insist that where such disagreements exist, at most one view is
correct and the rest mistaken. But in so far as we are reluctant to
impute widespread and systematic error to other cultures, or to our
own, relativism remains an attractive option. Descriptive relativism
is also central to the brand of relativism advocated by the
sociologists of scientific knowledge and other social constructionists
who argue that, even in the so-called “hard sciences”, we
cannot escape the specter of irresolvable differences and even
incommensurability (see §4.4.3).
There is not only a marked diversity of views on questions
of right and wrong, truth and falsehood, etc., but more significantly,
many disputes arising from such differences seem intractable.
There are instances of long-standing disagreement, such that the
disputants are very plausibly talking about the same subject matter
(thus avoiding incommensurability) and genuinely disagreeing with each
other; and yet, no amount of information and debate enables them or us
to resolve the disagreement. And moreover, in such cases, it can seem
that neither side seems to have made any obvious mistake (see, e.g.,
Hales 2014 and Beddor 2019).
If well-informed, honest and intelligent people are unable to
resolve conflicts of opinion, we should, some relativists argue,
accept that all parties to such disputes could be right and their
conflicting positions have equal claims to truth, each according to
their own perspective or point of view. Their disagreement is
faultless (Kölbel 2004; Brogaard 2007; Hales 2014). Many
relativistically inclined philosophers, (e.g., Max Kölbel
(2004), Wright (2006) and John MacFarlane with terminological
qualification (2014: 133–136)) see the presence of faultless
disagreements as central to motivating and justifying relativism. The
anti-relativists counter that the very notion of a
“faultless” disagreement is incompatible with our common
understanding of what it means to disagree. It is a hallmark of
disagreement, as commonly understood, that the parties involved find
fault with the other sides’ views. When people disagree at
least one of them is making a mistake or is failing to
believe what he or she ought to believe given his or her cognitive
aims.  Relativism accordingly offers a revisionary account of what it
means to disagree (e.g., MacFarlane 2007, 2014; see
§5 where the point has been discussed in
some detail); but it is not clear if the account can explain what is
left of a disagreement to preserve once we allow that both parties to
a disagreement could be right (Carter 2013; Dreier
2009).
A sophisticated semantic version of relativism about truth, known
as truth-relativism, and alternatively as “new
relativism”, has been proposed in recent years and which
attempts to deal with some of these issues (e.g., MacFarlane 2014 and
Ferrari 2019 for an overview). We will return to this variety of
relativism in
§5.
A different perspective on the move from disagreement to relativism
is offered in recent work by Carol Rovane (2012 and 2013), who rejects
the prevailing consensus on what she calls the “disagreement
intuition of relativism” in favor of an “alternatives
intuition”. According to Rovane, relativism is motivated by the
existence of truths that cannot be embraced together, not because they
contradict and hence disagree with each other but because they are not
universal truths. The example Rovane gives is conflict between a
belief that deference to parents is morally obligatory in Indian
traditionalist sense and the belief that it is not morally obligatory
in the American individualist sense. Each belief is true within its
particular ethical framework but the two beliefs cannot be conjoined
or embraced together. Or more generally, it is not possible both to
exercise full autonomy and simultaneously be dedicated to one’s
community and its norms. The underlying thought, for Rovane, is that
not all truth-value-bearers are in logical relations to one another,
that there are many noncomprehensive bodies of truths that cannot be
conjoined.
What the two approaches have in common is the claim that truth and
justification are plural, that there could be more than
one correct account of how things stand in at least some
domains and their correctness has to be decided relative to a
framework of context of assessment. 
Additionally, the relativistically inclined find further support
for their position in the contention that there is no
meta-justification of our evaluative or normative systems, that all
justifications have to start and end somewhere (see Sankey 2010 and
2011) and that there are no higher-order or meta-level standards
available for adjudicating clashes between systems in a non-question
begging way. Steven Hales, for instance, argues that faced with
disagreement and given non-neutrality, relativism is the most
viable non-skeptical conclusion to draw (Hales 2006: 98;
2014). Similar considerations apply to attempts to anchor beliefs on
secure foundations. Various intellectual developments, leading to loss
of old certainties in the scientific and social arena have
strengthened the appeal of this point.  The scientific revolution of
the early 20th century, brought about by, for instance, the
advent of Relativity Theory and Quantum Mechanics and the loss of
faith in lasting religious or political truths (Marxism in
particular), as well as the failure of foundationalist philosophical
programs have been used in arguments to vindicate relativistic views
(for relativism about science
see §4.4.3). The relativists often argue
that justifications are not only perspectival but also
interest-relative and there is no neutral or objective starting ground
for any of our beliefs (see Seidel 2014; Carter 2015: ch. 4 and Siegel
in Hales 2011: 205 for criticisms of this type of justification of
relativism).
Pierre Duhem’s (1861–1916) thesis of
underdetermination of theory by data, the claim that empirical
evidence alone is not adequate for providing justification for any
given scientific theory, has played an important role in building up a
case both for conceptual relativism (§4.2)
and for constructionism and relativism about science
(§4.4.2
and §4.4.3). According to the
underdetermination thesis, incompatible theories can be consistent
with available evidence. Relativism threatens whenever conflicting
theories or views appear to have equal claim to truth or
justification. The relativistically inclined use underdetermination to
claim that evidence could be brought to justify opposing explanations
and justification.  The underdetermination thesis is also used to
highlight the absence of neutral starting points for our
beliefs. Choices between incompatible but equally well-supported rival
theories, it is argued, are often made based on interests and local
preferences rather than neutral universal grounds.
Relativists argue that beliefs and values get their justification
or truth only relative to specific epistemic systems or practices (see
Kusch forthcoming). Strong support for this view has come
from social scientists and cultural theorist who focus on the
socio-cultural determinants of human beliefs and actions. The social
sciences, from their very inception, were hospitable to relativism.
Indeed, August Comte, the father of sociology, claimed that a strength
of “positive sociology” was its “tendency to render
relative the ideas which were at first absolute” (Comte 1976
[1830–42]: 89). Comte also was responsible for the battle cry
“all is relative”, but immediately and no doubt
self-consciously contradicted himself by adding “and
that’s the only absolute”. Other social scientists, under
the influence of Karl Marx (1818–1883), Max Weber
(1864–1920), and Wilhelm Dilthey (1833–1911), have given
credence to the idea that human beliefs and actions could be
understood and evaluated only relative to their social and economic
background and context (cf., Kinzel 2019). Beliefs, desires and actions, the argument
goes, are never independent of a background of cultural
presuppositions, interests and values. We cannot step out of our
language, culture and socio-historical conditions to survey reality
from an Archimedean vantage point. Even perceptions are
“theory-laden” and could vary between linguistic and
cultural groupings. The sociological view that beliefs are
context-dependent, in the sense that their context helps explain why
people have the beliefs they do, has also been used to support what is
sometimes called “social” or “sociological
relativism” or the view that truth or correctness is relative to
social contexts because we can both understand and judge beliefs and
values only relative to the context out of which they
arise. Context-dependence is also used to explain empirical
observations of diversity in beliefs and values; different social
contexts, the argument goes, give rise to differing, possibly
incompatible norms and values.
Advocates of relativism, particularly outside philosophical
circles, often cite tolerance as a key normative reason for becoming a
relativist. On this rationale, all ways of life and cultures are
worthy of respect in their own terms, and it is a sign of unacceptable
ethnocentrism to presume that we could single out one outlook or point
of view as objectively superior to others. The Principle of Tolerance
acquires an overtly socio-political form in the hand of Paul
Feyerabend who maintains that “A free society is a society in
which all traditions are given equal rights” (Feyerabend 1978:
30).  Anti-relativists find this normative advocacy of relativism
unconvincing for two key kinds of reasons. Some anti-relativists
(e.g., Rachels 2009) often appeal to cases at the limits (e.g.,
toleration of heinous crimes) to show the thesis to be implausibly
overpermissive (see §4.5). Others argue
that if all values are relative then tolerance and maximizing freedom
are valuable only to those who have already embraced them. Relativists
counter that they are not defending a global version of relativism
regarding all truths and justification but local versions concerning
the ethics and politics of belief and the usefulness of relativism in
our attempt to become better, or at least more flexible and less
dogmatic, thinkers and more tolerant citizens (e.g., Feyerabend 1978:
82–84).  
The anti-relativists counter-argue that even if we grant that
political tolerance is an important value, and that accepting
relativism would promote it, we should never adopt philosophical views
about the nature of truth or justification simply because of their
assumed good moral or political consequences. Second, and more
importantly: political toleration does not require the strong
doctrine of philosophical relativism. Increased awareness of diversity
together with an awareness of the historical contingency of
one’s own convictions will promote political toleration just as
effectively.  As Knobe and Nichols point out, simply being made aware
of radically different view points can lead to a:
 …crisis akin to that of the [Christian] child
confronted with religious diversity… For the discovery of
religious diversity can prompt the thought that it’s in some
sense accidental that one happens to be raised in a Christian
household rather than a Hindu household. This kind of arbitrariness
can make the child wonder whether there’s any reason to think
that his religious beliefs are more likely to be right than those of
the Hindu child (Knobe & Nichols 2007: 11) 
A separate strand of argument connecting tolerance and relativism has
appealed to the claimed virtues of relativism as a kind
of philosophical stance (e.g., Bloor 2011; Baghramian 2019),
one that is characterised by anti-absolutist intellectual virtues such
as curiosity and anti-dogmatism. The idea that a relativistic stance
involves the manifesting of intellectually beneficial attitudes has
been championed by, along with Bloor, Feyerabend (1975) and Code
(1995), the latter of whom have emphasised the value of emancipatory
thinking, e.g., thinking that is not artificially constrained by
attempts to “enforce a universalist truth”.
However, critics of relativism as a stance have countered such
arguments from ‘relativist virtues’ with arguments from
vice. Baghramian (2019), for instance, has suggested that even if we
grant that a relativist stance aligns with a cluster of intellectually
virtuous dispositions in thinking, the stance also has the consequence
of encouraging several corresponding vices, including intellectual
insouciance (e.g., Cassam 2019), and lack of conviction (Baghramian
2019: 265; cf., Kusch 2019 for replies).
The English term “relativism” came into usage only in
the 19th Century. John Grote was probably the first to
employ it when in Exploratio Philosophica (1865) he wrote:
 The notion of the mask over the face of nature
is…. what I have called “relativism”. If “the
face of nature” is reality, then the mask over it, which is what
theory gives us, is so much deception, and that is what relativism
really comes to. (Grote 1865: I.xi, 229).  
Its German counterpart, “Relativismus”, has a
longer history. Wilhelm Traugott Krug, who succeeded Kant in the
University of Königsberg in his philosophical lexicon, defines it as
 the assumption that everything which we
experience and think (the self, the idea of reason, truth, morality,
religion etc.) is only something relative, and therefore has no
essential endurance and no universal validity. (Krug 2010 [1838]:
224)
Although the term “relativism” is of recent coinage,
doctrines and positions, with some of the hallmarks of contemporary
relativism, date back to the very beginnings of Western
philosophy. Protagoras of Abdera (c. 490–420 BC) is often
considered the first overt champion of relativism, and his dictum
Man (anthrôpos) is the measure
(metron) of all things (chrêmatôn), of
the things which are, that they are, and of the things which are not,
that they are not (tôn men ontôn hôs esti,
tôn de mê ontôn hôs ouk estin) (from
Plato’s Theaetetus 152a 2–4)
its first battle-cry. According to Plato,
Protagoras thought:
Each thing appears (phainesthai) to me,
so it is for me, and as it appears to you, so it is for you—you
and I each being a man. (Theaetetus 152a 6–8)
For instance, the same wind could be cold to one
person and hot to another. The extent to which Protagoras’s
view, or at least what comes down to us from Plato, amounts to
genuine relativism remains somewhat controversial. As Burnyeat
(1976b: 172) notes, Sextus Empiricus thought—though Burnyeat
thinks mistakenly—that the Protagorean measure doctrine was to
be understood as the subjectivist thesis that
every appearance is true (simpliciter). This kind
of radical subjectivism, though, quickly can be shown to turn on
itself: it can appear that the thesis that “every
appearance is true” is false. And so this radical subjectivist
interpretation, regardless of whether it is accurate, is as Sextus
had thought, untenable. However, Plato also ascribes a social or
ethical dimension to Protagorean relativism which seem to go beyond
individualistic subjectivism. In Theaetetus 172a 2–6
he says
what may or may not fittingly be done, of just and
unjust, of what is sanctioned by religion and what is not; and here
the theory may be prepared to maintain that whatever view a
city takes on these matters and establishes as its law or
convention, is truth and fact for that city. In such matters,
neither any individual nor any city can claim superior
wisdom. [emphasis added]
Plato’s attempted refutation of Protagoras,
known as peritrope or “turning around”, is the
first of the many attempts to show that relativism is self-refuting.
Protagorean relativism directly influenced the Pyrrhonian Skeptics,
who saw the “man is the measure” doctrine as a precursor
to their brand of skepticism. Sextus Empiricus, for instance, in his
“Relativity Mode” states that judgments and observations
are relative to the person who makes them, to their context as well as
the object being observed and goes on to say,
since we have established in this way that
everything is relative (pros ti), it is clear then that we
shall not be able to say what an existing object is like in its own
nature and purely, but only what it appears to be like relative to
something. (Sextus Empiricus PH I 140)
But the conclusion he draws favors skepticism
rather than relativism as understood in modern philosophy, for he
concludes, “It follows that we must suspend judgment about the
nature of objects” (ibid.).
Glimpses of relativistic thinking were in evidence in Boethius
(480–524) (see Marenbon 2003) as well as in the double truth
doctrine, or the view that religion and philosophy are separate and at
times conflicting sources of truth, originally found in Averroes
(1126–1198) and the 13th century Latin Averroists.
However, the dominant belief in a singular and absolute revealed truth
within a Christian framework, on the whole, made the medieval period
inhospitable to relativism. There was a renewed interest in both
relativism and skepticism at the inception of modern philosophy
inspired, in part, by Latin translations of Sextus Empiricus in the
16th century. Michel de Montaigne’s work
(1533–1592), in common with others sympathetic towards
relativism, ancient or contemporary, relies on accounts of faraway
cultures to argue that “we have no other criterion of truth or
right-reason than the example and form of the opinion and customs of
our own country” (Montaigne 1580 [1991: 152]) (but also see
Fricker 2013 for a dissenting view). His advocacy of toleration, even
for the cannibal, paved the way for not only the acceptance but the
valorization of idealized versions of alien creeds and distant
cultures by Enlightenment figures such as Rousseau (1712–1778),
Voltaire (1694–1778), Diderot (1713–1784), Montesquieu
(1689–1755) and Condorcet (1743–1794), who in turn, were
instrumental in establishing an intellectual climate hospitable to
cultural relativism. These authors were also the first to explore the
idea of viewing one’s culture from an outsider’s point of
view and using this external perspective as a vehicle to criticize
local customs and norms. To take just one example, Diderot, in his
“Supplement to the Voyage of Bougainville”, tells us that
the Tahitian is mild, innocent, and happy while civilized people are
corrupt, vile, and wretched; the natives live according to customs and
rules that vary greatly from the Western ones. They do not possess
private property or operate their affairs based on egalitarian
principles, and they exercise sexual freedom not accepted in
“civilized societies”. Diderot accordingly opposes the
European mission of civilizing the natives, and despite his belief in
a common human nature, he advocates the relativistic sounding maxim to
be monks in France and savages in Tahiti. Put on
the costume of the country you visit, but keep the suit of clothes you
will need to go home in. (Diderot 1956 [1772]: 228 in Baghramian 2010:
37)
Discussions of relativism in the 19th century had two
sources (see Gardiner 1981). On the one hand, figures from the
so-called Counter-Enlightenment, a philosophical movement which arose
in the late 18th century and the early 19th
century in opposition to the Enlightenment, Johann Georg Hamann
(1730–1788), Johann Gottfried Herder (1744–1803), Wilhelm
von Humboldt (1767–1835) emphasized the diversity of languages
and customs and their role in shaping human thought. Hamann’s
views on language, for instance, foreshadow contemporary conceptual
and epistemic relativism. He maintained that language is the
“instrument and criterion of reason” as well as the source
of all the confusions and fallacies of reason. Furthermore, the rules
of rationality are embedded within language, which in turn, is
governed by local norms of custom and use (Hamann 1967
[1759]). Relativism ensues because languages and their rules of
rationality vary a great deal. Herder, on the other hand, not only
railed against the rational, universalizing and science-oriented ethos
of the Enlightenment but, much like later relativists, also argued
that different nations and epochs have their distinct preferences in
ethical and aesthetics matters as well as their varied conceptions of
truth and we are not in a position to adjudicate between them (Herder
1774 [2002: 272–358]).
The Counter Enlightenment had a significant influence on Hegel,
Nietzsche, and Dilthey, who in turn have shaped relativistic thinking
in certain strands of continental philosophy, postmodernism and
cultural studies. Hamann’s rejection of objectivism was central
to Nietzsche’s even more profound recoil from objectivity.  And
indeed, Nietzsche is possibly the single most influential voice in
shaping relativistic sensibilities in 20th century
continental philosophy. His declaration that all human conceptions and
descriptions, including those advanced by scientists, are
only an interpretation and arrangement of the
world (according to our own requirements, if I may say so!)—and
not an explanation of the world. (Nietzsche 1886a [1996]: §14)
and that “there is only a perspective
seeing, only a perspective knowing” (Nietzsche 1886b [1968]:
§540), irrespective of how Nietzsche himself intended them, have
been taken to express a core contention of relativism that no single
account of truth or reality can occupy a privileged position, for
such accounts are only one of many perspectives that prevail at a
given time in history. We cannot appeal to any facts or standards of
evaluation independently of their relation to the perspectives
available to us; we can do little more than to insist on the
legitimacy of our own perspective and try to impose it on other
people through our “will to power”. 
A second source was the German post-Kantian and British Idealist
discussions of the “relativity of knowledge” taking place
in the context of the distinction between being-for-other
(für anderes sein) and being-for-itself
(fürsichsein)—a distinction influenced by the
Kantian idea that all knowledge is ultimately relational because
knowledge of the Real or “the thing in itself” is
impossible. John Stuart Mill, for instance ascribes to the Kantian
William Hamilton the “doctrine of relativity of our human
knowledge” because Hamilton, according to Mill, believed that
there could be no unconditional or absolute knowledge for all
knowledge is dependent on the knowing mind (Mill 1884: 8).
The end of the 19th century witnessed the emergence of yet
another strand of relativism motivated by empirical-psychological and
physiological interpretations of Kantian categories. The view, known
as species relativism, and defended by neo-Kantian
psychologists such as Theodore Lipps (1851–1914), holds that the
rules of logic are products of the human mind and psychology and
therefore may be unique to the human species; different species could
have and use different logical principles. The view was vehemently,
but quite effectively, attacked by Frege and Husserl as part of
their arguments against what they called “psychologism”
and “speciesism” (Kusch 1995: 47). Logic in this approach is
identified with the actual thinking processes of individuals or
communities and its authority is seen to be local, or relative to the
practices of particular epistemic groupings. But Frege and Husserl
argued that with such relativization we would lose the ability to
distinguish between reasoning correctly and merely seeming to do
so.
Finally, the popularity of the very idea of relativism in the
20th century owes something to Einstein’s Special
Theory of Relativity (1905) which was to be used both as model and as
well as a vindication for various relativistic claims. Gilbert Harman
is among the philosophers to use Einsteinian relativity as a model for
philosophical versions of relativism. He says:
 According to Einstein’s Theory of Relativity
even an object’s mass is relative to a choice of spatio-temporal
framework. An object can have one mass in relation to one such
framework and a different mass in relation to another. …. I am
going to argue for a similar claim about moral right and wrong.
… I am going to argue that moral right and wrong …. are
always relative to a choice of moral framework. (Harman 1996:
3)
The Sapir-Whorf theory of linguistic relativity
(see §4.1) is also thought to have been
inspired by the Relativity Theory. It is however worth noting that
Einstein did not think that the Theory of Relativity supported
relativism in ethics or epistemology because, although in his model
simultaneity and sameness of place are relative to reference frames,
the physical laws expressing such relativity are constant and
universal and hence in no sense relative.
The different strands of the intellectual genealogy of relativism
have shaped a variety of relativistic doctrines.
Relativism is discussed under a variety of headings some of which
have been more prominent in recent philosophical and cultural
debates.
Public debates about relativism often revolve around the frequently
cited but unclear notion of cultural relativism. The idea
that norms and values are born out of conventions can be traced back
to the Greek historian Herodotus (c. 484–425 BC), but it is only
in the 20th century, and particularly with the advent of
social anthropology, that cultural relativism has gained wide
currency.  Franz Boas, responsible for the founding of social
anthropology in the U.S., claimed that
The data of ethnology prove that not only our
knowledge but also our emotions are the result of the form of our
social life and of the history of the people to whom we belong. (Boas
1940: 636)
Boas’s views became the orthodoxy of
anthropology through M. J. Herskovits’ “principle of
cultural relativism” stating: “Judgments are based on
experience, and experience is interpreted by each individual in terms
of his own enculturation” (Herskovits 1955:15).
Since those early days, social anthropologists have come to develop
more nuanced approaches to cultural relativism (see for instance
Geertz 1993); however, its core tenet, a claim to the equal standing
of all cultural perspectives and values which co-vary with their
cultural and social background, has remained constant.
Cultural relativists justify their position by recourse to a
combination of empirical, conceptual and normative considerations:
Claims (a)–(d) are open to a variety of objections. Some
anthropologists and biologists have argued against the empirical
assumption of the variability of cultures and have disputed its
extent.  Kinship, death and its attendant rituals of mourning, birth,
the experience of empathy, expressions of sympathy and fear, and the
biological needs that give rise to these, are some of the constant
elements of human experience that belie the seeming diversity reported
by ethnographers (Brown 2004). (c) has also been challenged by
naturalistically inclined social scientists who believe that an
evolutionary or a biologically informed approach can provide a
context-independent, universally applicable theoretical framework for
explaining what is common to all cultures, despite their superficial
differences. Moreover, Moody-Adams (1997), among others, has argued
that cultures are not integrated wholes that could determine
uni-directionally the beliefs and experiences of their members; they
are porous, riddled with inconsistencies and amenable to change.
Finally, (d) is under pressure from the very relativism it
advocates. Other critics, Pope Benedict XVI for instance, in his very
first homily delivered upon election (18 April 2005), reject and
condemn prescriptive cultural relativism as a harbinger of nihilism
and an “anything goes” extreme permissiveness.
An influential form of descriptive cultural relativism owes its
genesis to linguistics. Benjamin Whorf, inspired by his teacher Edward
Sapir, who in turn was supervised by the social anthropologist Franz
Boas, used ethnographic evidence from American Indian languages, such
as Hopi, to argue that languages mold our views of the world and
different languages do so differently, because “we dissect
nature along lines laid down by our native languages” (Whorf
1956: 213). In the case of the Hopi, the claim was that their language
imposes a conception of time very different from that of the speakers
of the Indo-European languages. The so-called Sapir-Whorf hypothesis,
and the position known as “linguistic relativity”, became
popular in both psychology and social anthropology in the mid
20th century. However, the empirical work by the
psychologists Berlin and Key (1969) and later by Eleanor Rosch (1974)
pointed to the universality of color terms. The linguistic theories of
Noam Chomsky regarding the universality of grammar were also widely
taken to have discredited linguistic relativity. Moreover, Malotki
(1983) had argued that, contrary to Whorf’s claim, the Hopi
language does indeed have tense, as well as units of time, such as
days, weeks, months and seasons, and terminology for yesterday and
tomorrow. Things have changed recently and there has been a slight
swing of the pendulum back in favor of linguistic relativity on the
part of so called “neo-Whorfians”. Stephen Levinson, for
instance, drawing on experimental evidence, has argued that the frame
of reference that underlies any given language shapes our spatial
experiences and perceptual modalities (see Gumperz & Levinson
1996). Similar claims have been made about emotions, object
representation, and memory. But the claims of linguistic relativity in
all these cases are much more modest than Whorf’s original
thesis.
Historical relativism, or historicism, is the diachronic version of
cultural relativism. As Clifford Geertz points out, cultural and
historical relativism are in effect the same doctrine with a core
claim that “we cannot apprehend another people’s or
another period’s imagination neatly, as though it were our
own” (1993: 44). Historicism originated in reaction to the
universalist tendencies of the Enlightenment but proved most
influential in the social sciences, particularly in the hands of
19th century theorists such as Karl Marx and Max Weber.
Oswald Spengler, the then-influential turn-of-the-century German
historian and philosopher, also declared that: “There are no
eternal truths. Every philosophy is an expression of its time”
(Spengler 1918: 58). Karl Mannheim, to whom we owe the sub-discipline of
sociology of knowledge, pronounced that historicism is a significant
intellectual force that epitomizes our worldview
(Weltanschauung).
The historicist principle not only organizes, like
an invisible hand, the work of the cultural sciences
(Geisteswissenschaften), but also permeates everyday
thinking. (Mannheim 1952 [1924]:84)
As we will see
(§4.4.3), in more recent times
historicist interpretations of science, chiefly those espoused by
Thomas Kuhn and Paul Feyerabend, have played a major role in
popularizing relativistic interpretations of scientific knowledge.
Conceptual relativism is a narrowly delineated form of
relativism where ontology, or what exists, rather than ethical and
epistemic norms, is relativized to conceptual schemes, scientific
paradigms, or categorical frameworks. In this sense, conceptual
relativism is often characterized as a metaphysical doctrine rather
than as variant of epistemic or cultural relativism. The underlying
rationale for this form of relativism is the anti-realist thesis that
the world does not present itself to us ready-made or ready-carved;
rather we supply different, and at times incompatible, ways of
categorizing and conceptualizing it. Reflection on the connections
between mind and the world, rather than empirical observations of
historic and cultural diversity, is the primary engine driving various
forms of conceptual relativism, but data from anthropology and
linguistics are also used in its support. The thought, at least since
Kant, is that the human mind is not a passive faculty merely
representing an independent reality; rather, it has an active role in
shaping, if not constructing, the “real”. The conceptual
relativist adds, as Kant did not, that human beings may construct the
real in different ways thanks to differences in language or
culture. 
In the 20th century, a variety of positions sympathetic
to conceptual relativism were developed. Quine’s ontological
relativity, Nelson Goodman’s “irrealism” with its
claim of the plurality of “world-versions” and Hilary
Putnam’s conceptual relativity are prominent examples. What
these authors have in common is an insistence that there could be more
than one “right” way of describing what there is, that
incompatible “manuals of translation” and
“world-versions” can be equally correct or acceptable.
Quine’s thesis of ontological relativity, probably the most
influential of 20th century approaches to conceptual
relativity, is expressed both in an epistemic as well as in a stronger
metaphysical form. Quine supports an epistemic thesis when he claims
that incompatible scientific theories can account equally adequately
for the data available to us (his underdetermination thesis)
and that “there are various defensible ways of conceiving the
world”, (Quine 1992: 102). But his thesis of the indeterminacy
of translation makes the stronger claim that different incompatible
manuals of translation, or conceptual schemes, can account for one and
the same verbal behavior and the indeterminacy resides at the level of
facts rather than our knowledge, a position that leads to unavoidable
ontological relativity.
Nelson Goodman’s irrealism is an even more radical claim to
the effect that the existence of many adequate, and indeed correct,
but irreconcilable descriptions and representations of the world shows
that there is no such thing as one unique actual world;
rather there are many worlds, one for each correct description (e.g.,
Goodman 1975; cf. Sider 2009). Hilary Putnam disagrees with
Goodman’s formulation of relativity with its radical talk of
“world-making” but relies on arguments from conceptual
plurality to reject metaphysical realism, the view that there is one
single correct account of what the world is like (cf., Arageorgis
2017). According to Putnam, our most basic metaphysical categories,
e.g., objecthood and existence, could be defined variously depending
on what conceptual scheme we use. What counts as an object itself, he
argues, is determined by and hence is relative to the ontological
framework we opt for.
Thomas Kuhn’s highly influential discussion of the governing
role of paradigms in science
(see §4.4.3) has also been interpreted
as a form of conceptual relativism by friends (Kusch 2002) and critics
(Davidson 1974) of relativism alike.
The key difficulty facing conceptual relativism is that of
formulating the position in a coherent but non-trivial manner. Trivial
versions allow that the world can be described in different ways, but
make no claims to the incompatibility of these descriptions. The
charge of incoherence arises from the claim that there could be
genuinely conflicting and equally true accounts or descriptions of one
and the same phenomenon. To use an example that is the corner-stone of
Hilary Putnam’s conceptual relativity, Putnam claims that the
simple question how many objects there are (say on a given table)
could be answered variously depending on whether we use “a
mereological or a Carnapian, common-sense, method of individuating
objects”. In circumstances where a Carnapian counts three
objects A, B and C, a mereologist will count
seven: A, B, C, plus the mereological sum
objects A+B, A+C, B+C, A+B+C.
As Putnam puts it:
 The suggestion … is that what is (by
commonsense standards) the same situation can be described in many
different ways, depending on how we use the words. The situation does
not itself legislate how words like “object”,
“entity”, and “exist” must be used. What is
wrong with the notion of objects existing “independently”
of conceptual schemes is that there are no standards for the use of
even the logical notions apart from conceptual choices. (Putnam 1988:
114)
The puzzle is to explain how both the Carnapian and mereological
answers to the one and same question could be correct and yet mutually
incompatible, for unless we abandon the most fundamental law of logic,
the law of non-contradiction, we cannot deem one and the same
proposition true and not true. Relativists respond that both
answers are correct, each relative to the conceptual scheme it
invokes. So, once we accept the insight that there is no
Archimedean vantage point for choosing among conflicting frameworks,
we no longer face a genuine contradiction. The response invokes, often
implicitly, a relativized conception of truth, which as we shall see
below, faces its own difficulties.
Relativism about truth, or alethic relativism, at its
simplest, is the claim that what is true for one individual or social
group may not be true for another, and there is no context-independent
vantage point to adjudicate the matter. What is true or false is
always relative to a conceptual, cultural, or linguistic
framework.
Alethic relativism is the most central of all relativistic
positions since other subdivisions of the philosophical theses of
relativism—with the possible exception of some narrowly defined
versions of conceptual relativism such as Nelson Goodman’s
irrealism (see §4.2)—are in
principle, reducible to it (Baghramian 2004: 92). For instance,
relativism about logic may be restated as a view according to which
the standing of logical truths (including truths about consequence
relations) is relative to cultures or cognitive schemes.  Ethical
relativism can be seen as the claim that the truth of ethical
judgments, if such truths exist, is relative to context or culture. If
truth is to be seen as equally applicable to all areas of discourse
and also unitary, rather than domain specific or plural, then alethic
relativism is not only a strong form of global relativism but it also
entails the denial of the possibility of more local forms of
relativism because all localized relativistic claims are also attempts
at relativizing truth (seemingly in a particular domain of
discourse). 
The central claim of alethic relativism is that “is
true”, despite appearances to the contrary, is (at least, in
some relevant domains of discourse) not a one-place but a two-place
predicate such that “P is true” should correctly be
understood as (modulo differences in particular ways of
developing this idea) shorthand for “P is true for
X”, where X is a culture, conceptual scheme,
belief framework, etc. And within the broad camp of alethic
relativists, the matter of how it is that which we should opt for
“P-is-true-for-X”, rather than
“P is true”, simpliciter, is developed in different
ways (e.g., see Meiland 1977; MacFarlane 2014: ch. 5; Egan 2007;
Ferrari & Moruzzi 2018).  One shared commitment of relativizing
the truth predicate is that claims such as “misfortune is caused
by witchcraft” could be true according to the Azande cultural
framework and false in the Western scientific framework. One major
difficulty facing alethic relativists is to explain what “true
for” actually means, and how “true for” should be
understood as related to the more familiar absolutist truth
predicate. For instance, should relative truth be understood as a
modification on an already familiar strategy for thinking about truth
(e.g., the correspondence, pragmatic or epistemic model) or in some
different way, entirely? (MacFarlane 2014: ch. 2). Much of the work of
New Relativists such as John MacFarlane (see §5) can be see as an attempt to clarify this
thorny issue.
The strongest and most persistent charge leveled against all types
of relativism, but (global) alethic relativism in particular, is the
accusation of self-refutation. Here is for instance Harvey Siegel:
 This incoherence charge is by far the most difficult
problem facing the relativist. It is worth noting that attempts to
overcome the problem by appealing to the notion of relative
truth appear not to succeed. Many versions of relativism rely on
such a notion, but it is very difficult to make sense of it. An
assertion that a proposition is “true for me” (or
“true for members of my culture”) is more readily
understood as a claim concerning what I (or members of my culture,
scheme, etc.) believe than it is as a claim ascribing to that
proposition some special sort of truth. Constructing a conception of
relative truth such that “p is relatively true” (or
“p is true for S”, or “p is
true for members of culture C”) amounts to something
stronger than “S believes that p” (or
“members of culture C believe that p”), but
weaker than “p is true (simpliciter)”, has
proved to be quite difficult, and is arguably beyond the conceptual
resources available to the relativist. (Siegel 2011:
203)
The original argument goes back to Plato’s criticism of
Protagoras in the Theaetetus where he argues:
Most people believe that Protagoras’s doctrine is false.
Protagoras, on the other hand, believes his doctrine to be
true.
By his own doctrine, Protagoras must believe that his
opponents’ view is true.
Therefore, Protagoras must believe that his own doctrine is false
(see Theaetetus: 171a–c)
Plato’s argument, as it stands, appears to be damaging only
if we assume that Protagoras, at least implicitly, is committed to the
universal or objective truth of relativism. On this view, Plato begs
the question on behalf of an absolutist conception of truth (Burnyeat
1976a: 44). Protagoras, the relativists counter, could indeed accept
that his own doctrine is false for those who accept
absolutism but continue believing that his doctrine is true
for him. He could also try to persuade others to become the sort
of thinker for whom relativism is true without being entangled in
self-contradiction.  Such an effort at persuasions, however, could
involve Protagoras in a performative contradiction as the relativist
cannot assume that her arguments are good for persuading
others. Ordinarily, the very act of defending a philosophical position
commits us to the dialectical move of attempting to convince our
interlocutors of the superior value of what we are arguing
for. The relativist cannot make such a commitment and therefore his
attempts to persuade others to accept his position may be
pragmatically self-refuting. The relativist can avoid the standard
charge of self-refutation by accepting that relativism cannot be
proven true in any non-relative sense—viz., that
relativism itself as a philosophical position is at best true only
relative to a cultural or historical context and therefore could be
false in other frameworks or cultures.  But such an admission will
undermine the relativist’s attempt to convince others of her
position, for the very act of argumentation, as it is commonly
understood, is an attempt to convince those who disagree with us of
the falsehood of their position. In other words, if Protagoras really
believes in relativism why would he bother to argue for it?
It may be argued that Protagoras could have opted for a more
sensible form of alethic relativism where a person’s beliefs are
not automatically true relative to the framework she
accepts. Rather a belief p is true according
to X’s framework iff (roughly) X would
believe that p if she were to reason cogently by her own
standards on the basis of full relevant information. This form of
alethic relativism allows for argument and persuasion among people who
initially disagree, for despite their disagreement they may share or
come to share a framework.  Protagoras may, on this reinterpretation,
be trying to persuade his interlocutor that if she were to reason
cogently by her own standards from their shared framework, she would
accept relativism. However, it is not clear how the relativist could
share a framework with the absolutist on the nature of truth or what
argumentative strategies he can use to convert the absolutist without
presupposing a shared (relativist or absolutist) conceptions of
truth. In particular, a consistent relativist will have only a
relativized criteria of what counts as “true” information,
which presumably will not be shared by the absolutist.
A second strand of the self-refutation argument focuses on the
nature and role of truth. J.L. Mackie, for instance, has argued that
alethic absolutism is a requisite of a coherent notion of truth and
that a claim to the effect that “There are no absolute
truths” is absolutely self-refuting (Mackie 1964: 200). But the
relativists reject the quick move that presupposes the very conception
of truth they are at pains to undermine and have offered sophisticated
approaches of defense. A good example of such a defense is
Hales’ (1997)—who uses a “u” operator to
represent “It is true in some perspectives that” and a
“n” operator to represent “It is true in all
perspectives that”—in order to establish that there could
indeed be a consistent relativist logic which avoids the charge of
self-refutation. Key to this approach, according to Hales, is that we
abandon a conception of global relativism on which the lose thesis
“everything is relative” is embraced—a thesis Hales
concedes to be inconsistent—for the thesis “everything
that is true is relatively true”, which he maintains is not
(cf. Shogenji 1997 for a criticism of Hales on this
point).
It has also been claimed that alethic relativism gives rise to what
J.L. Mackie calls “operational” (Mackie 1964: 202) and Max
Kölbel “conversational” self-refutation (Kölbel
2011) by flouting one or more crucial norms of discourse and thereby
undermines the very possibility of coherent discourse. One version of
the argument, advanced most notably by Gareth Evans (1985:
346–63), begins with the premise that a publicly shared
distinction between correct and incorrect, and hence true and false,
assertion is a necessary condition for coherent assertoric
discourse. As Evans puts it, a theory that
permits a subject to deduce merely that a
particular utterance is now correct but later will be incorrect
… cannot assist the subject in deciding what to say, nor in
interpreting the remarks of others. What should we aim at, or take
others to be aiming at?. (1985: 349)
And if truth is relative, then there is no single
shared definite aim for any given assertion (see MacFarlane
2014: ch. 12 for a discussion). The relativists however, could
respond that truth is relative to a group (conceptual scheme,
framework) and they take speakers to be aiming a truth relative to
the scheme that they and their interlocutors are presumed to
share. The difficulty with this approach is that it seems to make
communication across frameworks impossible.
Such a response, however, will be answerable to the charge of
incoherence raised by Donald Davidson against both alethic and
conceptual relativism. According to Davidson, the principle of
charity—the assumption that other speakers by and large speak
truly (by our lights)—is a pre-requisite of all interpretation.
He takes this to imply that there could not be languages or conceptual
schemes that we cannot in principle understand and interpret, in other
words, if a system of signs L is not recognizable as a language
by us then L is not a language. Languages are either
inter-translatable and hence not radically different from ours, or
incommensurable and beyond our ability to recognize them as languages
(Davidson 1974). The relativist, in effect, places other speakers and
their languages beyond our recognitional reach and thereby undermines
the initial claim that they could be radically different or
incommensurable.
New Relativism, as we shall see, offers a novel take on the old
question of alethic relativism and gives weight to Alasdair
MacIntyre’s observation that relativism may have been refuted a
number of times too often, whereas genuinely refutable doctrines only
need to be refuted once (MacIntyre 1982: 22).
Claims to knowledge and justification have proven receptive to
relativistic interpretations. Epistemic relativism is the thesis that
cognitive norms that determine what counts as knowledge, or whether a
belief is rational, justifiable, etc. could vary with and are
dependent on local conceptual or cultural frameworks and lack the
universality they aspire or pretend to. The three key assumptions
underlying epistemic relativism are:
The epistemic relativist, as Paul Boghossian in developing his
trenchant criticisms of relativism points out, is committed to a
“doctrine of equal validity”, the view that “there
are many radically different, incompatible, yet, ‘equally
valid’ ways of knowing the world, with science being just one of
them” (Boghossian 2006a: 2). The relativist’s key claim is
that either we can chauvinistically maintain that our epistemic system
is superior to all or accept the equal legitimacy of varying epistemic
systems.
One crucial question facing epistemic relativism is how to identify
and individuate alternative epistemic systems. The intuitive idea is
that varying and possibly incompatible cognitive principles,
ground-level beliefs and presuppositions, or what Wittgenstein calls
“hinge” and “bedrock” propositions
(Wittgenstein 1969: §§341–343) separate non-convergent
epistemic schemes. A simple and quite commonly used example is the
contrast between scientific and religious belief systems. Boghossian,
for instance, uses the debate between Galileo and Cardinal Bellarmine
as a case study of an encounter between antagonists operating within
putatively different epistemic frameworks, who use different
frameworks, or as Rorty (1979) put it “grids”, for
determining what would count as appropriate evidence on planetary
movements. The relativist claims that there is no fact of the matter
about whether the Copernican theory or the geocentric view is
justified by the evidence, “for there are no absolute facts
about what justifies what” (Boghossian 2006a: 62) while the
anti-relativist attempts to show the unintelligibility or the
implausibility of such a claim.
Boghossian has been criticized however for his characterization of
epistemic relativism. One notable such criticism has been advanced by
Crispin Wright (2008), who takes issue with Boghossian’s
attributing to the epistemic relativist a version
of (a) above, what Boghossian
calls epistemic relationism, or the thesis that any claim of
the form “Evidence E justifies belief B”, if
it is to have any prospect of being true, must be construed as
expressing the claim According to the epistemic system C, that I,
S accept, information E justifies belief B
(Boghossian 2006a:73). Having characterized the relativist’s
position in this fashion, Boghossian suggests—after considering
various ways of articulating what the relativist might say about
the untruth of claims of the form “Evidence E
justifies belief B”—that the relativist is left,
ultimately, with no coherent way to account for how she should count
as accepting or adhering to a given epistemic system. And on this
basis, Boghossian concludes that there is no coherent way to formulate
the position because the relativist in formulating his position and
setting up the opposition between two or more alternative
non-convergent epistemic systems cannot but assume the universality of
at least some epistemic principles, including deduction, induction,
warrant through empirical evidence, etc. (see Boghossian 2006a).
As Wright sees it, however, Boghossian’s attributing the
relationist clause to the epistemic relativist is to simply
fail to take seriously the thesis that claims such
as [Evidence E justifies belief B] can indeed by true or
false, albeit only relatively so. (Wright 2008: 383, our
italics)
Moreover, Wright argues, the epistemic relationist clause
Boghossian includes in the kind of epistemic relativism he challenges
betrays a failure to distinguish between (i) making a judgment in the
light of certain standards and (ii) judging that those standards
mandate that judgment.  (See also MacFarlane (2008b and Carter &
McKenna forthcoming for different critiques of Boghossian’s argument
against the epistemic relativist.)
Conceptions of rationality, and its key components of logic and
justification, are some of the principles that are often used to
differentiate between epistemic systems. Below we look at attempts at
relativizing each.
Earlier defenses of epistemic relativism centered on the idea of
alternative rationalities and were often developed as a reaction to
the charge of irrationality leveled at non-Western tribal people.
Rationality traditionally is seen as a cognitive virtue as well as a
hallmark of the scientific method. The complex notion of rationality
is intimately tied to requirements of consistency, justification,
warrant and evidence for beliefs. Relativists about rationality cast
doubt on the universal applicability of one or more of these features
of rational thought, and deem them merely local epistemic values.
Peter Winch’s treatment of E.E. Evans-Pritchard’s account
of the Azande tribe’s beliefs in witchcraft and magic is now a
classic of the “rationality wars” of the 1960s and 70s.
Winch had argued that since standards of rationality in different
societies do not always coincide, we should use only contextually and
internally given criteria of rationality in our assessment of the
systems of belief of other cultures and societies. Under the influence
of the later Wittgenstein, he maintained that it does not make sense
to speak of a universal standard of rationality because what is
rational is decided by a backdrop of norms governing a given language
and form of life. As outside observers, we are not in a position to
impute irrationality or illogicality to the Azande or any other group
whose practices and language-games may differ from ours. Critics of
Winch, Steven Lukes, for instance, using considerations reminiscent of
Davidson’s principle of charity, have argued that we will not be
in a position to understand a language or culture with standards of
rationality radically different from ours, and that we must have at
least some core principles, or what Martin Hollis had called a
“bridgehead” with elements such as consistency and the
goal of truth, in common with the Azande in order to understand them
(Hollis 1968; Lukes 1970). They, thereby, conclude that an all-out or
strong relativism about rationality is not tenable.  The weaker claim
is that some elements of rationality, for instance what counts as good
evidence or a better style of reasoning, could vary with historic
conditions and traditions of enquiry and therefore a degree of
relativization of such norms, without succumbing to irrationalism, is
acceptable (see Hacking 1982 and MacIntyre 1988). 
Being rational also means having warrant, in the form of good
reasons and justification for one’s beliefs. Epistemic
relativists maintain that the legitimacy of a justificatory system and
the presumed strength of epistemic warrants are decided locally.
Richard Rorty has made the influential claim that
there is nothing to be said about either truth or
rationality apart from descriptions of the familiar procedures of
justification which a given society—ours—uses in
one or another area of inquiry. (Rorty 1991: 23)
For Rorty, warrant is a “sociological
matter, to be ascertained by observing the reception of [a
speaker’s] statement by her peers” (1993: 449). Rorty also
claims that knowledge and truth are compliments “paid to beliefs
which we think so well justified that, for the moment, further
justification is not needed” (Rorty 1991: 24) where the
“we” is a historically conditioned community of
enquirers. Rorty rejects the label “relativist” because he
insists that, unlike the relativists, he does not subscribe to the
view that all beliefs are equally true or good. He calls his position
“ethnocentrism”, because the only form of warrant
available to any of us is the one provided through solidarity with our
peers.  His rejection of the label “relativist” has had
little effect on critics such as Hilary Putnam
(1999) or Paul Boghossian
(2006a) who do not see the distinction Rorty wishes to draw between
his brand of ethnocentrism and relativism
Debates about the scope and authority of logic are also focal to
discussions of rationality. The argument for relativism about logic is
usually traced to the French anthropologist Lucien Lévy-Bruhl
(1857–1939) who claimed that tribal or “primitive”
cultures did not subscribe to universal laws of logic such as the
principles of non-contradiction and identity and were in a pre-logical
stage of thinking (Lévy-Bruhl 1922/1923). In a posthumous
publication, Lévy-Bruhl renounced his earlier views, finding
them “simplistic and rather crude” (Lévy-Bruhl
1949/1975: 48) but he remains the standard bearer for relativism about
logic.
Peter Winch’s interpretation of the Azande material became
the impetus for a new wave of arguments for relativism about
logic. Barry Barnes and David Bloor, for instance, have argued that
different societies may have incompatible but internally coherent
systems of logic because validity and rules of inference are defined
by, and hence are relative to, the practices of a given community,
rather than a priori universal restrictions on all
thought. According to Bloor,
The Azande have the same psychology as us but
radically different institutions. If we relate logic to the psychology
of reasoning we shall be inclined to say that they have the same
logic; if we relate logic more closely to the institutional framework
of thought then we shall incline to the view that the two cultures
have different logics. (Bloor 1976: 129–130)
Even the status of “contradictions”
is at times seen as culturally relative and the Azande’s
application of witchcraft in determining guilt is cited as an
example. The Azande, according to Evans-Prichard, believe that it is
possible to identify a witch by examining the contents of his
intestine (through the use of a poison oracle). They also believe
that Witchhood is inherited patrilineally.  Since the Azande clan
members are related to each other through the male line, it follows
that if one person is shown to be a witch, then all the members of
his clan must also be witches. Evans-Pritchard tells us that although
the Azande see the sense of this argument they do not accept the
conclusion; they seem to side-step the contradiction in their
belief-system. Relativistically inclined commentators have argued
that the Azande both do and do not contradict themselves depending
on, or relative to, the culture that is being taken as the vantage
point (Bloor 1976: 124 and Jennings 1989: 281). See Seidel (2014) for
a sustained critique.
More recently, Peng and Nisbett, using experimental data, have
argued that Chinese and American students have different attitudes
towards the Law of Non-Contradiction. The Chinese, they claim, are
more willing to accept that conflicting views may be compatible and
therefore are less disposed to recognize or condemn contradictions
(Peng & Nisbett 1999). In his The Geography of Thought
(2003), Nisbett has generalized his results to claim that Asian and
European structures of thinking, including perception and
conceptualization, differ significantly.
Nisbitt’s data, as well as the claims by Barnes and Bloor,
are contributions to a long-standing debate about the status of logic.
Their approach attempts to naturalize logic by tying it to actual
practices of the human subjects. The relativistically inclined,
however, argue that to think of logic as singular, a priori, and
universal speaks of a philosophical prejudice and does not sit well
with a naturalistic and scientific attitude. As to the claim by Quine
and Davidson, that an allegedly illogical culture is in fact a
misinterpreted or badly interpreted culture—that if the speakers
of a language seem to accept sentence of the form “P and
not-P”, this is conclusive evidence that
“and” and “not” in their language do not mean
what these words mean in English (Quine 1960)—the relativists and their sympathisers point out that reasoning in deviant ways is
quite common and is not an impediment to understanding or translating
others (e.g., Stich 2012). They further argue that such diversity is
better explained by the relativist’s claim that the correctness
of the principles of reasoning is relative to their cultural
background rather than by the absolutist approach that attributes
wholesale error to alternative epistemic systems or to the members of
other cultures.
A different line of support for relativism about logic starts with
pluralism about logic, the view that there can be a multitude of
correct but not fully compatible conceptions of logic where differing
accounts of logical consequence, logical connectives or even validity
are on offer. Relativism ensues if we also assume that there is no
neutral framework for adjudicating between the differing accounts.
What counts as a correct account of logical consequence and validity
or even the choice of logical vocabulary are relative to the system of
logic that embed and justify these accounts and choices. (See
Steinberger 2019 for a useful survey.)
Stewart Shapiro (2014) is probably the most vocal defender of this
approach. His argument for relativism about logic is similar to
defences of relativism in other areas where intractable differences in
a particular domain and an inability to reconcile them are used as the
motivators for relativism. Shapiro advocates what, following Crispin
Wright, he calls “folk-relativism” and its slogan that “There is no
such thing as simply being Φ” (Shapiro, 2014: 7; Wright 2008a:
158) and applies it to validity and logical consequence. The claim is
that there are different conceptions of logical consequence. in
classical and non-classical logic, which although not compatible can
still capture correct accounts of the idea of logical
consequence. Therefore, it does not make sense to think that there is
a uniquely correct conception of validity and logical
consequence. Different conceptions can be legitimate in so far as each
is (internally) consistent and also non-trivial in the sense that it
is the basis a workable mathematical systems, i.e., the means of
making sense of “the practice of pursuing and applying mathematics”
(Shapiro 2014: 81). Intuitionism and fuzzy logic are notable examples.
Choices between different logical vocabularies also can lead to a
relativized conception of logic in so far a these vocabularies play a
decisive role in generating different relations of logical
consequence.
For further discussion, see the entry on 
  logical pluralism.
Discussions of relativism about science gained currency with the
publication of Thomas Kuhn’s The Structure of Scientific
Revolutions (1962) and the emergence of a historicist approach to
question of change and progress in science. Pronouncements such as
In so far as their only recourse to [the] world is
through what they see and do, we may want to say that after a
revolution scientists are responding to a different world (Kuhn 1970
[1962]: 111)
and
The very ease and rapidity with which astronomers
saw new things when looking at old objects with old instruments may
make us wish to say that, after Copernicus, astronomers lived in a
different world (Kuhn 1970 [1962]: 117)
were taken to suggest that not only standards of
epistemic appraisal but even the data gathered by scientists were, to
a significant extent, determined by governing paradigms and hence
relative to them. Although Kuhn stepped back from such radical
relativism, his views gave currency to relativistic interpretations
of science (though see Sankey 2018).
Relativism about science is motivated by considerations arising
from the methodology and history of science (Baghramian 2007). As we
saw in §4.2, Quine has argued that
Physical theories can be at odds with each other
and yet compatible with all possible data even in the broadest
possible sense. In a word, they can be logically incompatible and
empirically equivalent. (1970: 179) 
 Relativists about science have argued that only with the addition
of auxiliary hypotheses could the scientist choose between various
theories and that such auxiliary hypotheses are colored by socially
and historically grounded norms as well as by personal and group
interests. Paul Feyerabend’s “democratic
relativism”—the view that different societies may look at
the world in different ways and regard different things as acceptable
(1987: 59) and that we need to give equal voice to these differing
perspectives—is one instance of the use of the
underdetermination thesis in support of relativism. According to
Feyerabend, underdetermination ultimately demonstrates that 
for every statement, theory, point of view
believed (to be true) with good reason there exist arguments showing a
conflicting alternative to be at least as good, or even better. (1987:
76)
Larry Laudan usefully lists the ways
underdetermination is used to motivate relativism or its proximate
doctrines. He says:
 Lakatos and Feyerabend have taken the
underdetermination of theories to justify the claim that the only
difference between empirically successful and empirically unsuccessful
theories lies in the talents and resources of their respective
advocates (i.e., with sufficient ingenuity, more or less any theory
can be made to look methodologically respectable). Hesse and Bloor
have claimed that underdetermination shows the necessity for bringing
noncognitive, social factors into play in explaining the theory
choices of scientists (on the grounds that methodological and
evidential considerations alone are demonstrably insufficient to
account for such choices). H. M. Collins, and several of his fellow
sociologists of knowledge, have asserted that underdetermination lends
credence to the view that the world does little if anything to shape
or constrain our beliefs about it. (Laudan 1990: 321)
Laudan even connects Derrida’s deconstructionism and the view
that texts do not lend themselves to determinate readings with
underdetermination (ibid.). He also believes that an appropriately
modest understanding of what underdetermination entails will distance
it from relativism, but most relativistically inclined advocates of
underdetermination are not willing to follow Laudan’s advice to
circumscribe its scope. The key issue is that both the relativists and
the anti-relativists could agree that the totality of evidence
available does not prove the truth of any given theory. But the
anti-relativists responds to this fact of underdetermination by
pointing out that the we have good reasons for embracing the best
theory available and moreover that there are indeed objective facts
about the world, even if we are not in possession of them. The
relativist, in contrast, argues that there are many, equally
acceptable principles for accepting theories, all on the basis of
evidence available, but such theories could result in very different
verdicts. They also argue that in the absence of any strong epistemic
grounds for accepting the existence of absolute facts in any given
domain, we have no grounds, other than some kind of metaphysical
faith, for thinking that there are such facts.
Relativism about science is also influenced by the related doctrine
that all observations are theory-laden. Even anti-relativists such as
Karl Popper admit that the idea that observations are not in some way
tinted by theoretical assumptions is naïve. But some relativists
about science offer a particularly extreme form of the doctrine of the
widely accepted thesis of theory-ladenness. Feyerabend, for instance,
goes so far as to argue that different systems of classification can
result in perceptual objects that are not easily comparable.
Relativists about science also point to the prevalence of both
synchronic and diachronic disagreement among scientists as a
justification of their view. Looking at the history of science, Kuhn
and his followers argued that Aristotelian physics presupposes a
totally different conception of the universe compared to Newtonian
physics; the same is true of Einsteinian physics compared to its
predecessors. Moreover, these differing conceptions may be
incommensurable in the sense that they are not readily amenable to
comparison or inter-theoretical translation. There are also strong and
unresolved disagreements between scientists working
contemporaneously. The many different interpretations of quantum
mechanics are a case in point.
Anti-relativist philosophers of science are often willing to
concede all three points above, but insist that they do not, singly or
jointly, justify the claim that scientific knowledge, in any
philosophically interesting sense, is relative to its context of
production. The success of science, both theoretical and applied,
indicates that progress does take place. Fallibilism, the view that
all scientific claims are provisional and liable to fail, they argue,
is sufficient for dealing with difficulties arising from
considerations of underdetermination and theory-ladenness of
observations. Relativism, with its attendant denial that there could
be objective and universal scientific truths or knowledge exacts too
high a price for dealing with these allegedly troublesome features of
the methodology and history of science.
Social constructionism is a particularly radical form of conceptual
relativism with implications for our understanding of the methodology
and subject matter of the sciences. According to social
constructionism, nature as studied by scientists does not come carved
at its joints (to use Plato’s metaphor from Phaedrus:
265d–266a). Reality—with its objects, entities, properties
and categories—is not simply “out there” to be
discovered only by empirical investigation or observation; rather, it
is constructed through a variety of norm-governed socially sanctioned
cognitive activities such as interpretation, description, manipulation
of data, etc. Social constructionism has relativistic consequences
insofar as it claims that different social forces lead to the
construction of different “worlds” and that there is no
neutral ground for adjudicating between them. The “Science
Studies” approach of Bruno Latour is a prime example of
constructionism with relativistic consequences. Latour and Woolgar
(1986) have argued that so-called “scientific facts” and
the “truths” of science emerge out of social and
conceptual practices and inevitably bear their imprints. This is
because the very idea of a mind-independent reality open to scientific
study, or as they call it “out-there-ness”, itself is the
consequence of scientific work rather than the cause. A crucial
difference between scientific realists and constructionists is that
whereas the realists see nature and society as the causes
that explain the outcomes of scientific enquiry, for the
constructionists the activity of
scientists and engineers and of all their human
and non-human allies is the cause, of which various states of nature
and societies are the consequence. (Callon & Latour 1992:
350–1)
Scientific theories are also products of socially constituted
practices. They are
 contextually specific constructions which bear
the mark of the situated contingency and interest structure of the
process by which they are generated. (Knorr-Cetina 1981:
226)
So called “scientific facts” and
“natural kinds”, the primary subjects of scientific
investigation are, at least in part, the products of the contingent
social and epistemic norms that define the very subject matter of
science. It may be argued that the view, if taken literally, entails
a counter-intuitive form of backward causation to the effect that,
for instance, the scientific facts about dinosaur anatomy 50 million
years ago were caused in the 20th century when a
scientific consensus about dinosaur anatomy was formed (see
Boghossian 2006a). But constructionism, at least in its most extreme
form, accepts this consequence, insisting that there are indeed no
facts except for socially constructed ones, created and modified at
particular times and places courtesy of prevailing theoretical and
conceptual frameworks.
Moral or ethical relativism is simultaneously the most influential
and the most reviled of all relativistic positions. Supporters see it
as a harbinger of tolerance (see §2.6),
open-mindedness and anti-authoritarianism. Detractors think it
undermines the very possibility of ethics and signals either confused
thinking or moral turpitude. 
Briefly stated, moral relativism is the view that moral judgments,
beliefs about right and wrong, good and bad, not only vary greatly
across time and contexts, but that their correctness is dependent on
or relative to individual or cultural perspectives and
frameworks.  Moral subjectivism is the view that
moral judgments are judgments about contingent and variable
features of our moral sensibilities. For the subjectivist, to say that
abortion is wrong is to say something like, “I disapprove of
abortion”, or “Around here, we disapprove of
abortion”. Once the content of the subjectivist’s claim is
made explicit, the truth or acceptability of a subjectivist moral
judgment is no longer a relative matter. Moral relativism proper, on
the other hand, is the claim that facts about right and wrong vary
with and are dependent on social and cultural background. Understood
in this way, moral relativism could be seen as a sub-division of
cultural relativism. Values may also be relativized to frameworks of
assessment, independent of specific cultures or social settings.
Moral relativism, like most relativistic positions, comes in
various forms and strengths. It is customary to distinguish between
descriptive or empirical, prescriptive or normative, and meta-ethical
versions of moral relativism. These views in turn are motivated by a
number of empirical and philosophical considerations similar to those
introduced in defense of cultural relativism.  The purported fact of ethical diversity, the claim
that there are no universally agreed moral norms or values, conjoined
with the intractability of the arguments about them, are the core
components of descriptive moral relativism. The anti-relativists
counter-argue that the observed diversity and lack of convergence in
local norms can in fact be explained by some very general universal
norms, which combine with the different circumstances (or false
empirical beliefs) of the different groups to entail different
particular norms. The objectivist thereby can accommodate diversity
and lack of agreement at this higher level of generalization (see
Philippa Foot (1982) for this type of argument).
As in the case of cultural relativism, the imperative of tolerance
is often seen as a normative reason for adopting moral relativism.
Moral relativism, it is argued, leads to tolerance by making us not
only more open-minded but also alerting us to the limitations of our
own views. Edward Westermarck, for instance, in his early classic
defense of relativism writes:
 Could it be brought home to people that there is
no absolute standard in morality, they would perhaps be on the one
hand more tolerant and on the other more critical in their
judgments. (Westermarck 1932: 59)
Critics however point out that for the consistent relativist
tolerance can be only a framework-dependent virtue, while Westermarck,
and others, seem to recommend it as a universal desideratum. A second
problem with arguing for normative moral relativism on the grounds of
tolerance is known as the Argumentum ad Nazium.  Relativists,
as this argument goes, are not in a position to condemn even the most
abhorrent of worldviews as they are forced to admit that every point
of view is right (relative to the perspective of its
beholder). W.T. Stace, arguing against Westermarck’s relativism
gives an early example of this type of criticism:
 Certainly, if we believe that any one moral standard
is as good as any other, we are likely to be more tolerant. We shall
tolerate widow-burning, human sacrifice, cannibalism, slavery, the
infliction of physical torture, or any other of the thousand and one
abominations which are, or have been, from time approved by moral code
or another.  But this is not the kind of toleration that we want, and
I do not think its cultivation will prove “an advantage to
morality”. (Stace 1937: 58–59)
More moderate forms of normative moral relativism, positions that
sometimes are characterized as moral pluralism, have been defended by
David Wong (2006) and David Velleman (2013). Moderate moral
relativists endorse the idea of diversity and plurality of ethical
values and accept that such values are justified according to
differing local normative frameworks, but they avoid a full blown
“anything goes” relativism by maintaining that all such
frameworks are ultimately answerable to conditions for human
flourishing and other overarching universal constraints such as the
value of accommodation (Wong 2006). (It should however be noted that
while theses under the description of pluralism needn’t entail a
commitment to relativism, some formulations of relativism (such as
Boghossian’s 2006b), include, as an essential ingredient, a
“pluralist” clause. Whether particular instances of moral
pluralism entail moral relativism depends entirely on the details of
relevant claim to pluralism). 
Metaethical versions of moral relativism are often motivated by the
thought that ethical positions, unlike scientific beliefs, are not apt
for objective truth-evaluation. Strong realists about science such as
Gilbert Harman have argued that the intractability of moral
disagreements, the absence of convergence in ethics as opposed to the
natural sciences and mathematics, point to fundamental differences
between natural facts and ethical values (Harman & Thompson
1996). This is a metaethical, rather than a descriptive or normative
position, because it is a theory about the nature of ethics or
morality. The ethical domain, Harman argue, is such that all relevant
evaluations could be undertaken only in the context of social norms or
personal preferences and commitments.  Values are not
objective—they are not part of the fabric of the
universe. Rather they always arise from some form of convention and
agreement among people. Therefore, there can be no objective or
externally justified ethical knowledge or judgment (Harman 1975). In
this sense, metaethical relativism shares common concerns with
non-cognitivist approaches to ethics. What distinguishes it, however,
is the insistence on the part of metaethical relativists that moral
judgments contain an implicit relativization to the speaker’s
moral outlook (Dreier 2006: 261). It is possible to talk about the
truth or falsity of a moral judgment but only in the context of
pre-existing standards or value systems. For instance, we can ask
questions about just actions or judgments in the context of standards
of justice prevalent in a society at a given time; but questions about
the objective standing of these standards do not make sense (cf., Boghossian 2017). (For
further discussion of moral relativism see the separate entry on this
topic. What has become known as New Moral Relativism will be discussed
below).
There is a recent version of relativism according to which some of
the views considered so far—for instance, Harman’s (1975)
variety of moral relativism—will be regarded varieties
of contextualism as opposed to bona fide relativism.
This recent version—sufficiently distinct from the relativisms
so far considered that it is deserving of attention in its own
right—we are calling “New Relativism”, a variety of
relativism that has arisen out of work in the philosophy of language
in the analytic tradition, and for which the leading proponents have
included Max Kölbel (2003, 2004), Peter Lasersohn (2005), Crispin
Wright (2006) and, in particular, John MacFarlane (2005b, 2007, 2014);
cf., Marques (2019).  In this section we aim to (i) outline several
features that individuate New Relativism; (ii) consider in turn
motivations for (and objections to) several prominent strands of it;
and, finally, (iii) conclude with some philosophical problems that
face New Relativism more generally.
It is a commonplace that the truth-value of an utterance can depend
on the context in which it is uttered. If you say “I’m
happy” and I say the same sentence, your utterance may be true
and mine false. In such cases, the context of utterance plays a role
in determining which proposition the sentence expresses. This can
happen even when the sentence does not contain an overtly indexical
expression. Thus Harman and Dreier hold that a statement of the form
“A is wrong” is roughly equivalent to
“A is wrong according to the moral system I
accept”. So two utterances of (say) “Torture is
wrong” can differ in truth-value if they are uttered by speakers
who accept very different moral systems. Contextualists about
(for instance) moral, aesthetic and epistemic discourse will view
moral, aesthetic and epistemic expressions likewise as indexical
expressions but (as we’ll see) with some difficulty explaining
apparent genuine disagreement in these areas of discourse. On
this point, New Relativists claim an important advantage over
contextualists. New relativism, by contrast with
contextualism, aims to achieve this advantage via a much less
familiar form of context dependence.
Truth-relativism with respect to utterances in area of
discourse D is the claim that, following MacFarlane’s
notable version of the view: the truth
of S’s D-utterance u depends (in part) on
a context of assessment; that is (and in short) what S
asserts, u, gets a truth value—according to the
truth-relativist’s D-semantics—only once
the D-standard of the assessor is
specified. Independent of the specification of such a
standard, S’s u assertion lacks a truth-value much
as, by comparison, indexical expressions such as “The barn is
nearby” do not get a truth-value independent of contextual facts
about the context of use (i.e. the context in which the
utterance is made). And, as a further point of clarification here:
while the contextualist can, no less than the relativist, recognize a
“standards” or “judge” parameter, for the
contextualist, its value will be supplied by the context
of use, whereas the relativist takes it to be supplied
completely independently of the context of use, by the context of
evaluation (or, as MacFarlane calls it, the context of
assessment).
To see how this view is claimed to offer a satisfying take on
disagreement in types of discourse (see Beddor 2019), consider a simple example, concerning predicates of
personal taste. A utters, “Pretzels are tasty”,
and B utters, “Pretzels are not tasty”. While the
semantic invariantist (for whom the truth-value of taste
predications is in no way context sensitive) will insist that the
above exchange constitutes a genuine disagreement about whether
pretzels are tasty and that at least one party is wrong,
contextualists and truth-relativists have the prima facie
advantageous resources to avoid the result that at least one party to
the apparent disagreement has made a mistake.
The contextualist claims that the truth-evaluable content
expressed by A’s utterance encodes A’s
standards (cf. non-indexical contextualism). Thus,
in this apparent disagreement, the proposition expressed by A
is “Pretzels are tasty relative to my [A’s]
standards” while B expresses the proposition
“Pretzels are not tasty relative to my [B’s]
standards”. This maneuver avoids the result that at least one of
the two parties has uttered something false, but (as the new
relativist points out) this result comes at the price of being unable
to offer a clear explanation of our intuition that there is some
uniform content about which A and B disagree.
The new relativist, on the other hand, claims to be able to
preserve both the apparent subjectivity of taste
discourse and (and, unlike the contextualist) our intuition
that exchanges of the form mentioned constitute genuine
disagreements. They do this by first insisting (unlike the
contextualist—though see Suikkanen 2019) that there is a single truth-evaluable proposition
which A affirms and B denies. In the case where A
says “Pretzels are tasty”, and B denies this, there
is a uniform content that is affirmed by A’s utterance
and denied by B’s, namely the proposition that
pretzels are tasty, period. So we have a genuine
disagreement. Unlike the truth-absolutist, however, the new relativist
will add that the disagreement is faultless because the
proposition affirmed in A’s utterance has a truth value
only relative to a judge or standards parameter, and
in this case: A’s standards, when A is the
assessor, B’s standards, when B is the
assessor. Hence, the truth-relativist about predicates of personal
taste will, by insisting that the truth of Pretzels are tasty
depends on the context of assessment, allow a single proposition to be
(at the same time):
New Relativist views, which endorse truth-relativism
locally for some domain of discourse, stand in opposition to the more
traditional view of propositional content (what Cappelen &
Hawthorne call “The Simple View”) according to which
propositions bear truth and falsity as monadic properties
(cf.  however, MacFarlane 2011a for some resistance to Cappelen & Hawthorne’s
claim that this simple characterization should be regarded as the
“received” view.)
A key source of philosophical motivation for relativizing truth in
the fashion of New Relativism traces to Lewis’s (1980) and
Kaplan’s (1989) foundational work in semantics, according to which
sentence truth is to be understood as relative to a circumstance of
evaluation that includes world, time and location. New Relativists
inherit the formal apparatus of Lewis and Kaplan and add another
parameter, but their reasons for doing so are quite different from the
reasons that motivated the framework in the first place. While
Lewis’s and Kaplan’s reasons for
“proliferating” parameters were primarily based on
considerations to do with intensional operators (though see Yli-Vakkuri et al. 2019), the more contemporary
reasons for adding a judge or standard parameter are often to do with
respecting (for instance) disagreement data. (For further discussion
here, see
Kölbel (2015)). (Note that “old-style contextualism” can
also be stated in Kaplan’s framework; it involves variation in
content with respect to the context of utterance rather than in truth
value with respect to the circumstance of evaluation).
Kaplan’s view specifically was that the need for particular
parameters in the circumstance of evaluation was a function of
the non-specificity of certain propositional contents with
respect to world, time and location (see Kaplan’s (1989)
analysis of indexicals). On Kaplan’s view:
 A circumstance will usually include a possible
state or history of the world, a time, and perhaps other features as
well. The amount of information we require from a circumstance is
linked to the degree of specificity of contents and thus to the kinds
of operators in the language…. (1989: 502)
John MacFarlane, a leading contemporary relativist, writes:
 Taking this line of thought a little farther, the
relativist might envision contents that are “sense-of-humor
neutral” or “standard-of-taste neutral” or
“epistemic-state neutral”, and circumstances of evaluation
that include parameters for a sense of humor, a standard of taste or
an epistemic state. This move would open up room for the truth value
of a proposition to vary with these “subjective” factors
in much the same way that it varies with the world of
evaluation. (MacFarlane 2007: 6–7)
Similarly, Cappelen and Hawthorne write:
 Contemporary analytic relativists reason as follows:
‘Lewis and Kaplan have shown that we need to relativize truth to
triples of <world, time, location>[’]. … But,
having already started down this road, why not exploit these
strategies further? In particular, by adding new and exotic parameters
into the circumstances of evaluation, we can allow the contents of
thought and talk to be non-specific (in Kaplan’s sense) along
dimensions other than world, time and location. (2009:
10; edited)
A question on which New Relativists are divided, however,
is: what contents are non-specific along dimensions other
than world, time and location? It is with respect to this general
question that different families of New Relativism are generated.
The taxonomy we offer is that a view falls within the category
of New Relativism if, and only if, the view endorses a
truth-relativist semantics (as previously outlined) for utterance
tokens in some domain of discourse, such as: discourse about
predicates of personal taste (Lasersohn 2005; Kölbel 2003),
epistemic modals (Egan 2007; Egan, Hawthorne & Weatherson
2005; MacFarlane
2011b; Stephenson
2007), future contingents (MacFarlane 2003), indicative conditionals
(Weatherson 2009; Kolodny & MacFarlane 2010) gradable adjectives
(Richard 2004), deontic
modals (Kolodny & MacFarlane 2010 and MacFarlane 2014: ch. 11) and
knowledge attributions (Richard 2004); MacFarlane 2005b, 2011c,
2014). The motivations for truth-relativism in each of these domains
include various considerations unique to those domains. We consider
some of the arguments for New Relativism in four of these domains in
the following sections.
One area of discourse that has been particularly fertile ground for
New Relativism is discourse that concerns predicates of personal
taste (e.g., “tasty” and “fun”.)
Take a case where Mary says: “The chili is tasty” and
John says, “The chili is not tasty”. Lasersohn argues
(much as Kölbel does) that only the truth-relativist can
make sense of the nature of John and Mary’s disagreement: It is
a genuine disagreement. One affirms what the other denies.  And yet
neither is wrong. Lasersohn argues that there is an elegant way to
make sense of the idea that John and Mary are both (in some sense)
right, even though John asserts the negation of what is expressed by
Mary. What Lasersohn) suggests, more formally, is the introduction of
a judge parameter.
 Instead of treating the content of a sentence as a
set of time-world pairs, we should treat it as a set of
time-world-individual triples. We assume that the content will provide
an individual to be used in evaluating the sentences for truth and
falsity, just as it provides a time and world. (Lasersohn: 2005:
17)
Lasersohn adds (2005: 23) that in order to maintain an
authentically subjective assignment of truth-values to
sentences containing predicates of personal taste, we must allow that
the objective facts of the situation of utterance do not uniquely
determine a judge. But who is the judge? Typically, it
is us, and when it is, the evaluation is from what Lasersohn
calls an autocentric perspective. Importantly, Lasersohn
allows that in certain circumstances we take an exocentric
perspective when assessing predicates of personal taste:
assessing these sentences for truth relative to contexts in which
someone other than ourselves is specified as the judge (cf.
“Come on, it’ll be fun!” “Is this fun?”
(2005: 26); cf. Stanley (2005: 10) for a response to
Lasersohn’s program).
Kölbel’s (2003) faultless disagreement argument
for relativism about predicates of personal taste features a
“proof” that there is no faultless disagreement
followed by a demonstration that the proof is indefensible. The proof
proceeds from two premises: an equivalence schema
and an apparent truism about mistakes:
(ES) and (T) generate the conclusion that there is no faultless
disagreement through the following proof (see also Wright 2001:52)
But because Kölbel takes (9) to be implausible in what
Kölbel takes to be “discretionary” (non-objective, as
Kölbel sees it) areas of discourse he contends that we should
introduce a relativized version of (T) to avoid the conclusion that at
least one party has made a mistake.
Kölbel claims further that, for reasons of uniformity, we
should “relativize truth of all propositions across the
board…” and he accordingly endorses the following version
of truth relativism:
Kölbel (2003: 71) thinks that this position allows the
possibility of maintaining that faultless disagreement is impossible
in some non-discretionary (objective) areas, and this will
depend on the relation of perspective possession (but see also
Boghossian 2011 for the contrary view). An implication of the position
is that Kölbel’s view will allow assertions of the form:
“Pretzels are not tasty, though John believes they are. And yet
John is not mistaken”. For other discussions of faultless
disagreement, see Richard (2008), MacFarlane (2012, 2014: ch. 6), and
Zeman (2019). For an attempt to countenance faultless disagreement
within an absolutist framework, see Baker & Robson (2017).
There is a version of moral relativism (e.g., Kölbel
2004) that falls squarely within the New Relativist tradition. We can
think of this relativism simply as a generalization of the position
just discussed that treats moral terms (e.g.,
“right”, “good”) as assessment-sensitive along
with predicates of personal taste.
Such an extension faces problems analogous to those faced by
truth-relativists about predicates of personal taste (cf. 
Beebe (2010) for a helpful discussion of truth-relativist semantics
versus varieties of contextualist competitors).
A broader kind of problem for this semantic thesis (as well as to
moral relativists more generally), raised by Coliva and Moruzzi (2012)
is that it succumbs to the progress argument, an argument
that famously challenges, in particular, cultural relativists (as well
as indexical contextualists) about moral judgments by insisting that
moral progress is both evident and not something the relativist can
countenance (e.g., Rachels 2009). A third and particularly important
kind of worry, addressed by Capps, Lynch and Massey (2009),
involves explaining the source and nature of moral
relativity, on a truth-relativist framework. Specifically, they claim
that
 we ought to have some account of why it
is that truth in the moral domain is such that it varies with a
parameter set by the context of assessment. (Capps, Lynch & Massey
2009: 416)
An additional problem concerns the plausibility of simply extending disagreement based arguments for relativism about predicates of personal taste over to moral predicates like ‘right’ and ‘good’. As Wedgwood (2019) has suggested, moral disagreements, in a way that is disanalogous to  disagreements about what’s tasty, implicate a kind of ‘inexcusable irrationality’ (2019: 97)—at least, if the moral truths that constitute moral principles are a priori knowable. To the extent that there is a difference in inexcusability across the two cases of disagreement, it would be contentious to think that an argument from ‘faultless disagreement’ to relativism in the arena of predicates of personal taste would extend, mutatis mutandis, to an analogous argument in the moral arena.
Epistemic modality (e.g., claims of the form “S might
be F”) is another particularly fertile ground for New
Relativists. A key reason for this is the dialectical force
of Eavesdropper Arguments, which attempt to show the perils
of contextualist treatments of utterances containing epistemic
modals. Another prominent argument concerns metasemantic
complexity. We will examine both of these argument strategies. But
first, let’s distinguish epistemic modality
from metaphysical modality. To say that p is
metaphysically possible is to say that p might have been
the case in the sense that: in some possible world, p is
true. To say that p is epistemically possible is by
contrast to say that p might be the case, or
that p is the case for all we know (see the entry on
Varieties of Modality).  A
canonical example of a statement expressing an epistemic modal is the
claim A might be F. The truth of claims of the
form A might be F will depend on
whether F is an epistemic possibility for some individual or
group, which is to say, that F must not be ruled out by what
some individual or group knows. But which individual or
group? This is not always clear. As Egan and Weatherson (2011: 4)
remark:
 …statements of epistemic possibility in
plain English do not make any explicit reference to such a person,
group, evidence set, or information state. One of the key issues
confronting a semanticist attempting to theorize about epistemic
modals is what to do about this lack of reference.
Eavesdropper-style cases highlight the difficulty of determining
exactly which individual’s or group’s body of information
is relevant to the truth of claims of epistemic possibility and are
taken by defenders of truth-relativism about epistemic modals to
motivate their position. A variety of different eavesdropper cases
have been given by different proponents (and attempted refuters) of
truth-relativism about epistemic modals in the literature. For ease of
exposition, we will use an especially simple version of the case, from
Hawthorne’s (2007), slightly amended:
 EAVESDROPPER: [Sandra] is on the way to the grocery
store. I hear her say: “Susan might be at the store. I could run
into her”. No party to the conversation that I am listening in
on knows that Susan is on vacation. But I know that she is. Despite
the fact that it is compatible with what the conversants know that
Susan is in the store and that the speaker will run into her, I am
inclined to judge the speaker’s [Sandra’s] modal judgments
to be incorrect. (Hawthorne 2007: 92)
Egan (2007), Egan, Hawthorne and Weatherson (2005) and MacFarlane
(2011b) share a similar set
of diagnoses here: (i) it seems that while Sandra and I disagree about
the truth value of Sandra’s statement, neither she nor I have
made a mistake; (ii) the contextualist can’t explain this; (iii)
the truth-relativist can.
Why can’t the contextualist explain this? As noted, the truth
of claims expressing epistemic modals must depend on what some
individual or group knows. But in these cases the context of
use does not pick out a single such individual or
group. After all, if it did, then either Sandra or I would be wrong,
but it seems that neither of us is. That the context of use does not
uniquely pick out one relevant body of knowledge for determining the
truth of epistemic modal statements is not, as MacFarlane notes,
something that can be accommodated by “the framework of
contextualism, which requires that the relevant body of knowledge be
determined by features of the context of use”. (MacFarlane 2011c)
Additionally, as Egan and Weatherson (2011) suggest, any
contextualist account of the semantics of epistemic modals
that could handle eavesdropper-style cases in a principled
way would be hideously complicated. This motivates a metasemantic
argument against contextualism (and a corresponding argument for
relativism): if contextualism about epistemic modals is correct, then
the semantics for epistemic modals will be hideously complicated; the
semantics is not hideously complicated on the truth-relativist’s
proposal, therefore, ceteris paribus, truth-relativism for
epistemic modals is more plausible than contextualism. However,
Glanzberg (2007) notably denies that metasemantic complexity in this
case must be problematic.
How can the relativist accommodate eavesdropper cases? MacFarlane
(2011b) articulates the relativist solution: Sandra and I disagree
about the truth-value of a single proposition, the
proposition that Susan might be at the store. This proposition, even
when fully articulated, makes no reference to any particular body of
knowledge. But such propositions cannot be true or false
simpliciter. They are true only relative to a context of assessment
that includes a body of knowledge. In this case, the proposition is
true relative to a context of assessment where what Sandra
knows is operative—a context in which Sandra is the
evaluator—and false relative to a context of assessment where
what I know is operative because I am the evaluator. Thus:
both disagreement and faultlessness are preserved (cf. Ross
& Schroeder 2013 for criticism and Kindermann & Egan (2019)
for an alternative proposal).
Along with MacFarlane, Egan (2007) and Stephenson (2007) have also
offered positive defenses of truth-relativism about epistemic modals;
their defenses share MacFarlane’s view that propositions
expressing epistemic modals are non-specific along dimensions that
include the body of information possessed by a judge or assessor.
More recently, experimental philosophy has contributed to this
debate. Empirical studies reported by Knobe & Yalcin (2014) and
Khoo (2015) indicate that folk judgments about the truth of claims
featuring epistemic modals aligns more closely with what contextualism
rather than relativism would predict. However, see Beddor and Egan
(2019) for experimental results that are argued to better support (a
version of) relativism than contextualism.
Propositions termed “future contingents” are about the
future and their truth-values are not settled by the state of the
world in the past or present (see entry on
Future Contingents, and
MacFarlane 2014: ch. 9). In a deterministic world there are no future
contingent statements in this sense. But in an indeterministic world,
statements partly about the future will often satisfy these
conditions. Consider Aristotle’s oft-cited example: the
proposition There will be a sea battle tomorrow, uttered
at t. Contrast now two intuitions: the determinacy intuition
that utterances that “turned out true” were true at the
time of utterance; and the indeterminacy intuition that, at
the time of the utterance, multiple histories are possible, including
one where there was a sea battle and the proposition is true, and one
where there was not, and the proposition is false.
The indeterminacy intuition leads us to think the truth-value
of future contingents is indeterminate at the time of utterance, and
either true or false at a later time (cf. MacFarlane 2003;
Carter 2011).
John MacFarlane (2003)
thinks that both the indeterminacy intuition and
the determinacy intuition should be taken at face value and
that the only way to account for the semantics of future contingents
is to allow the truth of future contingent statements to be, as he
puts it, doubly relativized: to both the context of utterance and the
context of assessment. When we evaluate a single token utterance of
“There will be a sea battle tomorrow” produced on (say)
Monday, this counts as neither true nor false when the context of
assessment is the context in which the utterance is being made (as
multiple possible histories are open at this point). However the very
same statement will have a determinate truth-value relative to the
context of assessment of the following day.  So we can have faultless
transtemporal disagreement about the truth-value of a single utterance
(MacFarlane 2003: 36; cf. Carter 2011).
MacFarlane (2005b) argues
that “know” is sensitive to the epistemic standards at
play in the context of assessment; that is, the extension of
“know” varies with the context of assessment.  Much as the
relativist about future contingents aimed to accommodate both the
determinacy and indeterminacy intuitions, the relativist about

knowledge attributions can be viewed as offering an attempted

synthesis between the contextualist and both sensitive and insensitive

varieties of invariantist (see entry on
Epistemic Contextualism).
As MacFarlane (2014: 190) puts it:
 Invariantism is right that there is a single

knowledge relation, and that the accuracy of knowledge ascriptions
does not depend on which epistemic standard is relevant at the context
of use. But contextualism is right that the accuracy of such
ascriptions depends somehow on contextually relevant
standards. Relativism seeks to synthesize these insights into a more
satisfactory picture.
To apply this view, suppose George says, “Bill knows that his
car is in the driveway”, while Barry says, “Bill
doesn’t know that his car is in the driveway”. According
to the relativist, the assessment of the truth-values of Bill’s
and Barry’s statements depends also on the specification of some
epistemic standard. For the truth-relativist, the standard will be the
operative standard in the context of assessment. George’s
utterance may be true (and Barry’s false) relative to a context
of assessment in which ordinary “low” standards are in
place, whereas Barry’s may be true (and George’s false)
relative to a context of assessment in which high
“Cartesian” standards are in place. See Stanley (2005:
ch. 7) for a detailed criticism of this position, though see also
MacFarlane (2014: §8.5 for a reply). See also Richard
(2004), for another
version of truth-relativism for knowledge attributions. In
MacFarlane’s more recent (2014) defense of a truth-relativist
semantics for “knows”, the context of assessment is taken
to fix which alternatives count as relevant. See, however, Carter 2015
for an argument that MacFarlane’s more recent view generates
counterintuitive results in cases of environmental epistemic luck
(e.g., barn façade-style cases) and normative defeaters.
We turn now to two general arguments against New Relativism in all
its forms. The first is an argument from assertion, the
second an argument from simplicity.
Two assertion-related objections to New Relativism arise from work
by Gareth Evans (1985) and Robert Stalnaker (1978), respectively.
Greenough (2010: 2) concisely captures Evans’s challenge to
truth-relativism on assertoric grounds as follows:
The relativist must plausibly take issue with (2) or (3), (or
both).  For an attempt to meet Evans’ challenge, MacFarlane has
defended a way to effectively reject (2) via what Marques has called a
“meet-the-challenge” norm of assertion (cf.
MacFarlane 2003; though see also his 2014: ch. 5; cf., Stanley 2016: 181–2)—according to
which (à la Brandom 1983), in asserting p one
undertakes a commitment to either defending p or giving
up p if the challenge cannot be met satisfactorily (see
Kölbel (2004: 308) for some other discussions of this
objection).
A related assertion-based challenge to truth-relativism emerges by
appeal to Stalnaker’s (1978) belief transfer model of
assertion (cf. 2011). The idea here is to appeal to a
plausible view of the purpose of assertion—to “transfer
beliefs from assertor to members of her audience” (Egan 2007:
15) and then to object that what is asserted, according to the
truth-relativist, cannot play this characteristic role; specifically,
this will be because, for the truth-relativist, the asserted contents
are liable to be true relative to the speaker but false relative to
the audience. For instance, Sam hardly (on the
truth-relativist’s program) seems to
“transfer” to Dean his belief Apples are
tasty (which is true) by asserting this to Dean, when what Dean
comes to believe Apples are tasty is something (on the
assumption that Dean doesn’t like apples) that will be
false. Thus, and more generally, it’s not clear what, exactly,
could be said to be transferred and a fortiori
asserted. See Egan (2007) and Dinges (2017) for attempts to reconcile truth-relativism
(about epistemic modals) with Stalnaker’s belief-transfer model
of assertion.
Cappelen and Hawthorne (2009) assess the merits of New Relativism
as it stands to challenge what they take to be the received view of
the objects of thought and talk, “Simplicity”, the core
tenets of which are:
Cappelen and Hawthorne understand New Relativism (what they call
analytic relativism) as a direct challenge to (T1) and that,
if this challenge were successful, it would consequently bring down
the more general picture they call “simplicity” (cf.,
Ferrari & Wright 2017). Accordingly, Cappelen and
Hawthorne’s central objective is to show that
truth-relativist’s arguments aimed at undermining (T1) are
ultimately unsuccessful; more specifically, their broad strategy is to
insist that the arguments adduced in favor of
truth-relativism—when thoroughly understood—constitute a
presumptive case for contextualism (in the domains where
relativism was defended, and in particular, in the domain of
predicates of personal taste).
Relativism comes in a plethora of forms that are themselves
grounded in disparate philosophical motivations. There is no such
thing as Relativism simpliciter, and no single argument that would
establish or refute every relativistic position that has been
proposed. Despite this diversity, however, there are commonalities and
family resemblances that justify the use of the label
“relativism” for the various views we have discussed.
Relativism remains a hotly disputed topic still surviving various
attempts to eliminate it from philosophical discourse. What is most
surprising, however, is the recent popularity of some versions of the
doctrine in at least some circles of analytic philosophy.