Reports of religious experiences reveal a variety of different
kinds. Perhaps most are visual or auditory presentations (visions and
auditions), but not through the physical eyes or ears. Subjects report
“seeing” or “hearing,” but quickly disavow any
claim to seeing or hearing with bodily sense organs. Such experiences
are easy to dismiss as hallucinations, but the subjects of the
experience frequently claim that though it is entirely internal, like a
hallucination or imagination, it is nevertheless a veridical
experience, through some spiritual analog of the eye or ear (James 1902
and Alston 1991 cite many examples). In other cases, the language of
“seeing” is used in its extended sense of realization, as
when a yogi is said to “see” his or her identity with
Brahman; Buddhists speak of “seeing things as they are” as
one of the hallmarks of true enlightenment, where this means grasping
or realizing the emptiness of things, but not in a purely intellectual
way. Another type is the religious experience that comes through
sensory experiences of ordinary objects, but seems to carry with it
extra information about some supramundane reality. Examples include
experiencing God in nature, in the starry sky, or a flower, or the
like. A second person standing nearby would see exactly the same sky or
flower, but would not necessarily have the further religious content to
his or her experience. There are also cases in which the religious
experience just is an ordinary perception, but the physical object is
itself the object of religious significance. Moses’s experience
of the burning bush, or the Buddha’s disciples watching him
levitate, are examples of this type. A second person standing nearby
would see exactly the same phenomenon. Witnesses to miracles are having
that kind of religious experience, whether they understand it that way
or not. A fourth type of religious experience is harder to describe:
it can’t be characterized accurately in sensory language, even
analogically, yet the subject of the experience insists that the
experience is a real, direct awareness of some religiously significant
reality external to the subject. These kinds of experiences are usually
described as “ineffable.” Depending on one’s
purposes, other ways of dividing up religious experiences will suggest
themselves. For example, William James (1902) divides experiences into
“healthy-minded” and “sick-minded,” according
to the personality of the subject, which colors the content of the
experience itself. Keith Yandell (1993, 25–32) divided them into five
categories, according to the content of the experiences: monotheistic,
nirvanic (enlightenment experiences associated with Buddhism), kevalic
(enlightenment experiences associated with Jainism), moksha
(experiences of release from karma, associated with Hinduism), and
nature experiences. Differences of object certainly make differences in
content, and so make differences in what can be said about the
experiences. See section four for further discussion of this
issue.
Many have thought that there is some special problem with religious
language, that it can’t be meaningful in the same way that
ordinary language is. The Logical Positivists claimed that
language is meaningful only insofar as it is moored in our experiences
of the physical world. Since we can’t account for religious
language by linking it to experiences of the physical world, such
language is meaningless. Even though religious claims look in
every way like ordinary assertions about the world, their lack of
empirical consequences makes them meaningless. The principle of
verification went through many formulations as it faced
criticism. But if it is understood as a claim about meaning in
ordinary language, it seems to be self-undermining, since there is no
empirical way to verify it. Eventually, that approach to language
fell out of favor, but some still use a modified, weaker version to
criticize religious language. For example, Antony Flew (Flew and
MacIntyre, 1955) relies on a principle to the effect that if a claim is
not falsifiable, it is somehow illegitimate. Martin (1990) and Nielsen
(1985) invoke a principle that combines verifiability and
falsifiability; to be meaningful, a claim must be one or the other. It
is not clear that even these modifed and weakened versions of the
verification principle entirely escape self-undermining. Even if
they do, they seem to take other kinds of language with them—like
moral language, talk about the future or past, and talk about the
contents of others’ minds — that we might be loath to lose.
Moreover, to deny the meaningfulness of religious-experience claims on
the grounds that it is not moored in experience begs the question, in
that it assumes that religious experiences are not real
experiences.
Another possibility is to allow that religious claims are
meaningful, but they are not true or false, because they should not be
understood as assertions. Braithwaite (1970), for example,
understands religious claims to be expressions of commitments to sets
of values. On such a view, what appears to be a claim about a
religious experience is not in fact a claim at all. It might be
that some set of mental events, with which the experience itself can be
identified, would be the ground and prompting of the claim, but it
would not properly be what the claim is about.
A second challenge to religious-experience claims comes from
Wittgensteinian accounts of language. Wittgenstein (1978) muses at some
length on the differences between how ordinary language is used, and
how religious language is used. Others (see Phillips 1970, for
example), following Wittgenstein, have tried to give an explanation of
the strangeness of religious language by invoking the idea of a
language-game. Each language-game has its own rules, including its own
procedures for verification. As a result, it is a mistake to treat it
like ordinary language, expecting evidence in the ordinary sense, in
the same way that it would be a mistake to ask for the evidence for a
joke. “I saw God” should not be treated in the same way as
“I saw Elvis.” Some even go so far as to say the religious
language-game is isolated from other practices, such that it would be a
mistake to derive any claims about history, geography, or cosmology
from them, never mind demand the same kind of evidence for them. On
this view, religious experiences should not be treated as comparable to
sense experiences, but that does not entail that they are not
important, nor that they are not in some sense veridical, in that they
could still be avenues for important insights about reality. Such
a view can be attributed to D. Z. Phillips (1970).
While this may account for some of the unusual aspects of religious
language, it certainly does not capture what many religious people
think about the claims they make. As creationism illustrates, many
religious folk think it is perfectly permissible to draw empirical
conclusions from religious doctrine. Hindus and Buddhists for many
centuries thought there was a literal Mount Meru in the middle of the
(flat, disc-shaped) world. It would be very odd if “The
Buddha attained enlightenment under the bo tree” had to be given
a very different treatment from “The Buddha ate rice under the bo
tree” because the first is a religious claim and the second is an
ordinary empirical claim. There are certainly entailment relations
between religious and non-religious claims, too: “Jesus died for
my sins” straightforwardly entails “Jesus died.”
Since the subjects of religious experiences tend to take them to be
real experiences of some external reality, we may ask what reason there
is to think they are right. That is to say, do religious experiences
amount to good reasons for religious belief? One answer to that
question is what is often called the Argument from Religious
Experience: Religious experiences are in all relevant respects like
sensory experiences; sensory experiences are excellent grounds for
beliefs about the physical world; so religious experiences are
excellent grounds for religious beliefs. This argument, or one very
like it, can be found in Swinburne (1979), Alston (1991), Plantinga
(1981, 2000), and others. Critics of this approach generally find ways
in which religious experiences are different from sensory experiences,
and argue that those differences are enough to undermine the evidential
value of the experiences. Swinburne (1979) invokes what he calls
the “Principle of Credulity,” according to which one is
justified in believing that what seems to one to be present actually is
present, unless some appropriate defeater is operative. He then
discusses a variety of circumstances that would be defeaters in the
ordinary sensory case, and argues that those defeaters do not obtain,
or not always, in the case of religious experience. To reject his
argument, one would have to show that religious experience is unlike
sensory experience in that in the religious case, one or more of the
defeaters always obtains. Anyone who accepts the principle has
excellent reason to accept the deliverances of religious experience,
unless he or she believes that defeaters always, or almost always,
obtain.
Plantinga offers a different kind of argument. According to
Cartesian-style foundationalism, in order to count as justified, a
belief must either be grounded in other justified beliefs, or derive 
its justification from some special status, like
infallibility, incorrigibility, or indubitability. There is a parallel
view about knowledge. Plantinga (1981) argued that such a
foundationalism is inconsistent with holding one’s own
ordinary beliefs about the world to be justified (or knowledge),
because our ordinary beliefs derived from sense-experience aren’t
derived from anything infallible, indubitable, or incorrigible. In
fact, we typically treat them as foundational, in need of no further
justification. If we hold sensory beliefs to be properly basic, then we
have to hold similarly formed religious beliefs, formed on experiences
of God manifesting himself to a believer (Plantinga calls them
‘M-beliefs’), as properly basic. He proposed that human
beings have a faculty—what John Calvin called the
‘sensus divinitatis’—that allows them to be
aware of God’s actions or dispositions with respect to them. If
beliefs formed by sense-experience can be properly basic, then beliefs
formed by this faculty cannot, in any principled way, be denied that
same status. His developed theory of warrant (2000) implies that, if
the beliefs are true, then they are warranted. One cannot attack claims
of religious experience without first addressing the question as to
whether the religious claims are true. He admits that, since there are
people in other religious traditions who have based beliefs about
religious matters on similar purported manifestations,
they may be able to make the same argument about their own religious
experiences.
Alston develops a general theory of doxastic practices
(constellations of belief-forming mechanisms, together with
characteristic background assumptions and sets of defeaters), gives an
account of what it is to rationally engage in such a practice, and then
argues that at least the practice of forming beliefs on the basis of
Christian religious experiences fulfills those requirements. If
we think of the broad doxastic practices we currently employ, we see
that some of them can be justified by the use of other practices.
The practice of science, for example, reduces mostly to the
practices of sense-perception, deductive reasoning, and inductive
reasoning (memory and testimony also make contributions, of
course). The justificatory status the practice gives to its product
beliefs derives from those more basic practices.  Most, however,
cannot be so reduced. How are they justified, then? It seems that they
cannot be justified non-circularly, that is, without the use of
premises derived from the practices themselves. Our only justification
for continuing to trust these practices is that they are firmly
established, interwoven with other practices and projects of ours, and
have “stood the test of time” by producing mostly
consistent sets of beliefs. They produce a sufficiently consistent set
of beliefs if they don’t produce massive, unavoidable
contradictions on central matters, either internally, or with the
outputs of other equally well-established practices. If that’s
all there is to be said about our ordinary practices, then we ought to
extend the same status to other practices that have the same features.
He then argues that the Christian practice of belief-formation on the
basis of religious experience does have those features. Like
Plantinga, he admits that such an argument might be equally available
to other religious practices; it all depends on whether the practice
in question generates massive and unavoidable contradictions, on
central matters, either internally, or with other equally
well-established practices. To undermine this argument, one would have
to show either that Alston’s criteria for rationality of a
practice are too permissive, or that religious practices never escape
massive contradictions.
Both Plantinga’s and Alston’s defense of the epistemic
value of religious experiences turn crucially on some degree of
similarity with sense-experience. But they are not simple
arguments from analogy; not just any similarities will do to make the
positive argument, and not just any dissimilarities will do to defeat
the argument. The similarities or dissimilarities need to be
epistemologically relevant. It is not enough, for example, to
show that religious experiences do not typically allow for independent
public verification, unless one wants to give up on other perfectly
respectable practices, like rational intuition, that also lack
that feature.
 The two most important defeaters on the table for claims of the
epistemic authority of religious experience are the fact of religious
diversity, and the availability of naturalistic explanations for
religious experiences. Religious diversity is a prima facie defeater
for the veridicality of religious experiences in the same way that
wildly conflicting eyewitness reports undermine each other.  If the
reports are at all similar, then it may be reasonable to conclude that
there is some truth to the testimony, at least in broad outline. A
version of this objection is the argument from divine hiddenness
(cf. Lovering 2013). If God exists, and shows himself to some people
in religious experiences, then the fact that he doesn’t do so
for more people, more widely distributed, requires some
explanation. But if two eyewitness reports disagree on the most basic
facts about what happened, then it seems that neither gives you good
grounds for any beliefs about what happened. It certainly seems that
the contents of religious-experience reports are radically different
from one another. Some subjects of religious experiences report
experience of nothingness as the ultimate reality, some a vast
impersonal consciousness in which we all participate, some an
infinitely perfect, personal creator. To maintain that one’s own
religious experiences are veridical, one would have to a) find some
common core to all these experiences, such that in spite of
differences of detail, they could reasonably be construed as
experiences of the same reality, or b) insist that one’s own
experiences are veridical, and that therefore those of other
traditions are not veridical. The first is difficult to manage, in the
face of the manifest differences across religions. Nevertheless, John
Hick (1989) develops a view of that kind, making use of a Kantian
two-worlds epistemology. The idea is that the object of these
experiences, in itself, is one and the same reality, but it is
experienced phenomenally by different people differently. Thus, is
possible to see how one and the same object can be experienced in ways
that are completely incompatible with one another. This approach is
only as plausible as the Kantian framework itself is. Jerome Gellman
(2001) proposes a similar idea, without the Kantian baggage. Solutions
like these leave the problem untouched: If the different practices
produce experiences the contents of which are inconsistent with one
another, one of the practices must be unreliable. Alston (1991) and
Plantinga (2000) develop the second kind of answer. The general
strategy is to argue that, from within a tradition, a person acquires
epistemic resources not available to those outside the tradition, just
as travelling to the heart of a jungle allows one to see things that
those who have not made the journey can’t see. As a result, even
if people in other traditions can make the same argument, it is still
reasonable to say that some are right and the others are wrong. The
things that justify my beliefs still justify them, even if you have
comparable resources justifying a contrary view.
 Naturalistic explanations for religious experiences are thought to
undermine their epistemic value because, if the naturalistic
explanation is sufficient to explain the experience, we have no
grounds for positing anything beyond that naturalistic cause. Freud
(1927) and Marx (1876/1977) are frequently held up as offering such
explanations. Freud claims that religious experiences can be
adequately explained by psychological mechanisms having their root in
early childhood experience and psychodynamic tensions. Marx similarly
attributes religious belief in general to materialistic economic
forces. Both claim that, since the hidden psychological or economic
explanations are sufficient to explain the origins of religious
belief, there is no need to suppose, in addition, that the beliefs are
true. Freud’s theory of religion has few adherents, even among
the psychoanalytically inclined, and Marx’s view likewise has
all but been abandoned, but that is not to say that something in the
neighborhood might not be true. More recently, neurological
explanations of religious experience have been put forward as reasons
to deny the veridicality of the experiences. Events in the brain that
occur during meditative states and other religious experiences are
very similar to events that happen during certain kinds of seizures,
or with certain kinds of mental disorders, and can also be induced
with drugs. Therefore, it is argued, there is nothing more to
religious experiences than what happens in seizures, mental disorders,
or drug experiences. Some who are studying the neurological basis of
religious experience do not infer that they are not veridical (see,
e.g., d’Aquili and Newberg 1999), but many do. Guthrie (1995),
for example, argues that religion has its origin in our tendency to
anthropomorphize phenomena in our vicinity, seeing agency where there
is none.
There are general problems with all kinds of naturalistic
explanations as defeaters. First of all, as Gellman (2001) points
out, most such explanations (like the psychoanalytic and
socio-political ones) are put forward as hypotheses, not as established
facts. The proponent assumes that the experiences are not
veridical, then casts around for an explanation. This is not true
of the neurological explanations, but they face another kind of
weakness noted by Ellwood (1999): every experience, whatever
its source, is accompanied by a corresponding neurological state.
To argue that the experience is illusory because there is a
corresponding brain state is fallacious. The same reasoning would
lead us to conclude that sensory experiences are illusory, since in
each sensory experience, there is some corresponding neurological state
that is just like the state that occurs in the corresponding
hallucination. The proponent of the naturalistic explanation as a
defeater owes us some reason to believe that his or her argument is not
just another skeptical argument from the veil of perception.
One further epistemological worry accompanies religious
experience. James claimed that, while mystical experiences proved
authoritative grounds for belief in the person experiencing them, they
cannot give grounds for a person to whom the experience is
reported. In other words, my experience is evidence for me, but
not for you. This claim can be understood in a variety of ways,
depending on the kind of normativity that attaches to the purported
evidential relation. Some (see Oakes 1976, for example) have
claimed that religious experiences epistemically can necessitate
belief; that is, anyone who has the experience and doesn’t form
the corresponding belief is making an epistemic mistake, much like a
person who, in normal conditions, refuses to believe his or her
eyes. More commonly, defenders of the epistemic value of
religious experience claim that the experiences make it epistemically
permissible to form the belief, but you may also be justified in not
forming the belief. The testimony of other people about what they
have experienced is much the same. In some cases, a person would
be unjustified in rejecting the testimony of others, and in other
cases, one would be justified in accepting it, but need not accept
it. This leaves us with three possibilities, on the assumption
that the subject of the experience is justified in forming a religious
belief on the basis of his or her experience, and that he or she tells
someone else about it: the testimony might provide compelling evidence
for the hearer, such that he or she would be unjustified in rejecting
the claim; the testimony might provide non-compelling justification for
the hearer to accept the claim; or the testimony might fail to provide
any kind of grounds for the hearer to accept the claim. When a
subject makes a claim on the basis of an ordinary experience, it might
fall into any one of these three categories, depending on the
claim’s content and the epistemic situation of the hearer.
The most natural thing to say about religious experience claims is that
they work the same way (on the assumption that they give the subject of
the experience, who is making the claim, any justification for his or
her beliefs). James, and some others after him, claim that testimony
about religious experiences cannot fall under either of the first two
categories. If that’s true, it must be because of something
special about the nature of the experiences. If we assume that the
experiences cannot be shown a priori to be defective somehow,
and that religious language is intelligible—and if we do not make
these assumptions, then the question of religious testimony
doesn’t even arise—then it must be because the evidential
value of the experience is so small that it cannot survive transmission
to another person; that is, it must be that in the ordinary act of
reporting an experience to someone else, there is some defeater at work
that is always stronger than whatever evidential force the experience
itself has. While there are important differences between
ordinary sense-experience and religious experience (clarity of the
experience, amount of information it contains, presence of competing
explanations, and the like), it is not clear whether the differences
are great enough to disqualify religious testimony always and
everywhere.
Just as there are a variety of religions, each with its own claims
about the nature of reality, there are a variety of objects and states
of affairs that the subjects of these experiences claim to be aware
of. Much analytic philosophy of religion has been done in Europe and
the nations descended from Europe, so much of the discussion has been
in terms of God as conceived of in the Jewish, Christian, and Islamic
traditions. In those traditions, the object of religious experiences
is typically God himself, understood as an eternal, omniscient,
omnipotent, free, and perfectly good spirit. God, for reasons of his
own, reveals himself to people, some of them unbidden (like Moses,
Muhammad, and Saint Paul), and some because they have undertaken a
rigorous practice to draw closer to him (like the mystics). To say
that an experience comes unbidden is not to say that nothing the
subject has done has prepared her, or primed her, for the experience
(see Luhrmann 2012); it is only to claim that the subject has not
undertaken any practice aimed at producing a religious experience. In
such experiences, God frequently delivers a message at the same time,
but he need not. He is always identifiable as the same being who
revealed himself to others in the same tradition. Other experiences
can be of angels, demons, saints, heaven, hell, or other religiously
significant objects.
In other traditions, it is not necessarily a personal being who is
the object of the experience, or even a positive being at all. In the
traditions that find their origin in the Indian
subcontinent—chiefly Hinduism, Buddhism, and Jainism—the
object of religious experiences is some basic fact or feature of
reality, rather than some entity separate from the universe. In the
orthodox Hindu traditions, one may certainly have an experience of a
god or some other supernatural entity (like Arjuna’s encounter
with Krishna in the Bhagavad Gita), but a great many important kinds of
experiences are of Brahman, and its identity with the self. In Yoga,
which is based in the Samkhya understanding of the nature of things,
the mystical practice of yoga leads to a calming and stilling of the
mind, which allows the yogi to apprehend directly that he or she is not
identical to, or even causally connected with, the physical body, and
this realization is what liberates him or her from suffering.
In Theravada Buddhism, the goal of meditation is to “see
things as they are,” which is to see them as unsatisfactory,
impermanent, and not-self (Gowans 2003, 191). The meditator, as
he or she makes progress along the way, sheds various delusions and
attachments. The last one to go is the delusion that he or she is
a self. To see this is to see all of reality as made up of
sequences of momentary events, each causally dependent on the ones that
went before. There are no abiding substances, and no eternal
souls. Seeing reality that way extinguishes the fires of craving,
and liberates the meditator from the necessity of rebirth (Laumakis
2008, 158–161). Seeing things as they are involves removing from
the mind all the delusions that stand in the way of such seeing, which
is done by meditation practices that develop the meditator’s
mastery of his or her own mind. The type of meditation that brings this
mastery and allows the meditator to see the true nature of things is
called Vipassana (insight) meditation. It typically involves
some object of meditation, which can be some feature of the meditator
him- or herself, some feature of the physical or mental world, or some
abstraction, which then becomes the focus of the meditator’s
concentration and examination. In the end, it is hoped, the meditator
will see in the object the unsatisfactory and impermanent nature of
things and that there is no self to be found in them. At the moment of
that insight, nirvana is achieved. While the experience of
nirvana is essentially the realization of a kind of insight, it is also
accompanied by other experiential elements, especially of the cessation
of negative mental states. Nirvana is described in the Buddhist canon
as the extinction of the fires of desire. The Theravada tradition
teaches other kinds of meditation that can help the meditator make
progress, but the final goal can’t be achieved without
vipassana meditation.
In the Mahayana Buddhist traditions, this idea of the constantly
fluctuating nature of the universe is extended in various ways.
For some, even those momentary events that make up the flow of the
world are understood to be empty of inherent existence (the idea of
inherent existence is understood differently in different traditions)
to the point that what one sees in the enlightenment experience is the
ultimate emptiness (sunyata) of all things. In the Yogacara
school of Mahayana Buddhism, this is understood as emptiness of
external existence; that is, to see things as they are is to see them
as all mind-dependent. In the Zen school of Mahayana Buddhism, the
enlightenment experience (kensho) reveals that reality
contains no distinctions or dualities. Since concepts and language
always involve distinctions, which always involve duality, the insight
so gained cannot be achieved conceptually or expressed linguistically.
In all Mahayana schools, what brings enlightenment is direct
realization of sunyata as a basic fact about reality.
The situation is somewhat more complicated in the Chinese
traditions. The idea of religious experience seems to be almost
completely absent in the Confucian tradition; the social world looms
large, and the idea of an ultimate reality that needs to be
experienced becomes much less prominent. Before the arrival of
Buddhism in China, Confucianism was primarily a political and ethical
system, with no particular concern with the transcendent (though
people who identified themselves as Confucians frequently engaged in
Chinese folk religious practices). Nevertheless, meditation (and
therefore something that could be called “religious
experience”) did come to play a role in Confucian practice in
the tenth century, as Confucian thought began to be influenced by
Buddhist and Taoist thought. The resulting view is known as
Neo-Confucianism. Neo-Confucianism retains the Mencian doctrine that
human beings are by nature good, but in need of purification.  Since
goodness resides in every person, then examination of oneself should
reveal the nature of goodness, through the experience of the vital
force within (qi). The form of meditation that arises from
this line of thought (“quiet sitting” or “sitting
and forgetting”) are very like Buddhist vipassana meditation,
but there is no value placed on any particular insight gained, though
one can experience the principle of unity (li) behind the
world. Success is measured in gradual moral improvement. The Taoist
ideal is to come to an understanding of the Tao, the fundamental
nature of reality that explains all things in the world, and live
according to it. Knowledge of the Tao is essential to the good life,
but this knowledge cannot be learned from discourses, or transmitted
by teaching. It is only known by experiential acquaintance. The Tao
gives the universe a kind of grain, or flow, going against which
causes human difficulty. The good human life is then one that respects
the flow of Tao, and goes along with it. This is what is meant by
“life in accordance with nature.” By paying attention, a
person can learn what the Tao is, and can experience unity with
it. This picture of reality, along with the picture of how one can
come to know it, heavily influenced the development of Ch’an
Buddhism, which became Zen.