Descartes was born on 31 March 1596 in his maternal grandmother's house in
La Haye, in the Touraine region of France. His father Joachim, a lawyer
who lived in Châtellerault (22 kilometers southwest of La Haye,
across the Creuse River in the Poitou region), was away at the
Parliament of Brittany in Rennes. The town of La Haye, which lies 47
kilometers south of Tours, has subsequently been renamed Descartes. 
When Descartes was thirteen and one-half months old, his mother,
Jeanne Brochard, died in childbirth. The young René spent his
first years with his grandmother, Jeanne Sain Brochard, in La Haye,
together with his older brother Pierre and older sister Jeanne. It is
likely that he then moved to the house of his great uncle, Michel
Ferrand, who, like many of René's male relatives, 
was a lawyer,
and who was Counselor to the King in Châtellerault. When
Descartes met Isaac Beeckman in 1618, Descartes introduced himself as
“Poitevin,” or from Poitou (10:46, 51–4;
Rodis-Lewis 1998, 26; see also 2:642). At this time (and now
and again later on), he signed letters as “du Perron” and
called himself “sieur du Perron” (Lord of Perron), after a
small farm in Poitou he had inherited from his mother's family (Watson
2007, 81, 230). But he did not neglect his birth place in La Haye: in
a letter of 1649, he described himself as “a man who was born in
the gardens of Touraine” (5:349).
In 1606 or 1607, Descartes entered the newly founded Jesuit College
of La Flèche, where he remained until 1614 or 1615. He 
followed the usual course of studies, which included five or six years of grammar
school, including Latin and Greek grammar, classical poets, and Cicero,
followed by three years of philosophy curriculum. By rule, the Jesuit philosophy 
curriculum followed Aristotle; it was divided into
the then-standard topics of logic, morals, physics, and metaphysics.
The Jesuits also included mathematics in the final three years of
study.
Aristotle's philosophy was approached through textbook presentations
and commentaries on Aristotle's works. Aristotle himself frequently
discussed the positions of his ancient predecessors. The most
extensive commentaries also elaborated in some detail on positions
other than Aristotle's. Within this framework, and taking into account
the reading of Cicero, Descartes would have been exposed in school to
the doctrines of the ancient atomists, Plato, and the Stoics, and he
would have heard of the skeptics. Further, important intellectual
events were known at La Flèche, including the discovery of the
moons of Jupiter by Galileo in 1610. Hence, although scholastic
Aristotelian philosophy was dominant in his school years, it was not
the only type of philosophy that he knew.
Famously, Descartes wrote in the autobiographical portion of the
Discourse (1637) that, when he left school, “I found
myself beset by so many doubts and errors that I came to think I had
gained nothing from my attempts to become educated but increasing
recognition of my ignorance” (6:4). And yet in the next
paragraph he allowed that he did not “cease to value the
exercises done in the schools” (6:5), for languages, fables,
oratory, poetry, mathematics, morals, theology, and philosophy all had
their value, as did jurisprudence, medicine, and the other sciences
(including engineering), which serve as professions and which one
might study after attending a school such as La Flèche. He went
on to note the contradiction and disagreement that beset philosophy
and so infected the higher sciences (including medicine)
“insofar as they borrow their principles from philosophy”
(6:8). A year later, in 1638, he advised an inquiring father that
“nowhere on earth is philosophy taught better than at La
Flèche,” where he advised his correspondent to send his
son even if he wanted him subsequently to transcend the learning of
the schools—while also suggesting that the son might study at
Utrecht with Henry le Roy, a disciple of Descartes
(2:378–9). Descartes was, in the
Discourse, suggesting that it was no accident that the
philosophy he learned at La Flèche was uncertain: previous 
philosophy was bound to be uncertain, since he (Descartes) was now offering a
first glimpse of the one true philosophy that he had only recently
discovered. Until it could be promulgated, La Flèche, 
or another good school, would be the best on offer.
His family wanted Descartes to be a lawyer, like his father and many
other relatives. To this end, he went to Poitiers to study law, 
obtaining a degree in 1616. But he never practiced law or entered into
the governmental service such practice would make 
possible (Rodis-Lewis 1998, 18–22). Instead, he
became a gentleman soldier, moving in 1618 to Breda, to support the
Protestant Prince Maurice against the Catholic parts of the Netherlands
(which parts later formed Belgium), which were controlled 
by Spain—a Catholic land,
like France, but at this point an enemy.
While in Breda, Descartes met Isaac Beeckman, a Dutch mathematician
and natural philosopher. Beeckman set various problems for Descartes,
including questions about falling bodies, hydrostatics, and
mathematical problems. Descartes and Beeckman engaged in what they
called “physico-mathematica,” or mathematical
physics (10:52).  Since antiquity, mathematics had been
applied to various physical subject matters, in optics, astronomy,
mechanics (focusing on the lever), and hydrostatics. Beeckman and
Descartes brought to this work a commitment to atoms as the basic
constituents of matter; as had ancient atomists, they attributed not
only size, shape, and motion but also weight to those
atoms (10:68). Descartes opened a section in his notebook
entitled “Democritica” (10:8), in honor of the
ancient atomist Democritus.
At this time, Descartes discovered and conveyed to Beeckman the
fundamental insight that makes analytic geometry possible: the
technique for describing lines of all sorts by using mathematical
equations involving ratios between lengths. Descartes himself did not
foresee replacing geometrical constructions with algebraic formulas;
rather, he viewed geometry as the basic mathematical science and he
considered his algebraic techniques to provide a powerful alternative
to actual compass-and-ruler constructions when the latter became too
intricate. When, in the nineteenth century, algebra and analysis took
precedence over geometry, the rectilinear coordinate system of
algebraic geometry came to be called “Cartesian
coordinates” in honor of Descartes' discovery.
Descartes left Breda in 1619 to join the Catholic army of Maximilian
I (Duke of Bavaria and ally of France). The war concerned the authority
of Ferdinand V, a Catholic, who had been crowned emperor of the Holy
Roman Empire in September. Descartes attended the coronation and was
returning to the army when winter caught him in the small town of Ulm
(or perhaps Neuburg), not far from Munich. On the night of November 10,
1619, Descartes had three dreams that seemed to provide him with a
mission in life. The dreams themselves are interesting and complex (see
Sebba 1987). Descartes took from them the message that he should set
out to reform all knowledge. He decided to begin with philosophy, since
the principles of the other sciences must be derived from it
(6:21–2).
Descartes was familiar with both mainstream philosophy and recent
innovators (those who, among other things, rejected aspects of
Aristotle's philosophy), including reading that he did from 1620
on. In 1640, he recalled (3:185) having read various works in
philosophy around the year 1620, written by well-known commentators on
Aristotle: Francisco Toledo (1532–96), Antonio Rubio
(1548–1615), and the Coimbran commentators (active ca. 1600),
together with an abstract or summary of “the whole of scholastic
philosophy” by Eustace of Saint Paul (1573–1640),
whose Summa Philosophiae was first published in 1609. In
1638, he recalled having read Thomas Campanella's De Sensu
Rerum (1620) about fifteen years before, and not being much
impressed (2:659–60). And in 1630 he was able to rattle off the
names of recent innovators in philosophy (1:158), including Campanella
(1568–1639), Bernardino Telesio (1509–88), Giordano Bruno
(1548–1600), Lucilio Vanini (1585–1619), and Sébastien
Basson (b. ca. 1573).
Descartes' activities during the early 1620s are not
well-documented. He was in France part of the time, visiting Poitou to sell
some inherited properties in 1622 and visiting Paris. He went to Italy
(1623–25). Upon his return he lived in Paris, 
where he was in touch with
mathematicians and natural philosophers in the circle of his long-time
friend and correspondent 
Marin Mersenne (1588–1648). While in Paris,
he worked on some mathematical problems and derived the sine law of
refraction, which facilitated his work on formulating mathematically the shapes
of lenses (later published in the Dioptrics). His major philosophical
effort during these years was on the Rules, 
a work to convey his new method.
In the Rules, he sought to generalize the methods of
mathematics so as to provide a route to clear knowledge of everything
that human beings can know. His methodological advice included a
suggestion that is familiar to every student of elementary geometry:
break your work up into small steps that you can understand completely
and about which you have utter certainty, and check your work often.
But he also had advice for the ambitious seeker of truth, concerning
where to start and how to work up to greater things. Thus, Rule 10
reads: “In order to acquire discernment we should exercise our
intelligence by investigating what others have already discovered, and
methodically survey even the most insignificant products of human
skill, especially those which display order” (10:403). As
examples of “simple” arts “in which order
prevails,” he offered carpet-making and embroidery, and also
number-games and arithmetic games. He went on to discuss the roles of
the “cognitive faculties” in acquiring knowledge, which
include the intellect, imagination, sense perception, and memory.
These faculties allow the seeker of knowledge to combine simple truths
in order to solve more complex problems, such as the solution to
problems in optics (10:394), or the discovery of how a magnet works
(10:427).
By the end of 1628, Descartes had abandoned work on the
Rules, having completed about half of the projected treatise.
In that year he moved to the Dutch Netherlands, and after that he
returned to France infrequently, prior to moving to Sweden in 1649.
While in the Netherlands, he endeavored to keep his address a secret
and he changed locations frequently, in accordance with his motto, 
“who lives well hidden, 
lives well” (1:286*).
Upon arriving in the Netherlands, Descartes undertook work on two sorts
of topics. In Summer, 1629, an impressive set of parhelia, or false
suns, were observed near Rome. When Descartes heard of them, he set out
to find an explanation. (He ultimately hypothesized that a large, solid
ice-ring in the sky acts as a lens to form multiple images of the sun
[6:355].) This work interrupted his investigations on another topic,
which had engaged him for his first nine months in the Netherlands
(1:44)—the topic of metaphysics, that is, the theory of the first
principles of everything that there is. The metaphysical objects of
investigation included the existence and nature of God and the soul
(1:144, 182). However, these metaphysical investigations were not
entirely divorced from problems such as the parhelia, for he claimed
that through his investigations into God and the human self, he had
been able “to discover the foundation of physics” (1:144).
Subsequently, Descartes mentioned a little metaphysical treatise in
Latin—presumably an early version of the
Meditations—that he wrote upon first coming to the
Netherlands (1:184, 350). And we know that Descartes later confided to
Mersenne that the Meditations contained “all the principles of
my physics” (3:233).
While working on the parhelia, Descartes conceived the idea for a
very ambitious treatise. He wrote to Mersenne that he had decided not
to explain “just one phenomenon” (the parhelia), but rather to compose
a treatise in which he explained “all the phenomena of nature, that is
to say, the whole of physics” (1:70). This work eventually became
The World, which was to have had three parts: on light (a
general treatise on visible, or material, nature), on man (a treatise
of physiology), and on the soul. Only the first two survive (and
perhaps only they were ever written), as the Treatise on Light
and Treatise on Man. In these works, which Descartes decided
to suppress upon learning of the condemnation of Galileo (1:270, 305),
he offered a comprehensive vision of the universe as constituted from a
bare form of matter having only length, breadth, and depth
(three-dimensional volume) and carved up into particles with size and
shape, which may be in motion or at rest, and which interact through
laws of motion enforced by God (11:33–4). These works contained a
description of the visible universe as a single physical system in
which all its operations, from the formation of planets and the
transmission of light from the sun, to the physiological processes of
human and nonhuman animal bodies, can be explained through the
mechanism of matter arranged into shapes and structures and
moving according to three laws of motion. In fact,
his explanations in the World and the subsequent Principles
made little use of the three laws of motion in other than a 
qualitative manner. The laws sustained the notion that
matter moves regularly (in a straight line) and that upon impact bits of matter 
alter their motions in regular ways—something that
happens constantly in the full universe (the 
“plenum”) conceived 
by Descartes.
After suppressing his World, Descartes decided to put
forward, anonymously, a limited sample of his new philosophy, in the
Discourse with its attached essays. The Discourse
recounted Descartes' own life journey, 
explaining how he had come to
the position of doubting his previous knowledge and seeking to begin
afresh. It offered some initial results of his metaphysical
investigations, including mind–body dualism. It did not, however,
engage in the deep skepticism of the later Meditations, nor
did it claim to establish, metaphysically, that the essence of matter
is extension. This last conclusion was presented merely as a hypothesis
whose fruitfulness could be tested and proven by way of its results, as
contained in the attached essays on Dioptrics and
Meteorology. The latter subject area comprised
“atmospheric” phenomena. In his Meteorology,
Descartes described his general hypothesis about the nature of matter,
before continuing on to provide accounts of vapors, salt, winds,
clouds, snow, rain, hail, lightning, the rainbow, coronas, and
parhelia.
Descartes wrote in the Meteorology that
he was working from the following “supposition” or
hypothesis: “that the water, earth, air, and all other such
bodies that surround us are composed of many small parts of various
shapes and sizes, which are never so properly disposed nor so exactly
joined together that there do not remain many intervals around them;
and that these intervals are not empty but are filled with that
extremely subtle matter through the mediation of which, I have said
above, the action of light is communicated” (6:233). He
presented a corpuscularian basis for his physics, which denied the
atoms-and-void theory of ancient atomism and affirmed that all bodies
are composed from one type of matter, which is infinitely divisible
(6:239). In the World, he had presented his non-atomistic
corpuscularism, but without denying void space outright and without
affirming infinite divisibility (11:12–20).
In the Meteorology, he also proclaimed that his natural
philosophy had no need for the “substantial forms” and
“real qualities” that other philosophers “imagine to
be in bodies” (6:239). He had taken the same position in
the World, where he said that in conceiving his new
“world” (i.e., his conception of the universe), “I
do not use the qualities called heat, cold, moistness, and dryness, as
the Philosophers do” (11:25). Indeed, Descartes claimed that he
could explain these qualities themselves through matter in motion
(11:26), a claim that he repeated in the Meteorology
(6:235–6). In effect, he was denying the then-dominant
scholastic Aristotelian ontology, which explained all natural bodies
as comprised of a “prime matter” informed by a
“substantial form,” and which explained qualities such as
hot and cold as really inhering in bodies in a way that is
“similar” to the qualities of hot and cold as we
experience them tactually.
Unlike Descartes' purely extended matter, which can exist on its own
having only size and shape, many scholastic Aristotelians held that
prime matter cannot exist on its own. To form a substance, or
something that can exist by itself, prime matter must be
“informed” by a substantial form (a form that renders
something into a substance). The four Aristotelian elements, earth,
air, fire, and water, had substantial forms that combined the basic
qualities of hot, cold, wet, and dry: earth is cold and dry; air is
hot and wet; fire is hot and dry; and water is cold and wet. These
elements can themselves then serve as “matter” to higher
substantial forms, such as the form of a mineral, or a magnet, or a
living thing. Whether in the case of earth or of a living rabbit, the
“form” of a thing directs its characteristic activity. For
earth, that activity is to approach the center to the universe; water
has the same tendency, but not as strongly. For this reason,
Aristotelians explained, the planet earth has formed at the center,
with water on its surface. A new rabbit is formed when a male rabbit
contributes, through its seed-matter, the “form” of
rabbithood to the seed-matter of the female rabbit. This form then
organizes that matter into the shape of a rabbit, including
organizing and directing the activity of its various organs and
physiological processes. The newborn rabbit's behavior is then guided
by its rabbit-specific “sensitive soul,” which is the name
for the substantial form of the rabbit. Other properties of the
rabbit, such as the whiteness of its fur, are explained by the
“real quality” of white inhering in each strand of
hair.
Although in the World and Meteorology Descartes
avoided outright denial of substantial forms and real qualities, it is
clear that he intended to deny them (1:324; 2:200; 3:420, 500, 648).
Two considerations help explain his tentative language: first, when he
wrote these works, he was not yet prepared to release his metaphysics,
which would support his hypothesis about matter and so rule out
substantial forms (1:563); and, second, he was sensitive to the
prudential value of not directly attacking the scholastic Aristotelian
position (3:298), since it was the accepted position in university
education (3:577) and was strongly supported by orthodox theologians,
both Catholic and Protestant (1:85–6; 3:349).
After publication of the Discourse in 1637, Descartes
received in his correspondence queries and challenges to various of the
doctrines, including his account of the sequence of phenomena during
heart-beat and the circulation of the blood; his avoidance of
substantial forms and real qualities; his argument for a distinction
between mind and body; and his view that natural philosophical
hypotheses could be “proven” 
through the effects that they explain
(6:76). Descartes' correspondence from the 
second half of the 1630s repays close study, among other things for 
his discussions of hypothesis-confirmation in science, his replies to objections
concerning his metaphysics, and his explanation that he had left the
most radical skeptical arguments out of this work, since it was written
in French for a wide audience (1:350, 561).
In 1635, Descartes fathered a daughter named Francine. Her mother
was Descartes' housekeeper, Helena Jans. They lived with 
Descartes part of the time in the latter 1630s, 
and Descartes was arranging for them to join him when he learned
of Francine's untimely death in September 1640.
Descartes subsequently contributed a dowry for Helena's marriage in
1644 (Watson 2007, 188).
In a letter of 13 November 1639, Descartes wrote to Mersenne that he
was “working on a discourse in which I try to clarify what I have
hitherto written” on metaphysics (2:622). This was the
Meditations, and presumably he was revising or recasting the
Latin treatise from 1629. He announced to Mersenne a plan to put the
work before “the twenty or thirty most learned theologians” before it
was published. In the end, he and Mersenne collected seven sets of
objections to the Meditations, which Descartes published
with the work, along with his replies (1641, 1642). Some objections were from
unnamed theologians, passed on by Mersenne; one set came from the
Dutch priest Johannes Caterus; one set was from the Jesuit philosopher Pierre Bourdin;
others were from Mersenne himself, from the philosophers Pierre Gassendi
and Thomas Hobbes, and from the Catholic philosopher-theologian Antoine Arnauld.
As previously mentioned, Descartes considered the
Meditations to contain the principles of his physics. But
there is no Meditation labeled “principles of physics.” The principles
in question, which are spread through the work, concern the nature of
matter (that its essence is extension), the activity of God in creating
and conserving the world, the nature of mind (that it is an unextended,
thinking substance), mind–body union and interaction, and the
ontology of sensory qualities. (Descartes and his followers included topics
concerning the nature of the mind and mind–body 
interaction within physics or
natural philosophy, on which, see Hatfield 2000.)
Once Descartes had presented his metaphysics, he felt free to
proceed with the publication of his entire physics. However, he needed
first to teach it to speak Latin (3:523), the lingua franca of the
seventeenth century. He hatched a scheme to publish a Latin version of
his physics (the Principles) together with a scholastic
Aristotelian work on physics, so that the comparative advantages would
be manifest. For this purpose, he chose the Summa philosophiae
of Eustace of St. Paul. That part of his plan never came to fruition.
His intent remained the same: he wished to produce a book that could be
adopted in the schools, even Jesuit schools such as 
La Flêche (3:233, 523). Ultimately, his physics was taught 
in the Netherlands, France, England, and parts of Germany. For the Catholic lands, the
teaching of his philosophy was dampened when his works were placed on the Index of
Prohibited Books in 1663, although his followers in France, such as
Jacques Rohault (1618–72) and
Pierre Regis (1632–1707),
continued to promote Descartes' natural philosophy.
The Principles appeared in Latin in 1644, with a French
translation following in 1647. Descartes added to the French
translation an “Author's 
Letter” to serve as a preface. In the letter
he explained important elements of his attitude toward philosophy,
including the view that in matters philosophical one must reason
through the arguments and evaluate them for one's self (9B:3). He also
presented an image of the relations among the various parts of
philosophy, in the form of a tree:
The extant Principles offer metaphysics in Part I; the general
principles of physics, in the form of his matter theory and laws of
motion, are presented in Part II, as following from the metaphysics;
Part III concerns astronomical phenomena; and Part IV covers the
formation of the earth and seeks to explain the properties of minerals,
metals, magnets, fire, and the like, to which are appended discussions
of how the senses operate and a final discussion of methodological
issues in natural philosophy. His intent had been also to explain in depth the
origins of plants and animals, human physiology, mind–body union
and interaction, and the function of the senses. In the end, he had to
abandon the discussion of plants and animals (Princ. IV.188),
but he included some discussion of mind–body union in his 
abbreviated account of the senses.
From early in his correspondence with Mersenne, Descartes showed a
concern to avoid becoming embroiled in theological controversy or
earning the enmity of church authorities (1:85–6, 150, 271). 
Nonetheless, he was drawn into theological controversy with Calvinist
theologians in the Netherlands. In the latter 1630s, 
Henry le Roy (1598–1679), or Regius, 
a professor of medicine in Utrecht, taught Descartes' system of
natural philosophy. Already by 1640, Gisbert Voetius (1589–1676), 
a theologian at
Utrecht, expressed his displeasure over this to Mersenne (3:230).
Controversy brewed, at first between Regius and Voetius, with Descartes
advising the former. Voetius, who was rector of the University,
convinced the faculty senate to condemn Descartes' philosophy in 1642.
He and his colleagues published two works (in 1642 and 1643) attacking
Descartes' philosophy, to which Descartes himself responded by
publishing a Letter to Voetius (1643). The controversy
simmered through the mid-1640s. Descartes eventually had a falling out
with Regius, who published a broadsheet or manifesto that
deviated from Descartes' theory of the 
human mind. Descartes replied
with his Comments on a Certain Broadsheet (1648).
In the mid-1640s, Descartes continued work on his physiological
system, which he had pursued throughout the 1630s. He allowed his
Treatise on Man to be copied (4:566–7) and 
he began a new work (5:112),
Description of the Human Body, in which he sought to explain
the embryonic development of animal bodies. During this period he
corresponded with Princess Elisabeth, at first on topics in metaphysics
stemming from her reading of the Meditations and then on the
passions and emotions. Eventually, he wrote the Passions of the
Soul (1649), which gave the most extensive account of his behavioral
physiology to be published in his lifetime and which contained a
comprehensive and original theory of the passions and emotions.
Portions of this work constitute what we have of Descartes' moral
theory.
In 1649, Descartes accepted the invitation of Queen Christina of
Sweden to join her court. At the Queen's request, he composed the
Statutes of the Swedish Royal Academy. On the day he delivered them to
her, he became ill. He never recovered. He died on 11 February
1650.
In general, it is rare for a philosopher's positions and arguments to
remain the same across an entire life. This means that, in reading
philosophers' works and reconstructing their arguments, 
one must pay
attention to the place of each work in the philosophical development of
the author in question. Readers of the philosophical works of Immanuel
Kant are aware of the basic distinction between his critical and
precritical periods. Readers of the works of G. W. Leibniz are also
aware of his philosophical development, although in his case there is
less agreement on how to place his writings into a developmental
scheme.
Scholars have proposed various schemes for dividing Descartes' life
into periods. This entry adopts a relatively simple division between
the era when mathematics provided the model for his method and the
period after the “metaphysical turn” of 1629, when his
conception of the role of the intellect in acquiring knowledge changed
and when he came to conceive the truth of his special or particular
hypotheses in natural philosophy as less than certain and so as
subject to the scheme of confirmation through consequences mentioned
above. In effect, he adopted a hypothetico-deductive scheme of
confirmation, but with this difference: the range of hypotheses was
limited by his metaphysical conclusions concerning the essence of mind
and matter, their union, and the role of God in creating and
conserving the universe. Consequently, some hypotheses, such as the
“substantial forms” of scholastics, were ruled
out. Argumentative differences among the World,
Discourse, and Meditations and Principles
may then be seen as arising from the fact that in the 1630s Descartes
had not yet presented his metaphysics and so adopted an empirical mode
of justification, whereas after 1641 he could appeal to his published
metaphysics in seeking to secure the general framework of his
physics.
Other scholars see things differently. John Schuster (1980) finds
that the epistemology of the Rules lasted into the 1630s and
was superseded (unhappily, in his view) only by the metaphysical quest
for certainty of the Meditations. Daniel Garber (1992, 48)
also holds that Descartes abandoned his early method after the
Discourse. Machamer and McGuire (2006) believe that Descartes
expected natural philosophy to meet the standard of absolute certainty
through the time of the Meditations, and that he in effect
admitted defeat on that score in the final articles of the
Principles, adopting a lower standard of certainty for his
particular hypotheses (such as the explanation of magnetism by
corkscrew-shaped particles). They see the Principles as
marking Descartes' “epistemic 
turn” away from the methodological stance
of realism found in the Rules, Discourse, and
Meditations.
These contrasting views of Descartes' intellectual development suggest
different relations between his metaphysics and physics.  Schuster
(1980) treats Descartes' metaphysical arguments as a kind of
afterthought. Machamer and McGuire (2006) see Descartes' alleged
“epistemic turn” and his retreat from realism as a
response to philosophical criticism in 1641; they find more continuity
between Descartes' Rules and his writings up to 1641 than does
Garber, or than is presented herein. One way of understanding this earlier
discontinuity is to grant that Descartes was working on physical problems first, 
while emphasizing that his metaphysical insights of 1628–9
allowed him to achieve a general conception of matter as having only
“geometrical” properties, viz., size, shape, position, and motion.
There are also differences among interpreters concerning the
relative priority in Descartes' philosophical endeavors of epistemology
or the theory of knowledge as opposed to metaphysics or first
philosophy. In the account of Descartes' development from Sec. 1,
he was interested in epistemological and methodological questions
first, and these interests came to a head in the Rules.
Thereafter, his aim was to establish a new natural philosophy based on
a new metaphysics. In the extant works from the 1630s, the
World and Discourse plus essays, he argued for the
general principles of his physics, including his conception of matter,
on empirical grounds. He argued from explanatory scope and theoretical
parsimony. As regards parsimony or simplicity, he pointed out that his
reconceived matter had only a few basic properties (especially size,
shape, position, and motion), from which he would construct his explanations. He
claimed great explanatory scope by contending that his explanations
could extend to all natural phenomena, celestial and terrestrial,
inorganic and organic. But throughout the 1630s, Descartes claimed that
he also was in possession of a metaphysics that could justify the first
principles of his physics, which he finally presented in 
the Meditations and Principles.
Some scholars emphasize the epistemological aspects of Descartes'
work, starting with the Rules and continuing through to the
Principles. Accordingly, the main change in Descartes'
intellectual development is the introduction of skeptical arguments in
the Discourse and Meditations. Many interpreters,
represented prominently in the latter twentieth century by Richard
Popkin (1979), believe that Descartes took the skeptical threat to
knowledge quite seriously and sought to overcome it in the
Meditations. By contrast, in the main interpretive thread 
followed here, skeptical arguments were a cognitive tool that Descartes
used in order to guide the reader of the Meditations into the
right cognitive frame of mind for grasping the first truths of 
metaphysics. Achieving stable knowledge of such truths would have as
a side-effect security against skeptical challenge.
The reader who is curious about these issues should read the
relevant works of Descartes, together with his correspondence from the
latter half of the 1630s and early 1640s.
Descartes first presented his metaphysics in the Meditations
and then reformulated it in textbook-format in the Principles.
His metaphysics sought to answer these philosophical questions: How
does the human mind acquire knowledge? What is the mark of truth? What
is the actual nature of reality? How are our experiences related to our
bodies and brains? Is there a benevolent God, and if so, how can we
reconcile his existence with the facts of illness, error, and immoral
actions?
Descartes had no doubt that human beings know some things and are
capable of discovering others, including (at least since his
metaphysical insights of 1629) fundamental truths about the basic
structure of reality. Yet he also believed that the philosophical
methods taught in the schools of his time and used by most of his
contemporaries were deeply flawed. He believed that the doctrines of
scholastic Aristotelian philosophy contained a basic error about the
manner in which fundamental truths, such as the truths of metaphysics,
are to be gained. He expressed this mistaken view in the First
Meditation, by saying (not in his own voice, but in a voice for the
reader): “Whatever I have up till now accepted as most true I
have acquired either from the senses or through the senses”
(7:18). He then went on to challenge the veridicality of the senses
with the skeptical arguments of First Meditation, including arguments
from previous errors, the dream argument, and the argument from a
deceptive God or an evil deceiver.
In the Aristotelian scheme against which Descartes is moving, all
knowledge arises from the senses, in accordance with the slogan “There
is nothing in the intellect that was not previously in the senses”
(7:75, 267). Similarly, orthodox scholastic Aristotelians agreed that
there is “no thought without a phantasm,” or an image. Descartes
explained these convictions as the results of childhood prejudice (7:2,
17, 69, 107; Princ. I.71–3). As children, we are
naturally led by our senses in seeking benefits and avoiding bodily
harms. As a result, when we grow into adults we are “immersed” in the
body and the senses, and so we accept the philosophical view that the
senses are the basis for learning about the nature of the reality
(7:38, 75, 82–3).
Descartes denied that the senses reveal the natures of substances.  He
held that in fact the human intellect is able to perceive the nature
of reality through a purely intellectual perception. This means that,
in order to procure the fundamental truths of metaphysics, we must
“withdraw the mind from the senses” (7:4, 12, 14) and turn
toward our innate ideas of the essences of things, including the
essences of mind, matter, and an infinite being (God). Descartes
constructed the Meditations so as to secure this process of
withdrawal from the senses in Meditation I. Meditation II brings the
discovery of an initial truth, in the cogito (7:25), which is
elsewhere summarized as the argument “cogito, ergo sum,”
or “I think, therefore I am” (7:140). Descartes observes
that the cogito result is known only from the fact that it is
“clearly and distinctly” perceived by the intellect
(7:35). Hence, he sets up clear and distinct intellectual perception,
independent of the senses, as the mark of truth (7:35, 62, 73).
Descartes then unfolds the results of clear and distinct perception
in Meditations III–VI, and he repeats and extends these results
in Principles I–II. We consider these results in Secs.
3.3–3.5. For now, let us examine what Descartes thought about the
senses as a source of knowledge that was different from the pure
intellect.
Descartes famously calls the senses into doubt in the First
Meditation, and he affirms in Meditation Six that the senses are not
meant to provide knowledge of the “essential nature” of external
objects (7:83). In that way, his position in the Meditations
differs from that in the Rules, for in that work he allowed
that some “simple natures” pertaining to corporeal things can and
should be considered through the images of the senses (10:383, 417). In
the Meditations, he held that the essence of matter could be
apprehended by innate ideas, independently of any sensory image
(7:64–5, 72–3). To that extent, his later position agrees
with the Platonic tradition in philosophy, which denigrated sensory
knowledge and held that the things known by the intellect have a higher
reality than the objects of the senses. Descartes, however, was no
Platonist, a point to which we will return. His attitude toward the
senses in his mature period was not one of total disparagement.
Descartes assigned two roles to the senses in the acquisition of
human knowledge. First, he acknowledged that the senses are usually
adequate for detecting benefits and harms for the body. Indeed, he
considered their natural function to be “to inform the mind of what is
beneficial or harmful for the composite of which the mind is a part”
(7:83), that is, for the composite of mind and body. In this
connection, he was agreeing with the conception of the function of the
senses that was widely shared in the traditional literature in natural
philosophy, including the Aristotelian literature, as well as in the
medical literature on the natural functions of the senses.
Second, he recognized that the senses have an essential role to play
in natural philosophy. The older interpretive literature sometimes had
Descartes claiming that he could derive all natural philosophical or
scientific knowledge from the pure intellect, independent of the
senses. But Descartes knew full well that he could not do that. He
distinguished between the general principles of his physics and the
more particular mechanisms that he posited to explain natural
phenomena, such as magnetism or the properties of oil and water. He
claimed to derive the general principles “from certain seeds of truth”
that are innate in the mind (6:64). These include the fundamental
doctrine that the essence of matter is extension (Princ.
II.3–4, IV.203). As to particular phenomena, in general he had to
rely on observations to determine their properties (such as the
properties of the magnet), and he acknowledged that multiple hypotheses
about subvisible mechanisms could be constructed to account for those
phenomena. The natural philosopher must, therefore, test the various
hypotheses by their consequences, and consider empirical virtues such
as simplicity and scope (Disc. VI; Princ.
IV.201–6). Further, Descartes knew that some problems rely on
measurements that can only be made with the senses, including
determining the size of the sun (7:80) or the refractive indexes of
various materials (Met. VIII).
Although Descartes recognized an important role for the senses in 
natural philosophy, he also limited the role of sense-based knowledge
by comparison with Aristotelian epistemology. According to many
scholastic Aristotelians, all intellectual content arises through a 
process of intellectual abstraction that starts from sensory images as
present in the faculty of imagination. Mathematical
objects are formed by abstraction from such images. Even metaphysics
rests on knowledge derived by abstraction from images. Of course,
in this Aristotelian scheme the intellect plays an important role 
in grasping mathematical objects
or the essences of natural things through considering images. By 
contrast, Descartes affirmed that the truths of mathematics and
metaphysics are grasped by the intellect operating independently
of the senses and without need for assistance from the faculty
of imagination. Descartes designated the exercise of the intellectual 
capacity apart from sense-based images the use of the 
“pure intellect.”
In Descartes' scheme of mental capacities, knowledge does
not arise from the intellect alone. The intellect may present
some content as true, but by itself it does not affirm or deny
that truth. That function belongs to the will. A judgment, and hence
an instance of (at least putative) knowledge, does not arise in
this scheme until the will has affirmed or denied the content
presented by the intellect.
Moreover, not all content deriving from the intellectual faculty 
is “pure.” In
Descartes' scheme, there are only two powers of mind: the
intellect and the will (Med. IV, 
Princ. I.32–4). The 
intellect is the power of perception
or representation. Acts of pure intellect occur without
the need for any accompanying brain processes; these are purely
intellectual perceptions. But there are
other intellectual acts that require the presence of the body:
sense perception, imagination, and corporeal (body-involving) 
memory. These intellectual acts are less clear and distinct
than acts of pure intellect, and may indeed be obscure and
confused (as in the case of color sensations). Nonetheless,
the will may affirm or deny such content. As discussed in
the next subsection, error can arise in these judgments.
In sum, in considering Descartes' answer to how we know, 
we can distinguish classes of knowledge that differ as regards
the degree of certainty one may expect to achieve. Metaphysical 
first principles as known by the
intellect acting alone should attain absolute
certainty. Practical knowledge concerning immediate benefits and harms
is known by the senses. Such knowledge is usually good enough. Objects
of natural science are known by a combination of pure intellect and
sensory observation: the pure intellect tells us what properties bodies
can have, and we use the senses to determine which particular instances of
those properties bodies do
have. For submicroscopic particles, we must reason from observed
effects to potential cause. In these latter cases, our measurements and
our inferences may be subject to error, but we may also hope to arrive
at the truth.
At the beginning of the Third Meditation, 
Descartes declares “I now
seem to be able to lay it down as a general rule that whatever I
perceive very clearly and distinctly is true” (7:35). Clarity and
distinctness of intellectual perception is the mark of truth.
In the fifth set of Objections to the Meditations, Gassendi
suggests that there is difficulty concerning
Gassendi has in effect asked how it is that we should recognize clear
and distinct perceptions. If clarity and distinctness is the mark of
truth, what is the method for recognizing clarity and distinctness?
In reply, Descartes claims that he has already supplied such a
method (7:379). What could he have in mind? It cannot be the simple belief 
that one has attained clarity and distinctness, for Descartes himself
acknowledges that individuals can be wrong in that belief (7:35, 361).
Nonetheless, he does offer a criterion. We have a clear and distinct
perception of something if, when we consider it, we cannot doubt it
(7:145). That is, in the face of genuine clear and distinct perception,
our affirmation of it is so firm that it cannot be shaken,
even by a concerted effort to call the things thus affirmed
into doubt.
As mentioned in 3.1, Descartes held that any act of judgment, such as
the affirmation “I think, therefore I am,” involves both
the intellect and will. The intellect perceives or represents the
content of the judgment; the will affirms or denies that content. In
the face of genuine clarity and distinctness, “a great light in
the intellect” is followed by “a great inclination of the
will” (7:59). The inclination of the will is so strong that it
amounts to compulsion; we cannot help but so affirm.  Descartes thus
makes unshakable conviction the criterion. Can't someone be unshakable
in their conviction merely because they are stubborn? Assuredly
so. But Descartes is talking about a conviction that remains
unshakable in face of serious and well-thought out challenges
(7:22). To be immune from doubt does not mean simply that you do not
doubt a proposition, or even that it resists a momentary attempt to
doubt; the real criterion for truth is that the content of a
proposition is so clearly perceived that the will is drawn to it in
such a way that the will's affirmation cannot be shaken even by the
systematic and sustained doubts of the Meditations. Perhaps
because the process for achieving knowledge of fundamental truths
requires sustained, systematic doubt, Descartes indicates that such
doubt should be undertaken only once in the course of a life (7:18;
3:695).
Even so, problems remain. Having extracted clarity and distinctness 
as the criterion of truth
at the beginning of the Third Meditation, Descartes immediately calls
it into question. He re-introduces an element of the radical doubt from
the First Meditation: that a powerful God might have created him with
“a nature such that I was deceived even in matters which seemed most
evident” (7:36). Descartes therefore launches an investigation of
“whether there is a God, and, if there is, whether he can be a
deceiver” (7:36).
In the course of the Third Meditation, Descartes constructs an
argument for the existence of God that starts from the fact that he has
an idea of an infinite being. The argument is intricate. It invokes the
metaphysical principle that “there must be at least 
as much reality in the efficient and total cause as in the effect 
of that cause” (7:40). This principle is 
put forward as something that is “manifest by the
natural light” (7:40), which 
itself is described as a cognitive power
whose results are indubitable (7:38), like clear and distinct
perception (7:144). Descartes then applies that principle not to the
mere existence of the idea of God as a state of mind, but to the
content of that idea. Descartes characterizes that content as infinite,
and he then argues that a content that represents infinity requires an
infinite being as its cause. He concludes, therefore, that an infinite
being, or God, must exist. He then equates an infinite being with a
perfect being and asks whether a perfect being could be a deceiver. He
concludes: “It is clear enough from this that 
he cannot be a deceiver,
since it is manifest by the natural light that all fraud and deception
depend on some defect” (7:52).
The second and fourth sets of objections drew attention to a
problematic characteristic of this argument. In the words of
Arnauld:
Arnauld here raises the well-known problem of the Cartesian circle,
which has been much discussed by commentators in recent years.
In reply to Arnauld, Descartes claims that he avoided this problem
by distinguishing between present clear and distinct perceptions and
those that are merely remembered (7:246). He is not here challenging
the reliability of memory (Frankfurt 1962). Rather, his
strategy is to suggest that the hypothesis of a deceiving God can only
present itself when we are not clearly and distinctly perceiving the
infinity and perfection of God, because when we are doing that we
cannot help but believe that God is no deceiver. It is as if this very
evident perception is then to be balanced with the uncertain opinion
that God might be a deceiver (7:144). The evident perception wins out
and the doubt is removed.
Descartes explicitly responds to the charge of circularity in the
manner just described. Over the years, scholars have debated whether
this response is adequate. Some scholars have constructed other
responses on Descartes' behalf or have found such responses embedded
in his text at various locations. One type of response appeals to a
distinction between the natural light and clear and distinct
perception, and seeks to vindicate the natural light without appeal to
God (Jacquette 1996). Another response suggests that, in the end,
Descartes was not aiming at metaphysical certainty concerning a
mind-independent world but was merely seeking an internally coherent
set of beliefs (Frankfurt 1965). A related response suggests that
Descartes was after mere psychological certainty (Loeb 1992). The
interested reader can follow up this question by turning to the
literature here cited (as also Carriero 2008, Doney 1987, and
Hatfield 2006).
Building on his claim that clear and distinct perceptions are true,
Descartes seeks to establish various results concerning the nature of
reality, including the existence of a perfect God as well as the
natures of mind and matter (to which we turn in the next subsection).
Here we must ask: What is the human mind that it can perceive the
nature of reality? Descartes has a specific answer to this question:
the human mind comes supplied with innate ideas that allow it to
perceive the main properties of God (infinity and perfection), the
essence of matter, and the essence of mind. For readers 
in Descartes'
day, this claim would naturally raise a further question: assuming
that these innate ideas concern “eternal 
truths” about God, matter, and mind, 
do these truths hold independently of God, or do they instead 
reflect the contents of God's own intellect?
Descartes rejected both alternatives. He denied,
along with many of his contemporaries, that there are eternal
truths independent of the existence of God. But he also denied
that the eternal truths are fixed in God's intellect. Some
Neoplatonist philosophers held that the eternal truths in the human
mind are copies, or ectypes, of the archetypes in the mind of God. Some
Aristotelian philosophers just prior to Descartes, including Francisco
Suárez (1548–1617), held that 
the eternal truths reflect God's own understanding of
his creative power; God's power includes that, 
if he creates a rabbit, it must be an animal. Eternal truths are 
latent in God's creative
power, and he understands this, so that if human beings understand the
eternal truths as eternal, they also do so by understanding the creative
power of God (Hatfield 1993).
Descartes had a different account. He held that the eternal truths are the
free creations of God (1:145, 149, 151; 7:380, 432), originating from him
in a way that does not distinguish among his power, will, and intellect. God 
decides what
the essence of a circle is, or to make 2 + 3 = 5. He might have created
other essences, although we are unable to conceive what they
might have been. Our conceptual capacity is limited to the innate ideas
that God has implanted in us, and these reflect the actual truths that
he created. God creates the eternal truths (concerning logic,
mathematics, the nature of the good, the essences of mind and matter),
and he creates the human mind and provisions it with innate ideas that
correspond to those truths. However, even in this scheme there must
remain some eternal truths that are not created by God: those that 
pertain to the essence of God himself, including his existence
and perfection (see Wells 1982).
Descartes reveals his ontology implicitly in the Meditations,
more formally in the Replies, and in textbook fashion in the
Principles. The main metaphysical results that describe the
nature of reality assert the existence of three substances, each
characterized by an essence. The first and primary substance is God,
whose essence is perfection. In fact, God is the only true substance,
that is, the only being that is capable of existing on its own. The
other two substances, mind and matter, are created by God and can only
exist through his ongoing act of preservation or conservation, called
God's “concurrence” (Princ. I.51).
Descartes' arguments to establish the essences of these substances
appeal directly to his clear and distinct perception of those
essences.  The essence of matter is extension in length, breadth, and
depth. One might speak here of “spatial extension,” but
with this proviso: that Descartes denied the existence of space
separate from matter. Cartesian matter does not fill a distinct
spatial container; rather, spatial extension is constituted by
extended matter (there is no void, or unfilled space). This extended
substance possesses the further “modes” of size, shape,
position, and motion. Modes are properties that exist only as
modifications of the essential (principal) and the general attributes
of a substance. In addition to its essence, extension, matter also has
the general attributes of existence and duration. The individual parts
of matter have durations as particular modes. All the modes of
matter, including size, shape, position, and motion, can exist only as
modifications of extended substance.
The essence of mind is thought. Besides existence and duration, minds have 
the two chief powers or faculties previously mentioned: intellect and will. The
intellectual (or perceiving) power is further divided into the modes of
pure intellect, imagination, and sense perception. Pure intellect
operates independently of the brain or body; imagination and sense
perception depend upon the body for their operation (as does corporeal
memory). The will is also
divided into various modes, including desire, aversion, assertion,
denial, and doubt. These always require some intellectual content
(whether pure, imagined, or sensory) upon which to operate. Perhaps for
that reason, Descartes describes the mind as an “intellectual
substance” (7:78; also, 7:12). It seems he held that 
the mind essentially has a will, but that the intellectual (or perceptive, or
representational) power is more basic, because the will depends on it
in its operation.
What role does consciousness play in Descartes' theory of mind? Many
scholars believe that, for Descartes, consciousness is the defining
property of mind (e.g., Rozemond 2006). There is some support for this
position in the Second Replies. There Descartes defines mind as
“the substance in which thought immediately resides”
(7:161). He says of the term “thought” that it extends to
“everything that is within us in such a way that we are
immediately conscious of it” (7:160*). If mind is thinking
substance and thoughts are essentially conscious, perhaps
consciousness is the essence of thought?
Descartes in fact did hold that all thoughts are, in some way,
conscious (7:226). He did not mean by this that we have reflective
awareness of, and can remember, every thought that we have (5:220). In
the Second Meditation, he describes himself as a thinking thing by
enumerating all the modes of thoughts of which he is conscious:
understanding (or intellection), willing, imagining, and (at this
point, at least seeming to have) sense perceptions (7:28). He thus sets
up consciousness as a mark of thought. But is it the essence? There is
another possibility. If perception (intellection, representation) is
the essence of thought, then all thoughts might be conscious in a basic
way because the character of the intellectual substance is to
represent, and any representation present in an intellectual substance
is thereby conscious. Similarly, any act of will present in an
intellectual substance also is available to consciousness, because it
is of the essence of such a substance to perceive its own states
(11:343). Accordingly, perception or representation is the essence of mind,
and consciousness follows as a result of the mind's being
a representing substance.
All the same, in distinguishing between thoughts possessed of consciousness
and thoughts of which we are reflectively aware, Descartes opened a space
for conscious thoughts that we don't notice or remember. As in his
theory of the senses (Sec. 5), he allows for unnoticed sensations and unnoticed
mental operations upon them.
In the Discourse, Descartes presented the following argument
to establish that mind and body are distinct substances: 
This argument moves from the fact that he can doubt the existence of
the material world, but cannot doubt the existence of himself as a
thinking thing, to the conclusion that his thoughts belong to a
nonspatial substance that is distinct from matter.
The argument is fallacious. It relies
on conceivability based in ignorance. Descartes has not
included anything in the argument to ward off the possibility that he,
as a thinking thing, is in fact a complex material system. He has
merely relied on the fact that he can doubt the existence of matter to
conclude that matter is distinct from mind. This argument is
clearly inconclusive. From the fact that the Joker cannot, at a certain
moment, doubt the existence of Batman (because he is with him), but he
can doubt the existence of Bruce Wayne (who might, for all the Joker
knows, have been killed by the Joker's henchmen), it does not follow
that Bruce Wayne is not Batman. In fact, he is Batman. The Joker is
merely ignorant of that fact.
In the Meditations, Descartes changed the structure of the
argument. In the Second Meditation, he established that he could not
doubt the existence of himself as a thinking thing, but that he could
doubt the existence of matter. However, he explicitly refused to use
this situation to conclude that his mind was distinct from body, on the
grounds that he was still ignorant of his nature (7:27). Then, in the
Sixth Meditation, having established, to his satisfaction, the mark of
truth, he used that mark to frame a positive argument to the effect that
the essence of mind is thought and that a thinking thing is
unextended; and that the essence of matter is extension and that
extended things cannot think (7:78). He based this argument on clear
and distinct intellectual perceptions of the essences of mind and
matter, not on the fact that he could doubt the existence of one or the
other.
This conclusion in the Sixth Meditation asserts the well-known
substance dualism of Descartes. That dualism leads to problems. As
Princess Elisabeth, among others, asked: if mind is
unextended and matter is extended, how do they interact? This problem
vexed not only Descartes, who admitted to Elisabeth that he 
didn't have a good answer (3:694), but it 
also vexed Descartes' followers and other
metaphysicians. It seems that, somehow, states of the mind and the body 
must be brought into relation, because when we decide to pick up a pencil
our arm actually moves, and when light hits our eyes we experience the
visible world. But how do mind and body interact? Some of 
Descartes'
followers adopted an occasionalist position, according to which God
mediates the causal relations between mind and body; mind does not
affect body, and body does not affect mind, but God gives the mind
appropriate sensations at the right moment, and he makes the body move
by putting it into the correct brain states at a moment that
corresponds to the volition to pick up the pencil. Other philosophers
adopted yet other solutions, including the monism of Spinoza and the
pre-established harmony of Leibniz.
In the Meditations and Principles, Descartes did not
focus on the metaphysical question of how mind and body interact.
Rather, he discussed the functional role of mind–body union in
the economy of life. As it happens, our sensations serve us well in
avoiding harms and pursuing benefits. Pain-sensations warn us of
bodily damage. Pleasure leads us to approach things that (usually) are
good for us. Our sense perceptions are reliable enough that we can
distinguish objects that need distinguishing, and we can navigate as
we move about. As Descartes saw it, “God 
or nature” set up these relations for our 
benefit. They are not perfect. Sometimes our senses present things 
differently than they are, and sometimes we make judgments about sensory 
things that extend beyond the appropriate use of the senses.
In discussing the mark of truth, Descartes suggested that the human
intellect is generally reliable because it was created by God. In
discussing the functioning of the senses to preserve or maintain the
body, he explained that God has arranged the rules of mind–body
interaction in such a manner as to produce sensations that generally are
conducive to the good of the body.
Nonetheless, in each case, errors occur. In various circumstances, our
judgments may be false (often, about sensory things), just as, more broadly, human
beings make poor moral choices, even though God has given them a will
that is intrinsically drawn to the good (1:366, 5:159, Princ.
I.42). In addition, our sense perceptions may represent things
as being a certain way, when they are not. Sometimes we
feel pain because a nerve has been damaged somewhere along its length,
and yet there is no tissue damage at the place in which the pain is felt. 
Amputees may feel pain in their fingers when they have no fingers
(Princ. IV.196).
Descartes responded to these problems differently. He explained
cognitive and moral errors as resulting from human freedom. God
provides human beings with a will, and wills are intrinsically free. In
this way, there is no difference in degree in freedom between God and
man. But human beings have finite intellects. And because they are
free, they can choose to judge in cognitive or moral situations for
which they do not have clear and distinct perceptions of the true or
the good. If human beings restricted their acts of will to cases of
clear and distinct perception, they would never err. But the
vicissitudes of life may require judgments in less than optimal
circumstances, or we may decide to judge even though we lack a clear
perception. In either case, we may go wrong.
Matters are different for the errors of sensory representation. The senses
depend on media and sense organs and on nerves that must run from the
exterior of the body into the brain. God sets up the mind–body
relation so that our sensations are good guides for most circumstances.
But the media may be poor (the light may not be good), circumstances
may be unusual (as with the partially submerged stick that appears as
if bent), or the nerves may be damaged (as with the amputee). In these
cases, the reports of the senses are suboptimal. Since God has
set up the system of mind–body union, 
shouldn't God 
be held accountable for the fact that the senses can misrepresent
how things are? Here Descartes does not appeal to our freedom not 
to attend to the senses, for
in fact we must often use the senses in suboptimal cognitive
circumstances when navigating through life. Rather, he points out that God
was working with the finite mechanisms of the human body (7:88), and
he suggests that God did the best that could be done given the type of parts
needed to constitute such a machine (extended parts that might
break or be perturbated in an unusual manner).
In fact, the distinction between these two types of error, cognitive error
and sensory misrepresentation, is not completely clear-cut in Descartes. 
In the case of the amputee, the pain seems to
be in fingers that are not there. That appears to be a clear case of
sensory misrepresentation: the representational content (that the fingers
are damaged) does not match the world. Similarly with the partially
submerged stick. It may look bent. In these cases, even if we use our 
intellects to interpret the illusions or sensory misrepresentations so
as to avoid error by withholding judgment or even by judging correctly (7:438), 
there is a clear sense in which sensory misrepresentation has occurred.
In other cases, however, Descartes describes the senses as providing
material for error, but it remains uncertain whether he assimilates 
such error to what has been labelled cognitive error or to sensory 
misrepresentation. In the Third Meditation, he describes color
sensations and other sensations of so-called “secondary 
qualities” as “materially 
false.” Scholars have found it difficult to 
interpret the notion of material falsity, partly because 
Descartes' discussion of it in the
Third Meditation seems to offer 
two possibilities, and partly because his long discussion of the issue 
in the Fourth Replies, in response to Arnauld's 
Objections, is intricate and seemingly contradictory.
 In Third Meditation, Descartes initially defines material falsity
as something that “occurs in ideas, when they represent
non-things as things” (7:43). He offers as an example the idea
of cold: our senses represent cold as a positive quality of objects,
but Descartes considers the possibility that cold itself is merely the
absence of heat, and so isn't a quality of its own. Accordingly, this
case should be assimilated to sensory misrepresentation: representing
things as they are not (representing cold as a quality when it is the
absence of a quality). Material falsity would be a matter of
misrepresentation.
But Descartes also offers a different gloss on the obscurity of
sensory ideas. He allows that such ideas may be “true” in
the sense of representing something positive in things, but that they
may do so in such a way that “the reality which they represent
is so extremely slight that I cannot even distinguish it from a
non-thing” (7:44).  Accordingly, sensory ideas are not
misrepresentations, they are simply so obscure and confused that we
cannot tell what their representational content might be by
considering their experienced character, such as the phenomenal
character of cold or of color. (Metaphysics and natural philosophy are
needed to tell us what our color sensations obscurely represent:
properties of object-surfaces that reflect light a certain
way—see Sec. 5.) In this case, “material falsity”
would not amount to misrepresentation but to representation so obscure
that it leaves room for mistaken judgments, such as the so-called
“resemblance thesis,” that qualities in objects resemble
our sensations of them. On this interpretation, Descartes is saying
that the resemblance thesis arises not because the sensory ideas of
cold or of color misrepresent those qualities in objects, but because
we make a cognitive error, stemming from the prejudices of childhood
(as mentioned in Sec. 3.1 and discussed more fully in Princ.
I.66–72), in affirming the resemblance thesis.
The issues surrounding the notion of material falsity in Descartes
are intricate and cut to the core of his theory of mind and of 
sensory representation. The interested reader can gain entrance
to literature through Wee (2006) and Hatfield (2013).
When Descartes was at La Flèche, there already were signs that the
conception of the universe was changing. Recall that Galileo's
discovery of four moons of the planet Jupiter was celebrated at La
Flèche in 1610. More generally, Copernicus had, in the previous
century, offered a forceful argument for believing that the sun, not
the earth, is at the center of the solar system. Early in the
seventeenth century, Johannes Kepler announced new results in optics,
concerning the formation of images, the theory of lenses, and the fact
that the retinal image plays a central role in vision. By the early
1630s, Descartes was aware (1:263) of 
William Harvey's claim that the
blood circulates in the body.
Descartes himself contributed some specific new results to the
mathematical description of nature, as co-discoverer of the sine law of
refraction and as developer of an accurate model of the rainbow.
Nonetheless, as significant as these results are, his primary
contribution to the “new science” lay in the way in which he described
a general vision of a mechanistic approach to nature and sketched in
the details of that vision to provide a comprehensive alternative to
the dominant Aristotelian physics.
In the textbooks of Aristotelian physics of Descartes' day, it was
common to divide physics 
into “general” and
“special.” General physics 
pertained to the basic
Aristotelian principles for analyzing natural substances: form,
matter, privation, cause, place, time, motion.  Special physics
concerned actually existing natural entities, divided into inanimate
and animate. Inanimate physics further divided into celestial and
terrestrial, in accordance with the Aristotelian belief that the earth
was at the center of the universe, and that the earth was of a
different nature than the heavens (including the moon, and everything
beyond it). Inanimate terrestrial physics first covered the four
elements (earth, air, fire, and water), then the “mixed”
bodies composed from them, including the various mineral
kinds. Animate terrestrial physics concerned the various powers that
Aristotelians ascribed to ensouled beings, where the soul is
considered as a principle of life (possessing vital as well as mental or
cognitive powers). In the simplest textbooks, the powers of the soul
were divided into three groups: vegetative (including nutrition,
growth, and reproduction), which pertained to both plants and animals;
sensitive (including external senses, internal senses, appetite, and
motion), which pertain to animals alone; and rational powers,
pertaining to human beings alone.  All the bodies in both inanimate
and animate terrestrial physics were governed by a “form”
or active principle, as described in Section 1.3.
Descartes' ambition was to provide replacements for all the main
parts of Aristotelian physics. In his physics, there is only one matter
and it has no active forms. Thus, he dissolved the boundary that had
made the celestial and the terrestrial differ in kind. His one matter
had only the properties of size, shape, position, and motion. The
matter is infinitely divisible and it constitutes space; there is no
void, hence no spatial container distinct from matter. The motions of
matter are governed by three laws of motion, including a precursor to
Newton's law of inertia (but without the notion of vector forces) and
a law of impact. Descartes' matter possessed 
no “force” or active
agency; the laws of motion were decreed by God and were sustained by
his activity. Earth, air, fire, and water were simply four among many
natural kinds, all distinguished simply by the characteristic sizes,
shapes, positions, and motions of their parts.
Although Descartes nominally subscribed to the biblical story of
creation, in his natural philosophy he presented the hypothesis that
the universe began as a chaotic soup of particles in motion and that
everything else was subsequently formed as a result of patterns that
developed within this moving matter. Thus, he conceived that many suns
formed, around which planets coalesced. On these planets, mountains
and seas formed, as did metals, magnets, and atmospheric phenomena
such as clouds and rain. The planets themselves are carried around the
sun in their orbits by a fluid medium that rotates like a whirlpool or
vortex.  Objects fall to earth not because of any intrinsic
“form” that directs them to the center of the universe,
and also not because of a force of attraction or other
downward-tending force. Rather, they are driven down by the whirling
particles of the surrounding ether. Descartes insisted that all cases
of apparent action at a distance, including magnetism, must be
explained through the contact of particle on particle. He explained
magnetism as the result of corkscrew-shaped particles that spew forth
from the poles of the earth and flow from north to south or vice
versa, causing magnetized needles to align with their flow
(Princ. IV.133–83). To explain magnetic polarity,
Descartes posited that the particles exiting from the south pole are
threaded in one direction and those from the north are threaded
oppositely (like the oppositely threaded spindles on bicycle
pedals).
Descartes also wanted to provide an account of the formation of
plants and animals by mechanical causes, but he did not succeed during
his lifetime in framing an account that he was willing to publish (so that
only portions of his physiology were revealed in the Discourse,
Dioptrics, Meditations, Principles, and 
Passions). In writings that were published only posthumously
(but were read by friends and followers during his lifetime, e.g.,
5:112), he developed an extensive physiological description of animal
bodies, in which he explained the functions of life in a purely
mechanical manner, without appeal to a soul or vital principle.
In mechanizing the concept of living thing, Descartes did not deny
the distinction between living and nonliving, but he did redraw the line
between ensouled and unensouled beings. In his view, among earthly
beings only humans have souls. He thus equated soul with mind: souls
account for intellection and volition, including conscious sensory
experiences, conscious experience of images, and consciously
experienced memories. Descartes regarded nonhuman animals as machines,
devoid of mind and consciousness, and hence lacking in sentience. 
(Although Descartes' followers understood him to have denied
all feeling to animals, some recent scholars question this
interpretation; on this controversy, see Cottingham 1998 and Hatfield
2008.) Consequently, Descartes was required to
explain all of the powers that Aristotelians had ascribed to the
vegetative and sensitive soul by means of purely material and
mechanistic processes (11:202). These mechanistic explanations
extended, then, not merely to nutrition, growth, and reproduction, 
but also to the functions of the external and internal senses,
including the ability of nonhuman animals to respond via their sense
organs in a situationally appropriate manner: to approach things that
are beneficial to their body (including food) and to avoid danger (as
the sheep avoids the wolf).
In the Treatise on Man and Passions, Descartes
described purely mechanical processes in the sense organs, brain, and
muscles, that were to account for the functions of the sensitive soul.
These processes involved “animal spirits,” or subtle matter, as
distilled out of the blood at the base of the brain and distributed
down the nerves to cause muscle motions in accordance with brain
structures and current sensory stimulation. The brain structures that
mediate behavior may be innate or acquired. Descartes ascribed some
things that animals do to instinct; other aspects of their behavior
he explained through a kind of mechanistic associative memory. He held
that human physiology is similar to nonhuman animal physiology, as
regards both vegetative and (some) sensitive functions—those
sensitive functions that do not involve consciousness or
intelligence:
Many of the behaviors of human beings are actually carried out without
intervention from the mind.
The fact that Descartes offered mechanistic explanations for many
features of nature does not mean that his explanations were successful.
Indeed, his followers and detractors debated the success of his various
proposals for nearly a century after his death. His accounts of
magnetism and gravity were challenged. Leibniz challenged the coherence
of Descartes' laws of motion and impact. Newton offered his own laws of motion
and an inverse square law of gravitational attraction. His account of
orbital planetary motions replaced Descartes' vortexes. Others
struggled to make Descartes' physiology work. There were also deeper
challenges. Some wondered whether Descartes could actually explain how
his infinitely divisible matter could coalesce into solid bodies. Why
shouldn't collections of particles act like whiffs of smoke, that
separate upon contact with large particles? Indeed, how do particles
themselves cohere?
Such problems were real, and Descartes' physics was abandoned over
the course of the eighteenth century. Nonetheless, it provided a
conception for a comprehensive replacement of Aristotelian physics that
persisted in the Newtonian vision of a unified physics of the celestial
and terrestrial realms, and that continued in the mechanistic vision of
life that was revived in the latter part of the nineteenth century.
As the new “mechanical philosophy” of Descartes and others replaced the
Aristotelian physics, the theory of sensory qualities had to undergo
substantial change. This was especially true for what came to be known
as the secondary qualities (in the terminology of Robert Boyle and John
Locke). The secondary qualities include colors, sounds, odors, tastes,
and tactile qualities such as hot and cold. The Aristotelians
maintained that these qualities exist in objects as “real qualities”
that are like instances or samples of the quality as experienced. A red
thing possesses the quality red in just the same way it possesses a
shape: it simply is red, and we experience that very redness when we
see a red object (the “resemblance 
thesis” as mentioned in Sec. 3.5).
Descartes sought to replace “real qualities” with a
mechanistic account of qualities in objects. He rendered light as a
property of particles and their motions: it is a “tendency to
move” as found in a continuous medium and radiating out from a
luminous body. When light strikes an object, the particles that
constitute light alter their rotation about their
axis. “Spin” is what makes light have one color rather
than another. When particles with one or another degree of spin
interact with the nerves of the retina, they cause those nerves to
jiggle in a certain way. This jiggling is conveyed to the brain where
it affects the animal spirits, which in turn affect the mind, causing
the mind to experience one or another color, depending on the degree
of spin and how it affects the brain. Color in objects is thus that
property of their surface that causes light particles to spin in one
way or another, and hence to cause one sensation or another. There is
nothing else in the surface of an object, as regards color, than a
certain surface-shape that induces various spins in particles of
light.
Descartes introduced this new theory of sensory qualities in the
first six chapters of the World. There, he defended it by
arguing that his explanation of qualities in bodies in terms of
size, shape, and motion are clearly understood by comparison with the
Aristotelian qualities (11:33). Subsequently, in the
Meditations and Principles, he defended this account
by appeal to the metaphysical result that body possesses only
geometrical modes of extension. Real qualities are ruled out because
they are not themselves instances of size, shape, or motion (even if
patches of color have a size and a shape, and can be moved about).
In addition to a new theory of sensory qualities, Descartes offered
theories of the way in which the spatial properties—size, 
shape, distance, and position—are perceived in vision. In 
Descartes' day 
and before, “optics” was 
defined as the theory of vision,
including physical, physiological, and psychological aspects. It had been
an area of inquiry since antiquity. Euclid and Ptolemy had each written
on optical problems. During the Middle Ages, the Arabic natural
philosopher Ibn al-Haytham produced an important new theoretical work
in which he offered an extensive account of the perception of 
spatial properties.
The theoretical terrain in optics changed with Kepler's doctrine that
vision is mediated by the retinal image and that the retina is the
sensitive body in the eye. Previous theorists generally believed that
the “crystalline humor,” now known as the lens, was the
sensitive body. Descartes accepted Kepler's result and framed a new
theory of spatial perception. Some of his theorizing simply adapted
Ibn al-Haytham's theories to the newly discovered retinal image. Thus,
Ibn al-Haytham held that size is perceived by combining the visual
angle that a body subtends with perception of its distance, to arrive
at a perception of the true size of the object. (Visual angle is
formed by the directions from a vantage point to a seen-object for a
given fixation, e.g., the angle formed by the direction to the feet
and to the nose of a person standing at moderate distance to us, with
the eyes fixed for the moment.) In al-Haytham's scheme, visual angle
is registered at the surface of the crystalline humor. Descartes held
that size is perceived by combining visual angle with perceived
distance, but he now treated visual angle as the extent of an object's
projection onto the retina.
In Ibn al-Haytham's account, if the size of an object 
is known distance may be perceived through an inference; for a given size, 
an object's distance is inversely proportional
to its visual angle. Descartes recognized this traditional account, depending 
as it does on past experience of an object's size 
and on an inference or rapid judgment that combines perceived visual angle 
with known or remembered size. Descartes held that these rapid judgments are
habitual and happen so quickly that they go unnoticed. Further, the
sensations that present the objects in accordance with visual angle
also go unnoticed, as they are rapidly replaced by visual experiences
of objects at a distance.
Ibn al-Haytham also explained that distance can be perceived by 
an observer's being sensitive to the number 
of equal portions 
of ground space that lie between the observer and a distant object.
Descartes did not adopt this explanation. However, Descartes used his
mechanistic physiology to frame a new account of how distance might be
perceived, a theory different from anything that could have been found
in Ibn al-Haytham.
In Kepler's new theory of how the eye works, 
an image is formed on the
retina as a result of refraction by the cornea and lens. For objects
at different distances, the focal properties of the system must be
changed, just as the focal length of a camera is changed. There were
several theories of how this might occur, but Descartes accepted the
view that the lens changes shape 
or “accommodates” for
near and far vision. He then theorized that this change in the shape
of the lens must be controlled by muscles, which themselves are
controlled by nerve processes in the brain.
Descartes realized that the
central nervous state that controls accommodation would vary directly
in proportion to the distance of objects. However, unlike the case of
inferring distance from known size and visual angle, Descartes did not
suppose that the mind is aware of the apparatus for controlling the
accommodation of the eye. Rather, he supposed that, by an innate
mechanism, the central brain state that varies with distance directly
causes an idea of distance in the mind (6:137; 11:183). This
physiologically produced idea of distance could then be combined with
perceived visual angle in order to perceive an 
object's size, as in al-Haytham's 
theory of size perception. When we correctly perceive the 
distance and combine it with visual angle (by an unnoticed mental act),
the result is a veridical perception of a size-at-a-distance. Descartes
described the resulting perception as possessing the attributes that
were labelled as “size constancy” 
in the twentieth century:
When Descartes speaks of taking into account 
the “size of the images” on the retina,
he need be speaking only of visual angle, which can be taken as equivalent to
retinal-image size. Also, in saying an object ten times farther away than a near
object should be a hundred times smaller, he is speaking of area; it would be
ten times smaller in linear height. Accordingly, Descartes here describes a process
in which visual angle is combined with perceived distance in order to yield
a perceived “size at a distance” 
that reflects the object's constant true size
in those cases in which we correctly register and combine distance with
visual angle.
Descartes' work on visual perception is but one instance 
of his adopting a naturalistic stance toward conscious mental experience in seeking
to explain aspects of such experience. The Passions constitute
another. It is sometimes said that Descartes' dualism
placed the mind outside nature by rendering it as an immaterial substance. That 
is a retrospective judgment from a perspective in which immaterial substances are 
automatically deemed “unnatural.” For
Descartes and his followers, mind–body interaction 
and its laws were included within the domain of natural philosophy or physics 
(in the general meaning of the latter term, as the theory of nature). Descartes
spoke of regular relations between brain states and the resulting
sensory experiences, which his followers, such as Regis,
subsequently deemed “laws” 
of mind–body relation (see Hatfield 2000). In this way, 
Descartes and his followers posited the existence of psychophysical or
psychophysiological laws, long before Gustav Fechner (1801–87) 
formulated a science of psychophysics in the nineteenth century.
The things that readers find valuable in Descartes' work have changed
over the centuries. We have seen that his natural philosophy had an
immediate impact that lasted into the eighteenth century. His theory of
vision was part of that heritage, as were his results in mathematics.
We have also seen that his mechanistic account of the psychology of the
sensitive soul and his view that animals are like machines were revived
in the nineteenth century.
The fortune of the metaphysical and epistemological aspects of
Descartes' philosophy is complex. In his own time, 
he inspired a raft
of followers, who sought to develop his metaphysics, epistemology,
natural philosophy, and even to add a worked-out ethics. These authors
included Geraud de Cordemoy, Arnold Geulincx, Antoine Le Grand, Nicolas
Malebranche, Regis, and Rohault. The British philosopher
Henry More at first followed Descartes but subsequently turned against
him. Other major philosophers, including Benedict de Spinoza and G. W.
Leibniz, were influenced by Descartes' thought 
but developed their own, distinct systems.
Perhaps the most profound effect that Descartes had on early modern
epistemology and metaphysics arose from his idea to examine the knower as
a means to determine the scope and possibilities of human
knowledge. Among his immediate followers, Malebranche most fully
developed this aspect of Descartes' philosophy.
Subsequent philosophers who were not followers of Descartes also
adopted the strategy of investigating the knower. The epistemological
works of Locke, George Berkeley, David Hume, Thomas Reid,
and Immanuel Kant pursued this investigation. These authors came to
different conclusions than had Descartes concerning the ability
of the human mind to know things as they are in themselves.
Hume and Kant especially—and each in his 
own way—rejected the very notion
of a metaphysics that reveals reality as it is in itself. They did not 
merely deny Descartes' particular metaphysical 
theories; they rejected his sort of metaphysical project altogether.
But they did so through the type of investigation that Descartes
himself had made prominent: the investigation of the cognitive
capacities of the knower.
During the twentieth century, various aspects of Descartes'
philosophy were widely invoked and perhaps just as widely misinterpreted. The 
first is Descartes' skepticism. In the early twentieth 
century, one response to the threat of skepticism about our knowledge of the
external world was to retreat to the position 
that we can only know our own sense data, 
where “sense data” are
equated with the supposed contents of immediate sensory experience:
for vision, color patches having a shape (e.g., Russell 1914). Some authors 
then treated Descartes' project in 
the Meditations as that of reducing human knowledge to immediate 
sense data, from which knowledge of the external world was to be constructed.
As a reading of Descartes, this position has little to offer. As we have
seen, in the Second and Third Meditations Descartes argues from the
indubitability of the cogito reasoning to the trustworthiness
of intellectual perception to the existence of a perfect being
(God). In the latter argument, he does indeed seek to infer the reality of a
being external to himself. But the inference does not invoke
sensory experience. It proceeds from a nonsensory and
innate idea of God to the existence of that God. Whatever one may
think of the quality of the argument, it has nothing to do with sense
data. Descartes used skeptical arguments as a tool to disengage the
reader from the sensory world in order to undertake metaphysical
investigations. There did result, in the Sixth Meditation, a
re-evaluation of the senses in relation to metaphysics. But again,
sense data were not in the mix.
Another line of twentieth-century interpretation also focused on the
isolation of the subject in the Second Meditation. In the course of
that Meditation, Descartes accepts that he knows the contents of his
mind, including putative sensory experiences, even though he doubts
the existence of his body. Some philosophers have concluded from this
that Descartes believed that human beings actually can, in their
natural state, have sensory experiences even if they lack a body. But
Descartes in fact denied that possibility. In his metaphysics, sense
perception and imagination depend for their existence on
mind–body union. There can be intellectual perceptions that do
not depend on the brain. But acts of imagination and sense perception
require the brain (Pass. I.19–20, 43). Thus, Descartes
did not in fact hold that we might have all of our sense experiences
even if we had no brain. Rather, he allowed that he could conceive his
sensory experiences independent of the brain, and that, if God were
not supremely good, God could produce those experiences in us
independent of the brain; but because God's perfection is inconsistent
with deceit, he would never do this. Hence, conceivability does not in
all cases—and especially not in cases of mere ignorance, as in
the Second Meditation—yield metaphysical possibility (as we have
seen in the Discourse argument for the mind–body
distinction).
A third conception is little more than the use (or abuse) of Descartes
as a straw-man representative of a kind of 
over-arching “Western rationality”
that over-rationalized the human being and denied the body and
emotions. The claim that Descartes denied the body and the emotions
is easily put aside. It is an over-generalization, and a misunderstanding,
of Descartes' procedure 
of “withdrawing the mind from the
senses” in the Meditations for the purposes of doing
metaphysics. A more historically nuanced reading of Descartes'
text would connect it with the practice of spiritual meditation extant
in the seventeenth century, a practice that Descartes co-opted for
his metaphysical meditations (see the first three chapters 
in Rorty 1986). Also, the notion that Descartes ignored the
body and emotions does not respond at all to his work on 
the Passions, in which the body has a starring role. More
generally, this sort of charge does not engage the long portion
of the Sixth Meditation that concerns mind–body union
and interaction and the embodied mind.
One recent version of this caricature suggests that Descartes had a
notion of human behavior that consisted of a
“sense-represent-plan-move” cycle (Wheeler 2005,
chap. 3). As has been mentioned, Descartes explained many human
behaviors through the machine of the body, without mental
intervention.  As he said in the Fourth Replies, “When people
take a fall, and stick out their hands so as to protect their head, it
is not reason that instructs them to do this” (7:230); rather,
the machine of the body (material processes in the sense organs,
brain, and muscles) produces this behavior, without any mental
contribution. Descartes envisioned similar purely mechanistic
explanations for many of the behaviors that arise from the passions or
emotions. In this connection, the body acts first and the felt
experience of the passion has the function of getting the mind to want
to do what the body is already doing
(Pass. I.37–40). In any event, Descartes by no means
held that all human behavior does or should arise from rational
deliberation. Which is not to say that he devalued rational
deliberation when there is time and need to undertake it. But he was
under no illusion that all effective human behavior stems from reason.
How could interpreters get Descartes so wrong? One recent 
explanation suggests that many 
post-modern “theorists”
have absorbed their Descartes at second hand, and the same
explanation might be extended to others who invoke Descartes
after only cursory engagement with his writings. As the
literary historian Michael Moriarty explains, leading
French theorists such as Jacques Lacan and Michel
Foucault would have, in the course of their French educations,
“received a solid grounding in philosophy, 
and in Descartes' works in particular” 
(Moriarty 2003, 52). They then use Descartes
as a stalking horse. Moriarty suggests that many
readers of Lacan and Foucault have not received the
same education in philosophy or in Descartes. Such
individuals, “who read Lacan or Foucault without,
or before, reading Descartes, thus imbibe a certain
perception of Descartes, more negative, perhaps, than the
authors themselves, writing against the grain of their
own culture, may have intended to convey” 
(2003, 53). The implication is that Lacan and Foucault engaged Descartes
from a knowledge of his writings, whereas others who
lack such knowledge misunderstand the value
of such genuine engagement and take away
misunderstood implications. This would also explain how 
Descartes could be charged with denying the emotions even though
he published an entire book on the Passions, and how
the implications of this book might be overlooked by someone eager
to find a famous target to disagree with.
Leaving aside such blatant misinterpretations, what is 
Descartes' legacy now? The breadth of his
influence in the seventeenth century is permanent, including his
specific contributions in mathematics and optics, his vision for
a mechanistic  physiology, and the model he offered to Newton of
a unified celestial and terrestrial physics that assigns a few basic
properties to a ubiquitous matter the motions of which are governed
by a few simple laws. In this regard, Descartes' 
work offers an example of culturally engaged philosophy. Descartes had a sense 
for the fundamental philosophical issues of his time, many of which concerned the
theory of nature and the attempt to found a new natural science. He not
only offered a systematic reformulation of the extant natural philosophy,
but he did so in a way that could be heard and understood.
Beyond past historical influences, Descartes'
philosophy continues to speak to us now and to offer new insights to new
generations of philosophers who are in position to hear what he said. This
can be seen in the revival of body-first theories of the emotions. (Ironically,
some of Descartes' most vocal detractors among
scientists who study the emotions, including Damasio 1994, espouse theories similar 
in many respects to Descartes' own, on 
which, see Hatfield 2007.) Further, his theories of sensory qualities
have inspired new reflections (Simmons 2003), as has his account of distance
perception (see Wolf-Devine 1993 and the entries on optics and perception in
Nolan 2014). More generally, his Meditations is one of the most
finely crafted examples of philosophical prose in the entire history of
philosophy. That in itself ensures its ongoing relevance.
In the end, Descartes' legacy partly consists of problems he raised,
or brought into prominence, but did not solve. The mind–body
problem is a case in point. Descartes himself argued from his ability
clearly and distinctly to conceive mind and body as distinct beings to
the conclusion that they really are separate substances. Most
philosophers today accept neither the methodological basis for his
claim nor the claim itself. Indeed, since the time of Kant, few
philosophers have believed that the clear and distinct thoughts of the
human mind are a guide to the absolute reality of things. Hence, the
notion that even clear conceivability discerns metaphysical
possibility is not accepted. Moreover, few philosophers today are
substance dualists.
All the same, the mind–body problem persists. In distinguishing
the domain of the mental from that of the physical, Descartes struck a
chord. Many philosophers accept the conceptual distinction, but remain
uncertain of the underlying metaphysics: whether mind is identical
with brain; or the mental emerges from complex processes in the brain;
or constitutes a property that is different from any purely physical
property, even while being instantiated by the brain. In this case, a
problem that Descartes made prominent has lived far beyond his
proposed solution.