The notion of replication arose as a concern in the period immediately
after the second world war (see
 Figure 1),
 with the rise of information theory, communication theory,
cybernetics, and Erwin Schrödinger’s 1944 book What is
Life?. Biologists immediately began to consider the informational
aspect of life, in each of these theoretical frameworks, in areas
ranging from neurology to molecular biology, but especially the latter
(Brookes 1956; Eigen & de Maeyer 1966; Gatlin 1972; Johnson 1970;
Linschitz 1953; Margalef 1957 [1958]; Quastler 1953; Rashevsky 1955).
It was only after the development of communications theory by Shannon
(1948) and cybernetics by Wiener (1948) after it, that inheritance in
biology took on a specifically informational tint (Griffiths &
Stotz 2007). This is the case in particular of the work of Watson and
Crick on the double helix structure of DNA (Watson & Crick 1953),
as well as Crick’s Central Dogma, which states that information
cannot flow from protein to DNA. The Central Dogma (Crick 1958) was
initially cast in terms of structural information (Šustar
2007),
 Figure 2,
 and later recast by Crick as a more cybernetic or computational kind
of information (Crick 1970). [See Eugene V. Koonin 2012 & 2015 for
discussion of the nature of the Central Dogma in current biology.]
Figure 1. Yearly frequency of count for
the word ‘replication’ in Google text’s English
corpus from 1800–2000 with smoothing = 3. Data obtained from
Google Ngram Viewer (see
 Other Internet Resources).
Structural information is effectively based on the transfer of
molecular primary sequences (linear sequence) in the synthesis of
polypeptides; that is, it is the literal sequence of basic groups
(amino acids), before the protein folds into secondary and higher
conformations. This is a physical and causal account of information:
the new molecule has its sequence because it was templated in some way
by the “information”-imparting molecule (in this case, DNA
to proteins). Griffiths and Stotz (see below) call this, accordingly,
“Crick information”.
However, in the late 1950s, after the structure of DNA had become more
widely understood, chemist Homer Jacobson proposed a
cybernetic model of reproduction (Jacobson 1958), going so
far as to make a literal model out of train sets and electronic
circuits. Later, von Neumann proposed a theory of self-reproducing
automata (Neumann 1966) which has become a parallel but influential
research program to the issue in biology (Mitchell 2009). Jacob (1973)
cemented the logical description of heredity, but the ultimate
classical source of the notion that genes are information comes from
Williams’ classic 1966 book Adaptation and Natural
Selection, in which he referred to genes as “cybernetic
abstractions” (1966: 33).
The cybernetic notion of reproduction (and later, replication) rested
on the notion that genes were controllers of phenotypes;
later, this came to be identified (e.g., by Gatlin) as synonymous with
the “communication” conception of information that Shannon
proposed. In biology, genes came to be seen as “programs”
for phenotypes [‘senders’] that passed themselves on to
progeny [‘receivers’], around 1961 (Peluffo 2015).
Williams’ book was one inspiration for Dawkins’
Selfish Gene (1976), and much of what Dawkins proposed about
replicators is an extension of Williams’ views, in conjunction
with those of William D. Hamilton (1964) and various ethological
ideas. This view is now known as the gene’s eye view (for a
review see Okasha 2006, Chapter 5)
Williams introduced the notion of a gene as a substrate neutral
entity:
I use the term ‘gene’ to mean that which separates and
recombines with appreciable frequency, (1966: 20)
and he further defined an evolutionary gene (that is, one
that is selectively important):
[A] gene could be defined as any hereditary information for which
there is a favorable or unfavorable selection bias equal to several or
many times its rate of endogenous change. (1966: 25)
His answer to the question of what a gene is, is that a gene is
evolutionary just insofar as it is something heritable that is subject
to rates of selection that exceed the mutation rate. This is a
definition, not a discovery. If it’s favorably or unfavorably
selected and heritable, it’s an evolutionary gene. According to
this definition, items that are not made of DNA can be classed as
evolutionary genes so long as they match Williams’ definition
(Lu & Bourrat 2018).
Figure 2. The Central Dogma of genetics
as envisaged by Crick around 1965 (Thieffry & Sarkar 1998).
The language of “codes” and “information”
flows easily enough with respect to replication (see the entry
 biological information).
 Transcription, translation, punctuation, redundancy, synonymy,
editing, proofreading, errors, repairing of errors, messages, copies,
and information all sound natural enough. Yet, the literature dealing
with information is both extensive and factious. Several different
formal analyses of information can be found and very little agreement
about which analysis is best for which subjects. On one point these
scholars tend to agree—cybernetic information and
communication-theoretic information will not do for replication in
biological contexts. Some argue for semantic information
(Godfrey-Smith 2000a; Sarkar 2000; Sterelny 2000b). The trouble is
that no widely accepted version of semantic information exists. Winnie
(2000) distinguishes between Classical and Algorithmic Information
Theory and opts for a revised version of the Algorithmic Theory. But
once again, the problem is that no such formal analysis currently
exists.
In the face of all this disagreement and unfinished business,
biologists such as Maynard Smith (2000) maintain either that informal
analyses of “information” are good enough or that some
future formal version of information theory will justify the sorts of
inferences that they make. The sense of “information” used
in the Central Dogma of molecular biology is more like a fit of
template, or the primary structure of the protein sequence compared to
the sequence of the DNA base pairs. Attempts have been made in what is
now known as bioinformatics to use Classical Information Theory
(Shannon’s theory of communication) to extract functional and
phylogenetic information (Brooks & Wiley 1988; Gatlin 1972;
Maclaurin 1998; Rodrick Wallace & Wallace 1998), but they appear
to have been unsuccessful in the main.
While the most likely conclusion is that no version of information
theory as currently formulated can handle “information” as
it functions in biology (Griffiths 2001), attempts have continued to
be made to formulate just such a version (Bergstrom & Rosvall
2011; Sternberg 2008). However, this undercuts the motivation for
appealing to information theory to elucidate genes in the first
instance. Griffiths & Stotz (2013: 153) have argued for
“Crick” information, which they define as “the
specification of the order of amino acids in a polypeptide
chain”. This specificity definition is more chemical than
abstract (see the section below on 
Developmental Systems Theory).
The “informational gene” conception, as James R. Griesemer
(2005) terms it, is a highly abstract concept of a process and the
entities that comprise it. This is intentional, as it permits
Darwinian dynamics to be applied to a range of phenomena, such as
sociocultural, cybernetic, and medical processes. However, this raises
a metaphysical concern, namely that the view that a gene is nothing
but information is a version of Aristotelian hylomorphism (see the
entry
 form versus matter).
 That is, information is a type of form, which can be used to explain
physical processes. Classical hylomorphism was roundly demolished as a
scientific hypothesis when Daltonian elements were named and
investigated in the nineteenth century. By 1900, terms like
“substance” (for matter that is propertyless apart from
mass and extension in space) and “form” had taken on a
largely philosophical sense that differed extensively from
Aristotle’s own physical views. Griesemer notes:
We know that the informational genes are tied to matter and structure,
but if evolutionary theory – to be general enough to cover
cultural and conceptual change – must be devoid of all reference
to concrete mechanism, it cannot follow from the theory, for example,
that genes are inside organisms or are even parts of organisms, as
Dawkins’s language suggests. Strictly, only the correlations
between replicator and vehicle due to causal connections of a
completely unspecified sort can be implied by such a theory. Striving
to get matter and specific structure out of the theory in order to
make it apply to immaterial realms may thus leave it bankrupt as an
account of causal connection for the material, biological cases.
(Griesemer 2005: 79)
And yet, this kind of hylomorphism has remained, even in science.
Biologists have argued that form determined many properties of
organisms in ways that could not be reduced to the actions of their
parts, and this kind of thinking remained and was co-opted by the
molecular biologists and geneticists. Thus, we get the Central Dogma
of molecular biology:
The Central Dogma

This states that once ‘information’ has passed into
protein it cannot get out again. In more detail, the transfer
of information from nucleic acid to nucleic acid, or from nucleic acid
to protein may be possible, but transfer from protein to protein, or
from protein to nucleic acid is impossible. Information means here the
precise determination of sequence, either of bases in the
nucleic acid or of amino acid residues in the protein. (Crick
1958)
Read physically, this means only that the structure of the DNA
molecule is not reproduced from the structure of proteins, a perfectly
reasonable account of the molecular processes. But because Crick used
the word “information”, some scientists, including
Dawkins, took this to mean genes are informational entities, that
“code” for organismic traits from the molecular level up
to the entire organism and even beyond. This is striking in a purple
passage of The Blind Watchmaker, where Dawkins describe genes
the following way
It is raining DNA outside. [downy seeds from willow trees] …
The cotton wool is mostly made of cellulose, and it dwarfs the tiny
capsule that contains the DNA, the genetic information. The DNA
content must be a small proportion of the total, so why did I say that
it was raining DNA rather than cellulose? The answer is that it is the
DNA that matters… whose coded characters spell out specific
instructions for building willow trees… It is raining
instructions out there, it’s raining programs; it’s
raining tree-growing, fluff spreading, algorithms. That is not a
metaphor, it is the plain truth. It couldn’t be any plainer if
it were raining floppy disks. (1986: 111)
So we now turn to Dawkins’ view of genes as replicators, and the
way in which he takes information to be cybernetic and physical at the
same time.
Richard Dawkins introduced the distinction between replicators and
vehicles in his The Selfish Gene (1976). For his purposes
Dawkins found the contrast between genes and organisms too restrictive
and specific. Everyone agrees that genes are replicators, but genes
may not be the only replicators. Dawkins also argued that perhaps more
inclusive entities than single genes might also function as
replicators. At the very least, the possibility should not be ignored.
So, Dawkins adopted “replicator” as a more inclusive and
general term than “gene”. In The Extended
Phenotype he defined a replicator as “anything in the
universe of which copies are made” (Dawkins 1982b: 83). He also
introduced the term “vehicle” for those entities produced
by replicators that help these replicators increase in numbers by
interacting effectively with their environments. This distinction can
be expressed in terms of either entities or processes. According to
Dawkins, replicators function in replication, while vehicles function
in environmental interaction.
A long-standing dispute in evolutionary biology concerns the levels at
which selection can occur (Bourrat 2015c, 2015b, 2016; Brandon 1996;
Kerr & Godfrey-Smith 2002; Keller 1999; Lloyd 1988; Okasha 2006,
2016; Sober & Wilson 1998; Williams 1966) [see the entry on
 units and levels of selection].
 Some authors see this dispute as concerning the levels at which
replication can take place. Other authors take the levels of selection
dispute to concern environmental interaction and insist that
environmental interaction can take place at a variety of levels, from
single genes, cells and organisms to colonies, demes and possibly
entire species. Organisms certainly interact with their environments
in ways that bias the transmission of their genes, but then so do
entities that are both less inclusive than entire organisms (e.g.,
sperm cells) and more inclusive (e.g., beehives).
Dawkins argued that replication in biological evolution
occurs exclusively at the level of the genetic material. The term
“replication” refers first and foremost to copying, and
genes are the self-replicating molecules of biology. Some critics
(e.g., Lewontin 1991: 48) interpreted this to mean that a strand of
DNA placed on a glass slide might start replicating all on its own. Of
course, no biologist has ever held such view. Genes do replicate
themselves, but only with the aid of highly complicated molecular
machinery. Too often, however, the importance of this machinery has
gone unnoticed. To be sure, when we make copies on a photocopier, we
are interested in the texts, figures or just scrawls that appear on
these sheets of paper. We are not interested in how the photocopier
works, even if it does all the work.
In Dawkins’ early writings, replicators and vehicles played
different but complementary and equally important roles in selection,
but as he honed his view of the evolutionary process, vehicles became
less and less fundamental. Initially, Dawkins was content to dethrone
the organism from its pride of place in biology. It is an important
focus of environmental interaction, but other entities, both below and
above the organismic level, can also function as vehicles. In later
writings, however, Dawkins went even further to argue that phenotypic
traits are what really matter for evolution by natural selection to
occur, and that they can be treated independently of their being
organized into vehicles. More than that, features such as spider webs
should be viewed as part of a spider’s phenotype. Hence, Dawkins
titled his second book The Extended Phenotype (Dawkins
1982b).
Dawkins never lost his fascination with vehicular adaptations, a
fascination that his critics denigrate as Panglossian adaptationism.
He filled his books with adaptationist scenarios, some more firmly
supported by data than others, but from the perspective of the
structure of evolutionary theory, he held that replicators are much
more important than vehicles. For example, Dawkins argued at some
length that adaptations are always for the good of replicators, not
vehicles (Lloyd 1992), see entry on
 units and levels of selection.
 Vehicles exhibit these adaptations, but ultimately all
adaptations must be explicable in terms of changes in gene
frequencies. Thus, it comes as no surprise when Dawkins (1994: 617)
proclaims that he “coined the term ‘vehicle’ not to
praise it but to bury it”. As prevalent as organisms might be,
as definite as the causal roles that they play in selection are,
reference to them can and must be omitted from any perspicuous
characterization of selection in the evolutionary process. Although
Dawkins is far from a genetic determinist, he is certainly a
genetic reductionist. Whether reductionism itself is good or
bad is a moot question (Sarkar 1998).
According to Dawkins, replicators have three basic
properties—longevity, fecundity and
copy-fidelity. Longevity means longevity of the gene
type in the form of copies through descent (Dawkins 1982b:
84; Hull 1980), although the stability of gene tokens is
included in the definition in The Selfish Gene (1976: 18). No
gene as a physical body lasts all that long. In mitosis, a gene loses
half of its substance at each replication. What endures, he says, is
not the entity itself but the information incorporated in its
structure. It is this information that is copied with such high
fidelity. Mutations do occur, but at very low frequencies. Even so, in
some organisms mutation rates must be too high because mechanisms have
evolved that search out and repair such errors. The genotype is
therefore an informational notion; information is equivalent to
Aristotelian form. The type is the form of the tokens, in
Dawkins’ view.
One source of variation in genes of sexual organisms supplementing
mutation is crossover. Pairs of homologous chromosomes line up next to
each other at meiosis, crossover and recombine. For stretches of DNA
in which different alleles exist, the result can be a change in
information. Quite obviously, the shorter the stretch of DNA involved,
the less likely that crossover will occur and the message changed.
Dawkins appeals to such dismantling of entities to argue against
organisms functioning as replicators. In sexual organisms, organisms
themselves are torn apart and repeatedly assembled each generation
(Caporael 2003). If long stretches of DNA lack the necessary identity
by descent to function as replicators, then sexual organisms certainly
lack it. However, some other explanation has to be provided for
asexual organisms because they pass on their overall structure largely
unchanged from generation to generation. For example, R. A. Fisher, in
his The Genetical Theory of Natural Selection (Fisher 1930)
considered the entire genetic complement of asexual organisms to be a
single gene, and this view has been repeated from time to time since.
According to Dawkins, genes, and only genes, can function as
replicators in biological evolution. How large these genetic units are
depends on such things as the prevalence of sex, the frequency of
crossover or lateral gene transfers, and the intensity of
selection.
If there were sex but no crossing-over, each chromosome would be a
replicator, and we should speak of adaptations as being for the good
of the chromosome. If there is no sex we can, by the same token, treat
the entire genome of an asexual organism as a replicator. But the
organism itself is not a replicator. (Dawkins 1982a: 95)
Dawkins offered two reasons for organisms not being able to function
as replicators. The first is the one he uses to delineate evolutionary
genes. As is the case for long stretches of DNA, organisms are too
easily and frequently broken up to be considered units of replication.
A second reason is that they cannot pass on changes in their
structure, although some phenotypic change may result in generational
change. In fact, some epigenetic mechanisms have been shown
to be passed on across generations (Jablonka & Raz 2009; see the
entry on
 inheritance systems).
 The amount of DNA that counts as a replicator certainly varies, but
according to Dawkins, nothing more inclusive than the genetic material
functions as replicators in biological evolution.
In The Selfish Gene, although Dawkins wanted his definition
of gene to be close to that of Williams’ (1966)
“evolutionary gene”, it isn’t quite:
A gene is defined as any portion of chromosomal material which
potentially lasts for enough generations to serve as a unit of natural
selection. (Dawkins 1976: 30)
Where Williams’ definition is substrate neutral, Dawkins’
is explicitly chromosomal and DNA-based. Where William’s
“gene” refers to any entity, which is the reason
why it is an informational notion, Dawkins’ gene, by contrast,
is tied to DNA; a view later heavily criticized by Stent (1977), an
influential molecular biologist at the time.
On Dawkins’ account, the limits of genes need not be absolutely
sharp. Nor must all genes be of the same length. The greater the
selection pressure, the smaller the gene. At the most fundamental
level, selection takes place between alternative alleles residing at
the same locus.
As far as a gene is concerned, its alleles are its deadly rivals, but
other genes are just a part of its environment, comparable to
temperature, food, and predators, or companions. (Dawkins 1976:
40)
Alleles cannot cooperate with each other; only compete. That is where
the “selfish” in “selfish gene” comes in.
According to Dawkins (1976: 95), the selfish gene is not just one
physical bit of DNA. It is “all replicas of a particular bit of
DNA, distributed throughout the world” (for a recent defense of
a similar approach, see Haig 2012). Hence, genes do not form classes
of spatiotemporally unrelated individuals but trees. They must be
replicas. But being a replica is not enough. The linear repetition of
the “same gene” in the form of several hundred copies is
quite common. These replicas, however, do not reside at the same
locus. Although identical in structure, these genes do not
compete with each other in the way that alleles at the same locus can.
In the simplest and most basic sense, alleles compete with alternative
alleles at the same locus. Any other sorts of competition and
cooperation are merely extrapolations from this fundamental sense of
allelic competition. Even though genes may cooperate with each other
in very complicated ways in embryological development, in replication
they can be treated as “separate and distinct”. In
development the effects of genes blend. In replication replicators do
not blend.
Dawkins introduced the general notions of replicator and vehicle so
that selection need not be limited exclusively to gene-based
biological evolution. However, as the preceding discussion indicates,
his later revisions to his general theoretical outlook were influenced
strongly by the traditional perspective of genes and organisms. Genes
contain the information necessary to produce organisms and their
adaptations. Genes “ride around” in and
“guide” organisms. As Dawkins describes them, vehicles are
relatively discrete entities that “house” replicators and
which can be regarded as machines programmed to preserve and propagate
the replicators that ride inside them. Although these terms may be
appropriate for the relations between genes and organisms, they
interfere with a more general analysis of replication and selection.
What really matters in selection is that entities at various levels of
organization interact with their environments in such a way that the
relevant replicators increase in relative frequency. The actual causal
chain that connects replicators and vehicles need not be limited to
development.
For example, Dawkins argues at some length that genes and only genes
can function as replicators in biological evolution. He adds that
“all adaptations are for the preservation of DNA; DNA itself
just is” (Dawkins 1982a: 45). But DNA itself exhibits
adaptations. Anyone who has spent much time examining the molecular
structure of DNA soon realizes that it is adapted to replicate. In
addition, the proliferation of junk DNA, transposons, and meiotic
drive are three examples in which the only phenotypes that matter are
phenotypic characteristics of genes (Brandon 1996; Sterelny 1996:
388). Dawkins’ characterizations of replicators, vehicles and
the relations between the two are too closely tied to genes, organisms
and development. DNA can certainly replicate itself, but it can also
function as a “vehicle” even though it cannot code for,
ride around in or direct itself. In sum, a more general
characterization of selection is needed, a characterization that does
not assume that the only causal connection between replicators and
vehicles is development from embryo to maturity. Such a generalization
was offered by Hull (1980, 1981, 1988) who proposed that the relevant
notion is “interactor” rather than “vehicle”,
as interactors are causal and active while vehicles are passive
entities.
Although Dawkins finds it desirable to replace genes with replicators
in his general characterization of the evolutionary process, he says
very little about this more general notion in his The Selfish
Gene. Only one chapter (11) is dedicated to “memetic”
evolution. Instead, as we saw, he discusses the special case of genes
as replicators. The primacy of the genetic perspective in the
characterization of replicators is claimed by some (Griesemer 2000b)
to be one of the chief weaknesses not only in Dawkins’
discussions but also in the work of his successors [see the
section below on
 Reproducers]. Hull
and his colleagues (Hull, Langman, & Glenn 2001) claim to be
providing a general notion of replication, adequate to handle all
different sorts of replication, when too often we are simply reading
peculiarities of genetic replication into our general analysis of
replication.
Does replication play the same role in other sorts of selection that
it plays in gene-based biological evolution? The reaction of the
immune system to antigens is closest to the standard biological
example of replication and selection (Hull et al. 2001). Certainly immune systems arose through the same process as other
functional systems. The basic structure of the human immune system is
“built into our genes”, and the only genes that count in
evolution are the ones that we received from our ancestors and can
subsequently pass on to our progeny. In Dawkins’ (1982b: 83)
terminology, the genes that code for our immune system are active,
germ-line replicators. They are active because they influence their
probability to be copied; they are germ-line, because they can
potentially have an infinity of descendants.
However, the genes that function in the reaction of the immune system
to antigens have two peculiarities. First, they incorporate mechanisms
designed to produce very high frequencies of mutation, and second,
none of the genes involved in the functioning of the immune system are
germ-line. The genes that give rise to B-cells for instance are
designed to mutate extensively until one of these cells identifies an
invader as foreign. It then proliferates extensively as it attacks the
invader. As an organism matures, it accumulates more and more of the
B-cells that have been successful in its past. More than this, as the
process of proliferation continues, the strength of the affinities to
binding sites increases. Initially the primary antibodies almost
always exhibit a weak affinity for their targets, but as the reaction
to the antigen continues, these affinities become stronger.
Within the confines of a single organism, the reaction of the immune
system to antigens has all the characteristics of selection processes,
but when the organism dies all of these adaptations are lost. In some
species, females pass on not only the genes for the basic structure of
their immune systems but also some of the machinery that past
invasions of antigens have produced in her. However, these cells are
rapidly removed from the offspring as it develops its own immune
system. The reaction of the immune system to antigens departs from
gene-based selection in biological evolution in two ways. First, from
the organismal perspective, the genes that function in protecting an
organism from invaders are not germ-line. They are somatic. Second,
the relevant mutation rates are much, much higher in the immune system
than in ordinary gene-based selection. Instead of mechanisms existing
to discover mutations and repair them, mechanisms exist that encourage
mutations—massively so. If the functioning of the immune system
is to count as an adaptive process, then some changes must be made.
One possibility is to clarify what counts as a “germ-line”
replicator and a rejection of the notion that extremely low mutation
rates are inherent in all selection processes [see
the section below on
 Challenges to the Replicator].
The temptation to regard cultures and societies as evolving entities
in a way analogous to organism has a long tradition. In The
Selfish Gene (Chapter 11), Dawkins proposes a version of it that
makes use of the concept of the replicator. He chose the word
“meme” for a sociocultural replicator because of its
similarities with the word gene:
We need a name for the new replicator, a noun that conveys the idea of
a unit of cultural transmission, or a unit of imitation.
‘Mimeme’ comes from a suitable Greek root, but I want a
monosyllable that sounds a bit like ‘gene’ (Dawkins 1976:
192).
The basic idea, underlying Dawkins’ proposal is that since
evolution by natural selection in the biological domain requires
replication, it must also be the case in the sociocultural domain, and
that imitation, at least in many cases, is the way through which
sociocultural entities, the memes, replicate.
Important differences exist between sociocultural evolution and
biological evolution (Claidière & André 2012) [see
the entry on
 cultural evolution].
 For example, Dawkins (1976) admits that he is on shaky ground when it
comes to the high-fidelity copying required of replicators. Memes seem
to get changed much more frequently than genes (see Sterelny (2006)
for a review). In general, however, it is fair to say that the
standards used to evaluate sociocultural transmission are not on par
with those used to evaluate biological transmission. An overly
idealized view of Mendelian genetics is contrasted to a much more
realistic view of cultural change. So the criticism goes, one problem
with memes is that they do not have discrete boundaries, do not all
come in the same size, and in their functioning are strongly
influenced by their environments. Genes, so the critics claim, have
sharp boundaries, are all of the same size, and are immune to
environmental influences. If sociocultural evolution is to be
evaluated fairly, the same level of criticism must be applied to all
putative examples of selection from gene-based selection in biological
evolution and the reaction of the immune system to antigens to the
development of the central nervous system and social learning (Hull et
al. 2001). The collection of articles in Aunger (2000) present the
arguments pro- and against a memetic approach to culture and a more
recent discussion is available in Lewens (2015).
Dawkins (1976) also places considerable emphasis on human brains as
the “vehicles” for memetic evolution. He defines
“meme” as an entity capable of being transmitted from one
brain to another. Computers are also plausible vehicles for memes, as
well as artifacts more generally which can ‘store’ and
then release information when a copy of the artifact is made by
emulation (mimesis), that is without the presence of a
demonstration. Dawkins’ discussion of memes is, however, marred
by the pervasiveness of the gene-organism perspective. For example, he
defines “replicator” in terms of transmission of
information—memes leaping from brain to brain or from brains to
computers and back again. But memes do not leap from brain to brain or
from computer to computer. Their content is transmitted in a variety
of ways, including books, audiotapes, conversations and the like. As
much as the physical basis changes, the message remains sufficiently
unchanged. All instances of this message are equally memes, not just
the ones residing in human brains and computers.
Several accounts of memetic replication have been proposed in the
literature. Some consider that there is no replication in cultural
evolution, but that memes are “attractor points” in
culture (Atran 1998). Others consider that the interactor is the meme
itself (Blackmore 1999) or that the meme is the selected cultural
heritable information just as Williams’ “evolutionary
gene” is the selected genetic heritable information, and the
memetic interactor is the repertoire of behaviors it elicits (Wilkins
1998). One view that has been offered several times is that memes are
active neural structures (Aunger 1998, 2002; Delius 1991).
All the objections to the gene-meme analogy to one side, Dawkins
(1976: 211) finds the chief difference between genetic and memetic
change is that biological evolution is at bottom a war between alleles
residing at the same locus. “Memes seem to have nothing
equivalent to chromosomes and nothing equivalent to alleles”.
First, the usual depiction of alleles residing at the same locus on
homologous chromosomes so central to Mendelian genetics is an
oversimplification, but more importantly, for at least half of the
history of life on earth, replication and selection took place in the
absence of chromosomes, meiosis and the like. If gene-based biological
evolution took place for so long in the absence of the Mendelian
apparatus and still does so in many extant organisms, then demanding
that memetic evolution proceed by this very special and possibly
aberrant sort of inheritance seems too strong. The cost of meiosis
remains a serious problem in ordinary biological evolution. Demanding
that cultural evolution incorporates this same highly problematic
element in its own makeup seems strange in the extreme. If we are to
develop a general analysis of selection, then we must distinguish
between essential and contingent features of this process..
Numerous evolutionary biologists question how fundamental to selection
the perspective of alleles at a locus actually is. Almost everyone
agrees that evolution involves changes in gene frequencies. However,
few go on to add that evolution is nothing but changes in
gene frequencies. When one looks at evolutionary biology, one
discovers that it involves much more than changes in gene frequencies.
To be successful, memetic evolution must be fleshed out.
In 2000, Aunger summarized the disputes between proponents and
skeptics of the memetic approach, as revolving around three
levels:
Nearly 20 years after the diagnosis, it seems however that the memetic
approach has, by and large, been abandoned, with some of its insights
incorporated into other evolutionary approaches to culture. Perhaps
the most successful is dual-inheritance theory (Richerson & Boyd
2008), also known as gene-culture coevolution. A very general
characterization of the sociocultural evolution has been attempted by
El Mouden, André, Morin, & Nettle (2014). This approach
which relies on the most abstract formalism used by evolutionary
theorists, namely the Price equation (for an introduction to the Price
equation see Okasha 2006: Chap. 1), highlights some of the differences
between biological and sociocultural evolution, and why a pure memetic
approach seems difficult to implement as a general framework.
Some of Dawkins’ critics think that genes play too important of
a role in his notion of replication. Replication, so they argue, can
occur at other levels of organization as well. Just as Dawkins
extended the notion of the phenotype, these authors propose to make
the notion of replicators more general as well—to extend the
replicator so to speak. Dawkins introduced his Extended
Phenotype conception for two reasons. First, he wanted to extend
the notion of a “phenotypic trait”. The sort of nest that
a bird builds or the song that it sings can count as phenotypic traits
just as much as the shape of its bill. Second, as mentioned earlier,
Dawkins wanted to break the hold that organisms have over how we
conceptualize the living world. Traits do tend to come bundled into
reasonably discrete entities, but for making inferences about the
evolutionary process, traits can be treated as separate and distinct.
However, as he proceeded, Dawkins eventually decided that extending
the phenotype was not enough. He had to bury it. All sorts of
fascinating mechanisms to one side, what really matters in selection
takes place at the level of replicators.
Although such critics of Dawkins as Sterelny, Smith, & Dickison
(1996) declined to join with Dawkins in his demotion of environmental
interaction, they did agree with him that replicators are special.
They play a special role in development. However, they do not limit
replicators to genes even in biological evolution. Sterelny et al.
propose to extend the replicator to include nonstandard entities:
“the set of developmental resources that are adapted from the
transmission of similarity across the generations” (Sterelny
2001: 338). For example, the sort of burrow that a particular organism
digs is influenced by its genetic makeup, but if these burrows are
used over and over again, characteristics of these burrows can
themselves be viewed as replicators. The effects of these burrows get
passed on from generation to generation, but not via the DNA.
As more and more non-DNA replicators, including epigenetic
inheritance, are acknowledged, Dawkins’ view began to grade into
the conception of the Extended Replicator, which Sterelny et al.
(1996) specify as any non-genetic as well as genetic replicators where
‘genetic’ refers to DNA. These two views are so general
that any case that can be described in one can be redescribed in the
other. Differences lie in ease of description. According to Sterelny
et al. (1996), the burrows that some organisms dig can function as
replicators—extended replicators—while Dawkins portrays
them as instances of extended phenotypes. The contrast is between
selfish burrows and selfish genes for burrowing.
In the version of replication formulated by Sterelny et al. (1996)
both copying and biofunction are crucial. Copying is quite obviously a
causal phenomenon, but not any old causal connection will do.
Similarity of copies is necessary, but not sufficient. These copies
must be copies of copies. One copy must produce another copy and that
copy produce still another copy and so on. For one entity to be a copy
of another, it must be the output of a process whose biofunction is to
conserve function. The function of copying is to produce from one
token another token which is similar in the relevant respects. Genes
fit this definition, but so do lots of examples of non-genetic
transmission; e.g., habitat stability resulting from nest site
imprinting, the song that a bird learns, various microorganism
symbionts, not to mention sociocultural transmission.
In the wake of Oyama’s The Ontogeny of Information
(1985, 2000) and other work, notably that of Daniel Lehrman (1953)
and Patrick Bateson (2001), a view of biological evolution has arisen
that emphasizes development (see also Griffiths & Gray 1994a). In
the nineteenth century development was an extremely active research
program. The next great discoveries in biology were going to be in the
area of development. It was not to be. First Mendelian genetics and
then a version of evolutionary theory centered on population genetics
took over biology, and they did so while avoiding development.
Everyone knew that development was central to both evolution and
reproduction, but no one could see how to integrate the masses of
developmental data available into the emerging synthesis of
evolutionary biology and genetics. As a result, development was left
out of the Modern Synthesis (Beurton, Falk, & Rheinberger 2000;
Gilbert 1991). Considering how central development actually is in
metazoan and metaphyte biology, the advances made while ignoring it
are staggering.
Even so, developmental biology continued on its course until at long
last we seem to understand development well enough to begin
integrating it into the rest of biology. On the most conservative
view, current versions of evolutionary theory can remain largely
unchanged as development is grafted onto them. On a second view, both
perspectives are likely to require some modification to bring off this
integration. Our understanding of development may have to be modified,
but so too for evolutionary theory (Pigliucci & Müller 2010).
Finally, at the other extreme, development will all but replace
evolutionary theory. In their more exuberant moments, some advocates
of Developmental Systems Theory (hereafter DST) seem to be claiming
just that. Just as some molecular biologists think that molecular
biology is rapidly replacing all the rest of biology, some advocates
of DST argue that developmental theories will simply replace current
versions of evolutionary theory.
On some versions of the DST view, genes have no uniquely privileged
role in repeated cycles of development (Griffiths 2001; Griffiths
& Gray 1994b). In fact, no element of the developmental matrix
plays any privileged causal role—not genes, not organisms, not
the environment, not anything. Everything counts as a resource, albeit
in particular situations certain resources will play more important
roles than other resources. In rejecting any privileged role for
genes, advocates of DST are especially skeptical of one particular
role supposedly played by genes—the transmission of information.
According to some, information is central to developmentalism, but
genes are not the only mechanisms for information transfer. According
to others, information plays no role in the emerging developmentalist
perspective. The developmental system as a whole is the unit of
selection [see the entry on
 units and levels of selection].
 If genes have no special role and whole developmental cycles are
replicators, as some developmental- systems theorists argue, the
distinction between replicator and interactor becomes blurred.
In the continuing debate over developmental versus traditional
theories of evolutionary biology, Sterelny et al. (1996) hold a fairly
conservative position. They agree with the developmentalists that
genes play no privileged role in the development of phenotypes from
genotypes. Genes do play a role in this process, only simply not a
privileged role. Genes can serve as a causal bridge from
phenotype to phenotype, but other entities can do so as well. Genes
are not the only replicators in biological evolution. The repeated
cycles in inheritance include many different sorts of constancies and
repetitions—genes, cellular machinery, phenotypic traits
including behaviors, and social structures. Information remains
central to selection processes, but genes are not the only carriers of
such information. Genes predict phenotypic characters only in the same
sense that environmental factors predict them. Sterelny (2000a) has
argued that developmental considerations require no fundamental
reevaluation of evolutionary conceptions along the lines of DST.
Godfrey-Smith (2009; see also Godfrey-Smith 2000b; Griesemer 2005)
contrasts the replicator/interactor approach to natural selection with
a more classical approach. This latter approach is usually given as a
“recipe” for evolution by natural selection to use
Godfrey-Smith’s terminology (see also Brandon 1990: 3.1). Ever
since Darwin, a number of authors have proposed that for evolution by
natural selection to occur three conditions or ingredients are
necessary. A population should exhibit (1) variation, that (2) leads
to differences in fitness between the entities forming the population
[see the entry on
 fitness],
 (3) which are heritable (reviewed in Godfrey-Smith 2007). The most
famous version of these recipes is the one provided by Lewontin
1970.
There is a difference in emphasis between the two approaches in that
the replicator/interactor approach focuses on the entities
forming the population, while the classical approach provides a
population description of evolutionary change. Another difference
between the two approaches, is that under the classical approach
replication is not required for evolution by natural selection to
occur. In fact, as long as heritability is positive, and the two other
conditions are satisfied, then evolution by natural selection can
occur (but will not necessarily do so, cf. Godfrey-Smith 2009: 25). An
abstract definition of heritability (\(h^2\))—although by no
means fully general (see Bourrat 2015a)—is that it represents
the slope of the regression of average offspring character on parent
or mid-parent (in case of sexual species) character (see the entry on
 Heritability).
 Given a positive heritability does not entail replication of
character between parent and offspring, but is rather a special case,
in which heritability would be exactly 1 in the absence of
environmental variation, the replicator/interactor perspective is
subsumed by the classical approach. Godfrey-Smith concurs:
From this point of view, we can see the replicator analysis as picking
out a special case of what is covered (or supposed to be covered) by
the classical view. (2009: 36; see also Godfrey-Smith 2000b)
To see why a lack of replication does not prevent evolution by natural
selection from occurring, suppose a population of entities exists with
different sizes, as presented in
 Figure 3(a),
 in which there is selection for larger entities. We assume that the
entities reproduce asexually in discrete generations and that there is
no environmental variation. At the parental generation, there are two
types of individuals, with respective sizes of \(\frac{3}{4}\) and 1.
Because of the selection for size, entities of size \(\frac{3}{4}\)
produce 3 offspring while entities of size 1 produce 4 offspring.
Suppose now that there is a positive heritability, as defined above,
so that, on average, offspring resemble more their parent than they
resemble other entities of the parental generation, as is displayed on
 Figure 3(a),
 but only slightly so (\(h^2 = 0.2\)). After one generation,
although there is no high-fidelity replication, the average size of
the population has changed, due to the effect of natural
selection. This simple example demonstrates quite straightforwardly
that replication is not required for evolution by natural selection to
occur.
We said earlier that replication would imply a heritability of exactly
1 in the absence of environmental variation. Although this is correct,
the reverse is not true. In fact, take again a similar population as
in
 Figure 3(a),
 but this time assume a different pattern of inheritance for the two
types of entities as displayed in
 Figure 3(b).
 With this pattern of inheritance, although there is no replication,
entities, on average, have the exact same character as their parent.
In the case of the entities of size \(\frac{3}{4}\), some
offspring have the exact same character as their parent, but that is
not required either, as is the case with the entities of size 1, of
which none of the offspring has the same character as their
parent.
One possible response against regarding the classical approach to
evolution by natural selection as unconditionally superior to the
replicator/interactor approach, is to argue that although evolution by
natural selection can occur without replication, when this happens,
the evolutionary change resulting is not a pure case of
evolution by natural selection. Rather, it is evolution by natural
selection mixed with some other evolutionary processes. A rationale
for this claim is that the fact offspring do not resemble their parent
introduces some variation in the population of which the origin is not
natural selection. In abstract terms, the introduction of variation
can be regarded as a form mutation.
Under this interpretation, the classical approach on the one hand, and
the replicator/interactor approach, on the other hand, just emphasize
different aspects of evolutionary explanations. The classical approach
gives us evolutionary explanations in the context of other
evolutionary processes occurring, while the replicator/interactor
approach gives us evolutionary explanations of what the effect of
natural selection would be in the absence of any other evolutionary
process acting in the population, that is, in its pure form.
Understood that way, the two approaches do not necessarily need to be
opposed.
Another challenge to the replicator/interactor approach to evolution
by natural selection is to see replicators themselves as a
product of natural selection rather than as a necessary
starting point. One premise of this argument is that some form of
natural selection must have occurred on entities that initially were
not replicating, perhaps not even reproducing. This is recognized by
Dawkins, who notes in passing in the second chapter of the Selfish
Gene that “Darwin’s ‘survival of the
fittest’ is really a special case of a more general law of
survival of the stable” (Dawkins 1976: 13) and that life
originated from selection of molecules for stability. The idea that
evolution by natural selection can occur without reproduction has been
argued by Bouchard (2008, 2011; see also Doolittle 2014, Bourrat
2014).
(a) Population in which there is no replication and a low
heritability (\(h^2\)), yet, evolution by natural selection occurs.
(b) Population in which there is no replication, yet heritability 
is 1. Evolution by natural selection occurs.
Figure 3. Illustration of the idea that
evolution by natural selection can occur without replication.
The idea that selection can occur without there being replicators was
first introduced as “chemical selection” in line with the
views of Oparin, who proposed that coascervates (colloidal droplets)
could encapsulate protobiological chemicals and self-replicate without
genes through mechanical fission, a view also independently proposed
by Haldane (Oparin 1936 [1938], Haldane 1929; see Kolb 2016). This was
later extended by the work of Sidney Fox, who showed that proteinoid
spheres could mechanically reproduce stably (Hsu & Fox 1976).
If modern biological systems evolved from molecules that did not have
the ability to reproduce, let alone replicate, one might ask, what is
the simplest case of evolution by natural selection? It is a case in
which different types of entities have different persistences but do
not produce any offspring. In this model, the types with the property
of persisting longer represent an increasing frequency of the total
population over time. One problem though in a model of persistence
alone, is that each time one entity goes out of existence, it is not
replaced by another entity, so that over time the population size
tends towards zero. Although this does not mean that evolution by
natural selection cannot occur in such populations, this poses
important constraints on the evolutionary dynamics of this population.
Furthermore, it is possible to regard the ability for a population to
maintain its size or increase its size as a primordial form of
adaptation. To see this one can imagine different populations of
entities at different locations, some with the ability to produce some
entities or multiply, others without. It is clear that the populations
with the ability to maintain or increase their size would out-compete
those that are unable to do so. The ability for a population to
sustain its population size might thus be regarded as a primordial
form of adaptation.
A next ‘stage’ in the evolution from primordial entities
unable to reproduce to modern biological systems might thus have been
for entities to produce new offspring entities (or multiply) without
the ability to pass on their properties reliably. In such a situation
the size of a population could be maintained. The most extreme form of
that would be to imagine a population of two types in which each type
has the same probability to produce an offspring of the other types
than its own type. With entities of the two types having different
persistence, a modest form of evolution by natural selection is still
possible. Versions of this model have been proposed by Wilkins,
Stanyon, & Musgrave (2012), Earnshaw-Whyte (2012) and Bourrat
(2014). Since there is, on average, no more resemblance between an
offspring with its parent than any other entity of the parental
generation, and evolution by natural selection is still observed in
such a scenario, one might think that heritability is, strictly
speaking not a necessary condition for evolution by natural
selection.
Wilkins et al. (2012) argue that over time in a reactor with limited
incoming chemical species, hypercycles (as defined by Eigen,
Biebricher, Gebinoga, & Gardiner 1991) of reactions will tend to
include reaction types that are more stable and capture more source
molecules and energy than variant reaction types, leading to the
evolution by natural selection of replicator-like molecules as well as
energetically efficient “metabolic” molecules. Recent work
in biochemistry has added strength to that suggestion (Altstein 2015).
Hence, given that no replicator is required for selection (in this
case, chemical), replicator molecules can be seen as the
outcome of selective evolution, not a necessary prior
condition for it. In effect, the evolution of replicators is the first
major transition of evolution, despite the view of Szathmáry
and Maynard Smith that replicators needed to come first (Maynard Smith
& Szathmáry 1995; Szathmáry & Maynard Smith
1997). Bourrat (2014), further developed this idea into a series of
agent-based models. He showed that replication is an attractor in
populations lacking heritability once small random mutations
increasing or decreasing the fidelity of character inheritance is
introduced.
The works on the origins of replicators ties in with the notion of the
reproducer proposed by Griesemer (2000a,b, 2002, 2005;
Wimsatt & Griesemer 2007), although it was published first, based
on a circulated manuscript by Griesemer, by Szathmáry and
Maynard Smith (1997). A reproducer is an entity that develops and has
a material overlap between the “parent” and
“progeny”. This causal relationship between parents and
progeny is called “progeneration”, the “increase in
numerically distinct objects of a given kind”. Reproduction is a
composite process of development and progeneration, leading to objects
that are themselves capable of development and progeneration. Thus,
the reproducer concept extends the notion of a developmental
system.
Here inheritance is a system property, not a property of
parts, unless they are also reproducing systems, and is
developmentally acquired. Organisms do not arise already capable of
reproduction in the main, but must undergo orderly transitions before
they may reproduce.
The relation between reproducers, and replicators and interactors,
varies according to author. Griesemer treats replication as the
terminal form of reproduction, once coding mechanisms have been
evolved, which is itself an evolved form of multiplication (Griesemer
2000a: 76). Unlike Dawkins’ replicator concept, which Griesemer
believes is based on a similarity relationship of
“copying”, a reproducer requires material overlap
of systems. However, replication arises when material overlap evolves
progeneration, and progeneration evolves a codical inheritance system,
as
 Figure 4
 indicates.
Figure 4. Wimsatt and Griesemer’s
reproducer concept (Wimsatt & Griesemer 2007, 268).
Others, particularly Jablonka and Lamb (2005, 2007), think that
reproducers are distinct from replication, and that some epigenetic
inheritance systems are reproducers without being replicators. For
them, a reproducer is the “target of selection” (see the
entry on
 inheritance systems).
Godfrey-Smith (2009: 83; see also Okasha 2006: 14) takes issue with
Griesemer’s requirement of “material overlap” as
being too narrow a definiendum of reproducers. He thinks that
reproducers need not contribute actual material to their progeny
(where they template for sequences, as in the case of viruses).
Griesemer believes Godfrey-Smith has over-interpreted the requirement;
he is primarily concerned with the idea that parents cause
progeny (Griesemer 2014). Charbonneau (2014) furthers the move made by
Godfrey-Smith. He argues that the existence of parent-offspring
lineages is unnecessary for evolution by natural selection to occur.
An aspect of reproducers sensu lato that has fascinated some
is that it does not imply a particular level of reproduction or
progeneration, and indeed Szathmáry and Maynard Smith consider
that the major transitions of evolution each involve an evolved mode
of progeneration that is more inclusive or novel than what it evolved
from (Maynard Smith & Szathmáry 1995; Szathmáry
& Maynard Smith 1997).
Godfrey-Smith also proposed a taxonomy of reproducers, dividing them
into simple, collective and scaffolded (Godfrey-Smith 2009, 87ff).
Simple reproducers are 
entities that can reproduce … using their own machinery, in
conjunction with external sources of energy and raw materials. 
He gives an example of a bacterial cell. Collective reproducers 
… are reproducing entities with parts that themselves have the
capacity to reproduce, where the parts do so largely through their own
resources rather than the coordinated activity as a whole. 
And scaffolded reproducers 
are entities which get reproduced as part of the reproduction of some
larger unit (a simple reproducer), or that are reproduced by some
other entity. 
Examples here includes viruses and chromosomes. Godfrey-Smith applies
the scaffolded reproducer category to sociocultural evolution.
The notion of reproducers has also been applied to speciation and
cladogenesis (A. Hamilton & Haber 2006). While it may apply to
populations, given that taxa do not share the kind of causal unity
found in populations and organisms, it is unlikely to apply to species
or supraspecific taxa, and macroevolution in general.
The idea that evolution by natural selection requires the existence of
replicators has been a very useful heuristics in evolutionary biology,
but also a way of motivating the application of an evolutionary
thinking beyond the boundaries of evolutionary biology. We started by
showing how the notion of gene can be abstracted away from its
physical basis and characterized in purely informational terms. We
then showed how Dawkins and Hull pursued this abstraction and
attempted to free the gene from its biological substrate. This
motivated responses both from proponents of the replicator concept who
furthered the abstraction but also critics. As successful and
inspiring such an abstraction has been, it should not be reified:
evolution by natural selection and adaptation can occur even in the
absence of replicators. High fidelity certainly facilitates adaptive
evolution, but this might be because replicators are themselves the
product of evolution rather than necessary for it.