Absolutely central to the contemporary civic republican program is
the conception of political liberty as non-domination or independence
from arbitrary power, and so it makes good sense to begin with an
explication of this idea.
It is notorious that there are several competing conceptions of
political liberty. The now standard account was laid down most
influentially by Isaiah Berlin in his famous lecture on “Two
Concepts of Liberty” (Berlin 1969). According to the first,
‘negative’ conception of liberty, people are free simply to
the extent that their choices are not interfered with. There are many
variations on this conception, depending on how exactly one wants to
define ‘interference’, but they all have in common the
basic intuition that to be free is, more or less, to be left alone to
do whatever one chooses. This idea of negative liberty Berlin
associates especially with the classic English political philosophers
Hobbes, Bentham, and J. S. Mill, and it is today probably the dominant
conception of liberty, particularly among contemporary Anglo-American
philosophers. In Mill’s well-known words, “the only freedom
which deserves the name, is that of pursuing our own good in our own
way, so long as we do not attempt to deprive others of theirs”
(1859, 17).
The second, ‘positive’ conception of liberty is not
quite so easy to define. Roughly speaking, a person or group is free in
the positive sense to the extent that they exercise self-control or
self-mastery. It is not agreed, however, what exactly constitutes this
self-mastery in the relevant sense. According to one particularly
influential account, to be free in the positive sense is to be able to
act on one’s second-order desires (Frankfurt 1982). For example,
the addicted gambler may be free in the negative sense not to
gamble—since no one actually forces him to do so—, but he is not
free in the positive sense unless he actually succeeds in acting on
his presumed second-order desire not to desire gambling. Berlin
associates this second conception especially with such continental
philosophers as Spinoza, Rousseau, and Hegel. Although it found some
support among English Hegelians like T. H. Green, those who advocate
the positive conception of liberty have generally been in the minority,
particularly among contemporary Anglo-American philosophers.
The troubling implications of the positive conception of liberty are
well-known, and need not be rehearsed at length here. For the most part, these
stem from the problem that freedom in the positive sense would seem to
license fairly extensive coercion on behalf of individuals’
allegedly ‘real’ interests—for example, coercively
forcing the gambler to quit on the presumption that this is, in fact,
what he really wants to do (even if he doesn’t say so). Regarding
this danger, Berlin writes:
Liberals like Berlin have thus understandably rejected the positive,
and emphatically embraced the negative conception of liberty. The
question remains, however, whether the received view of negative
liberty as non-interference in particular adequately captures the
political ideal we should be most interested in. Contemporary civic
republicans argue that it does not.
By way of illustration, consider the following scenarios (both are
standard examples in the republican tradition). In the first, imagine
a group of slaves with a generally well-meaning master. While the
latter has an institutionally-protected right to treat his slaves more
or less as he pleases (he might start whipping them just for the heck
of it, say), let us suppose that this master in particular leaves his
slaves for the most part alone. Now to the extent that he does not in
fact interfere with his slaves on a day-to-day basis, we are committed
to saying—on the non-interference view of liberty—that they
enjoy some measure of freedom. Some find this conclusion deeply
counterintuitive: if there is anything to the idea of political
liberty, one might think, surely it cannot be found in the condition of
slavery!
Even if we are willing to accept this conclusion, the
non-interference view of liberty commits us to others that are perhaps
even more paradoxical. For one thing, notice that we are committed to
saying that the slaves of our well-meaning master enjoy
greater freedom than the slaves of an abusive master down the
road. Of course, the former slaves are better off in some respect than
the latter, but do we really want to say that they are more
free? For another, consider the slave who, over time, comes to
understand his master’s psychological dispositions better and
better. Taking advantage of this improved insight, he manages to keep
on his master’s good side, and is consequently interfered with
less and less. Thus, on the non-interference view of liberty, we are
committed to saying that his freedom is increasing over time. Again, while
it is clear that the slave’s greater psychological insight
improves his well-being in some respect, do we really want to say that
it increases his freedom specifically?
Now consider a second scenario. Imagine the colony of a great imperial
power. Suppose that the colonial subjects have no political rights,
and thus that the imperial power governs them unilaterally. But
further suppose that the imperial power, for one reason or another,
chooses not to exercise the full measure of its authority—that
its policy towards the colony is one of more or less benign neglect.
From the point of view of liberty as non-interference, we must
conclude that the colonial subjects enjoy considerable freedom with
respect to their government for, on a day-to-day basis, their
government hardly ever interferes with them. Next suppose that the
colonial subjects revolt with success, and achieve political
independence. The former colony is now self-governing. We may imagine,
however, that the new government is somewhat more active than its
imperial predecessor, passing laws and instituting policies that
interfere with people’s lives to a greater extent than formerly was
the case. On the view of liberty as non-interference, we must
therefore say that there has been a decline in freedom with
independence. As in the first scenario, many find this
counterintuitive. Surely, a nation that has secured its independence
from colonial rule must have increased its political
liberty.
 What these examples are driving at is that political liberty might
best be understood as a sort of structural relationship that exists
between persons or groups, rather than as a contingent outcome. Whether
a master chooses to whip his slave on any given day, we might say, is
a contingent outcome: it all depends on the master’s mood, the
slave’s behavior, and so forth. What is not contingent (or at
least not in the same way) is the broader configuration of laws,
institutions, and norms that effectively permit masters to treat their
slaves however they please. As the ex-slave Frederick Douglass said of
his former condition, “it was slavery—not its mere
incidents—that I hated” (1855, 161).
 The republican conception of political liberty aims to capture
this insight as directly as possible. It defines freedom as a sort of
structural independence—as the condition of not being subject to
the arbitrary or uncontrolled power of a master. Pettit, who has done
more than anyone else to develop this republican conception of freedom
philosophically, puts it thus: a person or group enjoys freedom to the
extent that no other person or group has “the capacity to
interfere in their affairs on an arbitrary basis” (1999, 165;
cf. Pettit 1996, 1997, 2001, 2012, 2014).  On a plausible rendering of
the term ‘domination’ as, roughly speaking, arbitrary or
uncontrolled power (see Wartenberg 1990; Pettit 1996, 1997, 2012;
Lovett 2001, 2010, 2018), we might equivalently say that freedom in the
republican sense consists in the secure enjoyment of
non-domination. This view has since been widely embraced by
republican-minded authors such as Skinner (1998, 2002, 2008), Viroli (2002),
Maynor (2003, 2015), Laborde (2008, 2010), Costa (2009, 2013, 2016), Honohan (2013, 2014), and Taylor (2017). 
 Notice that the republican view of freedom is, at least in the
broad sense, a negative conception of political liberty. One need not
do or become anything in particular to enjoy political liberty in the
republican sense; one need not exercise self-mastery, on any view of
what that entails, nor succeed in acting on one’s second-order
desires (Skinner 1984, 1991, 2002; Spitz 1993). Republican freedom merely requires
the absence of something, namely, the absence of any structural
dependence on arbitrary power or domination.  (Also like
non-interference, non-domination comes in degrees: on the civic
republican view, one is not either free or unfree, but rather more or
less free depending on the extent of non-domination one securely
enjoys.)
Despite these similarities, however, republican freedom is not
equivalent to the received view of negative liberty as
non-interference. In contrast to the non-interference view, it easily
accounts for our intuitions in the two scenarios described above. The
slave lacks freedom because he is vulnerable to the arbitrary power of
his master; whether his master happens to exercise that power is
neither here nor there. Likewise, what matters with respect to
political freedom on the republican view is not how much the
imperial power chooses to govern its colony, but the fact that the
former may choose to govern the latter as much and however it
likes. Thus Joseph Priestley described the lightly-governed American
colonies as nevertheless in a condition of servitude because “by
the same power, by which the people of England can compel them to pay
one penny, they may compel them to pay the last penny they have”
(1769, 140).
Moreover, the republican conception captures in a more intuitively
satisfying way what would improve either situation with
respect to political liberty. Most people are not inclined to say that
slaves enjoy increasing freedom just because, with experience, they
improve their insight into their master’s psychological
dispositions. But many would be inclined to say that their
freedom is enhanced, other things being equal, if some effective reform
in the laws, institutions, or norms sharply reduced their
master’s authority over them. (This is not necessarily to
say that the slaves will enjoy greater well-being, all things
considered—only that because their domination is lessened, they
enjoy greater freedom to that extent.) And of course, no matter how
benevolent their particular master happens to be, no slave can be
completely free until the institution of slavery itself is
abolished.
Political freedom, in other words, is constituted by rightly-ordered
laws, institutions, and norms: “to enjoy such non-domination,
after all, is just to be in a position where no one can interfere
arbitrarily in your affairs,” writes Pettit, “and you are
in that position from the moment that the institutions are in
place” inhibiting possible arbitrary interference (1997, 107).
Political freedom is most fully realized, on this view, in a
well-ordered self-governing republic of equal citizens under the rule
of law, where no one citizen is the master of any other (Pettit 1989,
1997, 2012, 2014; Skinner 1991, 1998; Spitz 1993, 1995; Viroli 2002; Maynor 2003; Lovett 2012a, 2016a). In the classic
expression of James Harrington, such a community would be an
“empire of laws and not of men” (1656, 8).
The appeal of the republican conception of political liberty as
independence from the arbitrary power of a master is perhaps
understandable. This is not to say, however, that this conception is
uncontroversial. Before discussing its role in developing contemporary
civic republican arguments, we should consider various problems and
debates surrounding the republican idea of freedom.
A common objection to the republican idea of freedom is that it fails
to pick out an distinct conception at all. The suggestion here, first
noted perhaps by Paley (1785), is that talking about non-domination is
really just another (more obscure) way of talking about security of
non-interference (Goodin 2003; Carter 2008; Kramer 2008). Contemporary
civic republicans must reject this view. Pettit (1997, 73–4) observes that one might secure a low expected level of
non-interference in more than one way, and the republican idea of
freedom is by no means indifferent as to the method adopted. For
example, to have a master with an exceptionally benevolent disposition
is to be reasonably secure in one’s expectation that one will not
often be adversely interfered with—but it is to have a master
nonetheless. The republican idea of freedom specifically instructs us
not to make our master a better person (the goal of the old
‘mirror for princes’ literature), but to render him less
of a master (Lovett 2012b). This can only be done by curbing either his arbitrary
power or his subjects’ dependency on him.
Supposing then that non-domination and non-interference are indeed
distinct ideas, one might wonder where this leaves the latter, on the
civic republican view of things. Is obtaining freedom from arbitrary
power the only thing we should care about? Roughly speaking,
there are three possible answers civic republicans might give to this
question.
The first is simply to answer yes. It was a mistake, one
might argue, to ever think non-interference important or desirable in
itself. Of course, as a contingent empirical fact, extensive arbitrary
power often brings extensive interferences in train (slave masters and
absolute monarchs just can’t help meddling in their
subjects’ affairs, we might suppose), so it is understandable that
our distaste for the former should influence our assessment of the
latter. There are good reasons for rejecting this first answer,
however. Imagine living in a community where our lives are regulated
down to the tiniest detail, but always in strict accordance with
commonly-known, non-arbitrary rules and procedures. Although we enjoy
extensive freedom from arbitrary power, we have hardly any freedom of
individual choice. Most would not want to live in such a community, and
this suggests that we do indeed place some independent value on
non-interference (Larmore 2001; Wall 2001).
 This leaves two other possible answers. On the one hand, we might
try to incorporate some measure of non-interference into our idea of
freedom as non-domination. Something like this approach was initially
taken by Pettit (1997, 74–7): there he distinguished between
factors that “compromise” liberty, and factors that
“condition” it. Perhaps my republican freedom is
compromised when someone gains arbitrary power over me, but it is
merely conditioned when I lack the means or opportunities to make full
use of it, and interferences might be one such conditioning factor.
On the other hand, we might allow that republican freedom and
non-interference are distinct goods, but hold that both are valuable
in some degree. We might either regard them as having roughly equal
value (Skinner 1998), or we might regard republican liberty as having
greater importance than non-interference, other things equal
(Viroli 2002, Pettit 2012). Each of these options has its advantages
and disadvantages, and there is no settled view in the contemporary
civic republican literature on this point (see Lovett 2018). 
A second major difficulty in developing the republican idea of
freedom lies in giving precise meaning to the notion of arbitrariness.
According to what criteria are we to consider power ‘arbitrary’? Not
simply when its exercise is random or unpredictable. This view would
undermine the whole point of the republican conception of political
liberty. As discussed above, with long experience a slave is better
able to predict his master’s behavior, and so it appears less
random to him, but (the civic republican wants to argue) the slave does
not enjoy greater freedom by that fact alone. Just because one is
better able to cope with arbitrary power, it does not follow that
one’s domination is any less.
‘Discretionary’ is much closer to the relevant meaning
of arbitrary, but it is not quite right either. Discretionary power
might be delegated to a public agency with a view to advancing certain
policy goals or ends—as for example Congress has delegated
discretionary authority to the Federal Reserve—but we would not
want to say that this reduces our freedom (or, at any rate, not so long
as that discretionary authority is appropriately answerable to a common
knowledge understanding of the goals or ends it is meant to serve and
the means it is permitted to employ). For reasons explained in
the fourth section of this entry, contemporary civic republicans must
be able to offer an account of non-arbitrary, yet discretionary
authority.
How then should we characterize arbitrary power? Broadly speaking, two
answers have been proposed. The first defines non-arbitrariness procedurally. Power
is not arbitrary, on this view, to the extent that it is reliably
controlled by effective rules, procedures, or goals that are common
knowledge to all persons or groups concerned (Lovett 2001, 2010). To
be reliable and effective, on this view, constraints must be resilient
over a wide range of possible changes or modifications in the relevant
circumstances (Lovett 2012c). Roughly speaking, the procedural view
equates republican freedom with the traditional idea of the rule of
law, provided we are willing to extend the latter idea considerably
(List 2006; Lovett 2016a).
Alternatively, we might define non-arbitrariness democratically. Power is not arbitrary, on this second view, to the extent that it is directly or indirectly controlled by the concerned persons or groups themselves. In an example offered by Pettit (2012, 57–58), suppose Andrea has given Bob the keys to her alcohol cupboard, with strict instructions that no matter how much she pleads, he is not to return them except on twenty-four hours notice. Since Bob must answer to Andrea for his conduct in this regard, his power over her is not arbitrary. In roughly the same way, the power of the state over its citizens will not be arbitrary provided the people have an equal share in controlling how their state exercises its power. Many authors subscribe to some version of this democratic view (see for example Bohman 2008; Laborde 2008; Forst 2013; McCammon 2015).
Either way, two caveats are worth noting. The first is that, on either view, arbitrariness  simply means uncontrolled and vice versa. Pettit’s recent preference for the latter term over the former (e.g., Pettit 2012, 2014) is simply due to its superior clarity, and represents neither a real change in view nor the addition of a new condition alongside the old. The second caveat is that, again on either view, arbitrary or uncontrolled power should not be defined along substantive lines as power that is unjust or illegitimate. This was never Pettit’s view, though in earlier work (e.g., Pettit 1997) some passages may have inadvertently suggested otherwise. The well-known problem with a moralized definition of arbitrariness is that it would collapse our conception of republican freedom into a general account of the human good (Larmore 2001; Costa 2007; Carter 2008). 
So far we have assumed that, however ultimately defined, republican
freedom is always a good thing. Some have wondered whether this is the
case, however. This objection is most often expressed via the example
of benevolent care-giving relationships. On the republican view that
one enjoys freedom only to the extent that one is independent from
arbitrary power, it would seem that children do not enjoy republican
freedom with respect to their parents. But surely, one might suppose,
the parent-child relationship is (in most cases) an extremely valuable
one, and so we would not want greater republican freedom in such a
context. Republican freedom is, perhaps, not always a good thing
(Ferejohn 2001).
 As stated, this objection rests on a conceptual error, though (as
we shall see) it points to an important set of issues as yet
under-developed in the contemporary civic republican literature. The
error in the above example stems from our confusing the overall
evaluation of a whole with an evaluation of its parts considered
separately. It is undeniable that, at least in the ordinary course of
things, parent-child relationships are extremely valuable, considered
as a whole; it does not follow from this, however, that the
relationship is necessarily valuable in each and every part. For the
objection to hold, it must be the case—not only that the
parent-child relationship is valuable overall—but further, that
that it would actually be worse if, holding all its other features
constant, it involved less arbitrary power. But this is highly
doubtful. Clearly, the introduction of children’s rights into
western law was a boon, precisely because it reduced the degree of
arbitrary power to which children are inevitably subject (which is to
say, because it increased their republican freedom). That their
republican freedom cannot be increased still further, perhaps, without
destroying family life altogether, and thus losing its many other
benefits, is neither here nor there.
What consideration of this faulty objection does reveal, however, is
that republican freedom is simply one good among others, with which it
might come into conflict (Markell 2008). The challenge for
contemporary civic republicans, therefore, is less to show why non-domination is an important human good
(for which there are plenty of good arguments in the literature: see
Pettit 1997; Maynor 2003; Laborde 2008; Lovett 2010), but rather to
show how it fits into a broader moral framework, and specifically, the comparative weight we should assign
to republican freedom vis-à-vis other important goods in
the achievement of human flourishing (or, if non-domination is regarded as a deontological side-constraint, as suggested by Forst 2013, its relative priority vis-à-vis other side-constraints). Pettit (2005, 2014) sketches a case
for the relative priority of republican liberty on more or less
pragmatic grounds: roughly speaking, he argues that political
doctrines will be most effective when they concentrate on as few core
values as possible, and accordingly that the best values to
concentrate on are those whose promotion will service as wide a range
of needs as possible. Republican freedom is just such a good, he
claims, insofar as our efforts to promote it will necessarily have
far-reaching beneficial consequences. It will be more clear why this
might be so in light of the discussion in part four below, but
regardless there remains considerable work to be done developing the
foundations of republican theory.
After long-standing neglect among historians of political thought,
there has been a dramatic revival of interest in the classical republican tradition in the past fifty years or so. For the first few
decades of this revival, a particular interpretation of that tradition
prevailed. According to this view, the classical republicans held what
would now be described as a perfectionist political
philosophy—that is, a political philosophy centered on the idea
of promoting a specific conception of the good life as consisting in
active citizenship and healthy civic virtue on the one hand, while
combating any sort of corruption that would undermine these values on
the other. This distinctive vision of the good life is supposed to be
rooted in the experience of the ancient Greek polis, especially as
expressed in the writings of Aristotle. The goods of active political
participation, civic virtue, and so on, are to be understood as
intrinsically valuable components of human flourishing.
 It is now standard to refer to this as the ‘civic
humanist’ interpretation of the classical republican tradition, and it is most commonly associated with the writings of Arendt (1958, 1963), Pocock (1975, 1981), and Rahe (1992). These and other civic humanist writings have left such an impression on the field that even today many fail to distinguish their views from those of the civic republicans. As we shall see, however, the two are importantly distinct.
Beginning with Skinner (1984), Sunstein (1988), and Pettit (1989), an alternative interpretation of the tradition began to emerge. Undoubtedly, the classical republicans were committed to the importance of active political participation, civic virtue, combating corruption, and so forth. But
rather than viewing these as intrinsically valuable components of a particular vision of the good life, these authors argued, they should instead be viewed as
instrumentally useful tools for securing and preserving political
liberty, understood as independence from arbitrary rule. Republicanism, on this view, has its roots not in an Aristotelian vision of the ancient Greek polis, but rather in Roman jurisprudence with its fundamental and categorical distinction between free men and citizens on the one hand, and dependent slaves on the other. This instrumental or ‘neo-Roman’ interpretation of the tradition was cemented in major contributions by Spitz (1995), Pettit (1997), Dagger (1997), and Skinner (1998).
There now exists a considerable historiographical literature advancing this new interpretation, including studies of Machiavelli (Skinner 1983, 1984; Viroli 1998), the seventeenth-century English republicans (Dzelzainis 1995; Skinner 1998, 2000; Lovett 2005, 2012a); Rousseau (Viroli 1998); the Americans of the founding era (Sellers 1994); Wollstonecraft (Coffee 2012; Halldenius 2015); and the nineteenth-century American labor republicans (Gourevitch 2015). These and other contemporary civic republicans argue that a careful reading of the classical republican texts firmly rejects the perfectionist interpretation favored by civic humanists.
Moreover, the instrumental turn was vital to establishing interest in republicanism as a viable contemporary political doctrine. The difficulty with civic humanism, as many critics have pointed out, is that a perfectionist vision of human flourishing through active political virtue is out of step with modern political and social conditions. There is simply no hope of recreating the experience of the Greek polis in economically complex mass democracies characterized by reasonable pluralism (Herzog 1986; Goodin 2003; Brennan and Lomasky 2006). This objection is removed, however, if we regard civic virtue instrumentally, as merely one tool among others for securing political liberty. Insofar as republicans are willing to use that tool, and thus willing to support public policies designed to deliberately cultivate civic virtue, they must perhaps reject stronger doctrines of liberal neutrality; but they will nevertheless be happy to endorse broad principles of toleration (Honohan 2013; Lovett and Whitfield 2016). Thus properly understood, republicanism is fully “compatible with modern pluralistic forms of society” (Pettit 1997, 8).

3.2 Republicanism and Liberalism


The contemporary civic republican interpretation carries with it
what could be seen as a significant drawback, namely, that it reduces the distance between classical republicanism and the
mainstream liberal tradition. At one level, this should surprise no
one. After all, classical republicans and classical liberals shared
many political commitments (constitutionalism and the rule of law, for
example), and many figures are regarded as central to both traditions
(Montesquieu, for example). The difficulty arises, however, from the
suggestion that on the new instrumental interpretation, republicanism
for all intents and purposes collapses into liberalism (Larmore 2001; Patten 1996). Indeed, at one point in his
Political Liberalism, Rawls explicitly states that his theory
has “no fundamental opposition” with a non-perfectionist,
instrumental interpretation of republicanism (1993, 205). What then
is the advantage of civic republicanism over mainstream liberalism (Herzog 1986; Goodin 2003; Brennan and Lomasky 2006)?


The standard reply among contemporary civic republicans is
to argue that there is indeed a connection between republicanism and
liberalism, but that liberalism is “an impoverished or incoherent
republicanism” (Viroli 2002, 61)—a bastard offshoot, so to
speak, of what was originally a considerably more appealing political
philosophy. The republican critique of liberalism is thus best understood as a critique of various problematic tendencies that developed within the liberal tradition as it increasingly diverged from its republican roots. 
 The most important of these is the tendency in the liberal tradition, especially beginning with Bentham, Paley, and Constant, to displace the robust conception of liberty as independence from arbitrary or uncontrolled power with a weaker conception of liberty as non-interference. The significance of this substitution will be easier to assess after the discussion below, but in the main it comes down to this: because republican liberty is inherently incompatible with any form of dependency or mastery, its social implications are considerably more radical than those of mere negative liberty. This is precisely why many liberal authors took pains to distance themselves from republicanism in the first place, as they openly admitted: “those definitions of liberty ought to be rejected, which, by making that essential to civil freedom which is unattainable in experience, inflame expectations that can never be gratified,” observed Paley (1785, 315; cf. Pettit 1997).

What is more, on the view of liberty as non-interference, any sort of public law or policy intervention will count as an interference and, ergo, as a reduction in freedom. Liberals committed to the received view of negative liberty will thus tend to be overly hostile to government action (Pettit 1997, 2009). On the republican view, by contrast, public laws or policy interventions need not always count as reductions in freedom. Provided the law or policy is adopted and implemented in an appropriately non-arbitrary manner, the citizens’ freedom remains untouched. Indeed, if the law or policy ameliorates dependency, or curtails the arbitrary powers some in the community exercise over others, freedom may be enhanced. In the classical tradition, this idea was often expressed as the claim that, in the words of Blackstone, “laws, when prudently framed, are by no means subversive but rather introductive of liberty” and thus “where there is no law, there is no freedom” (1765,
122). The grounds for this claim will be explained further below.
4. The Contemporary Republican Program


However interesting the debates discussed in the
previous section, one may still wonder whether republicanism has
anything valuable to contribute to contemporary normative political
theory and philosophy. One reason many people remain skeptical has to
do with the fact that the classical republican writings often express
views that are decidedly elitist, patriarchal, and militaristic. How
could the basis for an appealing contemporary political program be
found in such writings (Goldsmith 2000; Maddox 2002; Goodin 2003; McCormick 2003)?
 That the classical republicans often expressed these very
unappealing views is not disputed. But what are we to make of this
fact? There are two possibilities. On the one hand, the parochialism
of the classical republicans might reflect logical consequences of
their core value commitments, in which case we cannot adopt the latter
without taking on board the former. On the other hand, it might merely
reflect the accidental prejudices of their day, in which case it can
easily be dispensed with as we modernize the republican program. Now
according to the civic humanist reading of the tradition, the
classical republicans were committed to a perfectionist conception of
the human good as active citizenship and civic virtue. On this view,
it is clear that some individuals will be more successful than others
in attaining the good so understood—some are more adept at
politics than others, some are more capable of heroic displays of
virtue than others, and so on. Indeed, political power and public
honor are, to some extent, positional goods, meaning that their
distribution among the members of a community will necessarily be
unequal. It follows that, on the civic humanist reading of the
tradition, the elitist bent of the classical republican writings is a
consequence of their core values. As Arendt writes, it is “the
sign of a well-ordered republic” that only the politically
virtuous elite “would have the right to be heard in the conduct
of the business of the republic” (1963, 279).


The civic republicans, naturally, reject this view. There is nothing
inherently elitist about the ideal of freedom when this is understood
negatively as independence from arbitrary or uncontrolled power. The classical
republicans, to be sure, typically confined the extension of this ideal
to a narrow range of propertied, native-born male citizens. But on the
civic republican reading of the tradition, this merely reflects an
unnecessary prejudice we can easily dispense with. The elitism of the tradition long concealed the potentially radical implications of freedom as non-domination; suitably universalized now at last, republicanism is revealed to be a strikingly progressive political doctrine (Pettit 1997, 2014; Maynor 2003; Lovett 2009; Gourevitch 2015).


The remainder of this section will sketch some of the wide-ranging
applications of a universalized republicanism, dedicated to the
promotion of freedom as non-domination. Much of the contemporary
republican program, as one would expect, bares some familial
relationship with the political commitments of the classical
republicans. There are also divergences, however. Contemporary civic
republicans draw inspiration from the classical tradition, but they do
not aim to anachronistically implement the republicanism of yore for
its own sake.
4.1 Republican Public Policy
 Contemporary civic republicans aim to promote freedom, understood
as independence from arbitrary power. Roughly speaking, there are two
directions from which republican freedom might be threatened. First,
there is the obvious danger of an autocratic or despotic government
assuming arbitrary powers over its subjects; this concern, and
republican remedies for it, will be discussed below. But there is a
second danger to republican freedom as well—one that concerns
contemporary civic republicans just as much as the first. (Absent this
second concern, republican policy would indeed often seem
“indeterminate,” as observed by McMahon 2005 and Costa
2007.)  This is the danger that some individuals or groups within
civil society will succeed in assuming arbitrary or uncontrolled
powers over others. A few examples will help clarify this second
danger.


Imagine for a moment there were no system of domestic criminal and
civil law. In this case, citizens would not know where they stood with
one another; their interrelations would be governed simply by
force—which is to say, by the arbitrary whim of the momentarily
stronger party. In order to enjoy some degree of republican freedom,
therefore, it is absolutely essential to introduce a domestic legal
system so as to govern the citizens’ mutual relations (Lovett 2016a). Notice
that, on the republican view of freedom, the laws do not merely protect
some freedoms at the expense of others (as on the non-interference
view), but rather themselves actually introduce or enable that freedom.
On this view, only when their interrelations are mutually governed by a
system of public and stable rules is it possible for fellow
citizens to enjoy some measure of independence from arbitrary rule
(Pettit 1989, 1997, 2012; Viroli 2002; Dagger 2009).


This connection between the rule of law and freedom is a common theme
in the classical republican literature. Contemporary civic republicans
observe, however, that even when the rule of law is firmly
established, there remain many other potential dangers of which the
classical republicans were less well aware. For example, while markets as such need not involve domination (Pettit 2006), and indeed when well-ordered might reduce it (Taylor 2017), republicans’ enthusiasm for markets will have definite limits. Specifically, there is the danger of basic needs deprivation, which can place the least advantaged
members of society in a position of economic vulnerability (Spitz 1993; Pettit
1997; Viroli 2002). In order to satisfy their basic needs, individuals
may well submit themselves to the arbitrary power of exploitative
employers or become dependent on the whims of voluntary charity
(Dagger 2006; Lovett 2009; Gourevitch 2015). Ensuring the enjoyment of republican
freedom will therefore require some public provision for otherwise
unmet basic needs.
 Yet another danger to republican freedom arises in the context of
family life and gender relations. Traditional family law subjected
both wives and children to considerable arbitrary power: circumstances
in the case of the latter, circumscribed opportunities in the case of
the former, ensured the nearly complete dependency of both on the
family they happened to be in. The contemporary civic republican
program is thus congenial to both an expansion of children’s
rights, and the elimination of sex domination (Pettit 1997; Phillips
2000; Costa 2013; Halldenius 2015).


It is always important from a civic republican point of view to be on
guard against the introduction of new forms of dependency and
arbitrary power through those very laws and policies designed to
enhance individual freedom, however. In the area of criminal and civil
law, for example, freedom might be threatened by legal uncertainty or
prosecutorial discretion; and, of course, there are grave republican
concerns with respect to the existing system of punishment in many
western nations (Braithwaite and Pettit 1990). These dangers might
suggest the need for a more democratized system of criminal justice
(Martí 2009).  Similarly, in the public provision of basic
needs, there are republican concerns with respect to dependence on
government aid and arbitrariness in the distribution of benefits that
might point to the introduction of an unconditional basic income
(Raventos 2007; Lovett 2009; for a contrary view, see Taylor 2017). In many of these areas, however, there remains
considerable work for contemporary civic republicans in determining
the appropriate public policy implications of a universalized concern
for republican freedom.
4.2 Republican Political Institutions


Turning from questions of public policy to the form of government,
we return to issues more familiar to the writers in the classical
tradition. Protecting citizens from the arbitrary or uncontrolled power of their
government through good institutional design represents perhaps the
signature classical republican concern. Many of the standard devices
for achieving this aim—the rule of law, the separation of powers,
federalism, constitutionally entrenched basic rights, and so
on—have been adopted by liberals and others. Contemporary civic
republicans, naturally, remain committed to these institutional devices
in some measure (Pettit 1997, 2012, 2014; Maynor 2003).


However, contemporary civic republicans also recognize that these
sorts of devices can only go so far. The basic reason for this is that,
no matter how carefully designed, the operation and functioning of
government necessarily entails considerable discretion on the part of
public authorities (Pettit 1997; Richardson 2002). There are two
especially prominent instances of this. First, it is clear that no
matter how detailed and carefully-crafted it is, no system of explicit
rules and regulations can possibly cover all contingencies and
circumstances. It follows that discretionary authority must inevitably
be left in the hands of courts, public agencies, and administrative
bureaucracies. Second, even apart from this, there remains extensive
discretion in the hands of legislatures to set public law and policy in
the first place. A daily-changing system of rules is no better than
having no rules at all.  


The standard republican remedy for this problem is enhanced
democracy. It must, however, be democracy of the right sort. Most
contemporary civic republicans reject the populist model of democracy
according to which all public laws and policies must express the
collective will of the people in order to be considered legitimate.
Instead, they generally endorse some form of “qualified
populism” (Richardson 2002) or “contestatory
democracy” (Pettit 1997, 1999, 2001; Maynor 2003). Roughly
speaking, the idea is that properly-designed democratic institutions
should give citizens the effective opportunity to contest the
decisions of their representatives. This possibility of contestation
will make government agents wielding discretionary authority
answerable to a public understanding of the goals or ends they are
meant to serve and the means they are permitted to employ. In this
way, discretionary power can be subject to popular control in the sense
required for a secure enjoyment of republican liberty (Pettit 2012, 2014; see also Ingham 2016).


Next, of course, we will want to know how popular control might actually be put into practice.
The main challenges are commonly addressed under three headings, outlined by Pettit
(1997, 186–7). The first and most thoroughly discussed is the requirement that
discretionary authority be guided by the norm of deliberative
public reasoning. This means that the relevant decision-makers
(legislatures, courts, bureaucrats, etc.) must be required to present
reasons for their decisions, and those reasons must be subject to open
public debate (see Sunstein 1988, 1993; Pettit 1997; Richardson 2002). So,
for example, legislative processes should be designed so as to
discourage back-room bargaining on the basis of sectional interests,
and instead to encourage open public deliberation. Similarly,
bureaucratic agencies should not be allowed to merely issue
determinations on the basis of technocratic expertise without offering
reasons for their decisions that are open to public examination.


The other two requirements have not received as much attention as the
first, perhaps because both are relatively obvious. The second is that
of inclusiveness. Opportunities for democratic contestation must be
equally open to all persons and groups in the society. This
requirement follows naturally from a universalized concern for
republican liberty, and it has implications for the design of
representative institutions, campaign financing, and so on (Pettit
1997, 2012; Bellamy 2007). And the third requirement is that there exist
institutionalized forums for contestation—impartial
‘courts of appeal,’ so to speak, where citizens can raise
objections to public laws and policies (Pettit 1997, 1999, 2012). Whether
these forums should include constitutional courts with strong powers
of judicial review remains a subject of debate in the republican
literature, however (Bellamy 2007; Honohan 2009).
4.3 Civic virtue and corruption


Among the more salient themes in the classical republican tradition
are the importance of civic virtue and the dangers of corruption. We
may understand the term ‘corruption’ simply to mean the
advancement of personal or sectional interest at the expense of the
public good, and ‘civic virtue’ as its opposite—that
is, a willingness to do one’s part in supporting the public
good. Critics of republicanism often fear that this implies extensive
self-sacrifice and frugality, a renunciation of individuality and
self-identification with the community (Herzog 1986; Goodin 2003; Brennan and Lomasky 2006). These fears are
no doubt encouraged by the civic humanist reading of the classical
tradition along perfectionist lines. Civic republicans accordingly
have been at pains to show the contrary—that civic virtue should
be understood as a strictly instrumental good, useful in establishing
and maintaining republican liberty. Far from calling for the
subjection of individual to collective aims, they argue, republican
liberty is desirable in part because it enables citizens to pursue
their private aims with assurances of security (Skinner 1984, 1991; Spitz 1993; Dagger 1997; 
Viroli 2002; Maynor 2003).


Broadly speaking, there are two topics to consider under the heading
of civic virtue. On the one hand, there is the civic virtue and danger
of its corruption on the part of public officials; on the other, there
is the civic virtue and danger of its corruption on the part of
citizens in general. With respect to the former, republicans typically
reject the view (common in the liberal tradition) that public officials
are by nature corrupt, and instead regard individuals as potentially
corruptible, but not necessarily corrupt (Pettit 1997). Working from
this assumption, it is strictly a pragmatic and empirical question which
configurations of public laws, institutions, and norms are most likely to
minimize the danger of corruption, and enhance the civic virtue of
public officials. Options here include screening procedures on the
selection of officials, rules and norms keeping some policy options out
of bounds, and both positive and negative sanctions. In designing such
institutions, it is important not to assume the worst of people, for
otherwise we might inadvertently encourage (through an evident lack of
trust) the very corrupt behavior one aims to guard against.


Promoting civic virtue on the part of the citizens in general,
however, is just as important from a republican point of view. There
are a variety of possible reasons for this. For the most part, they
stem from the observation that the widespread enjoyment of republican
liberty is most likely to be maximized in a community where the
citizens are committed to that ideal, and each is willing to do his or
her part in realizing it. For example, through collective political
action, citizens can bring instances of domination to public attention;
they can support laws and policies that would expand republican
freedom; and they can do their part in defending republican
institutions when called upon to do so. Promoting this sort of
commitment to republican ideals will require a fairly robust program of
civics education, together with a culture that rewards virtue with
public esteem (Dagger 1997; Pettit 1997; Brennan and Pettit 2003; Maynor
2003; Costa 2009). Again, it should be emphasized here that citizens do not enjoy
republican freedom, on the civic republican view, in being
virtuous. Indeed, this could not be the case since, as argued earlier,
the degree of republican freedom enjoyed is rather a question of how
the laws, institutions, and norms of the community are ordered. Civic
virtue is, however, instrumentally useful both in bringing
about the right sorts of laws, institutions, and norms, and in ensuring
their durability and reliability.


Finally, it is worth mentioning the connection between civic virtue
(both on the part of public officials and citizens in general) and the
rule of law. The significance of the rule of law for republican
liberty was discussed above; in the classical republican tradition,
this was expressed as the “empire of law” ideal—the
notion that in a free republic laws, not men, rule. Of course this
cannot ever be literally true, but it can be approximated in a sort of
artificial way, so that life can be experienced as if it were
true within a given community. This requires, however, that the law be
widely regarded as clear, predictable, and legitimate, and this in
turn is possible only when there is a generally high level of
compliance and when legal rules are embedded in a shared network of
informal social norms (Pettit 1997; Lovett 2016a).
4.4 Republicanism Across Borders
The classical republicans were fond of extolling the martial valor of Rome and other ancient republics, and they often followed Machiavelli in advocating policies and institutions that would enhance the expansionist capacities of republics. For this they have often been accused of militaristic and imperialistic tendencies (see for example Goodin 2003), but this is not entirely fair. One has to be mindful of the dangerous security environments republics have often faced. The classical republicans rarely advocated conquest for its own sake: “swords were given to men,” writes Sidney, “that none might be slaves,” not that they might enslave others (1698, 343). In a hostile world populated by autocratic rivals, Machiavelli may have been right to believe that a republic’s best defence is a good offense.

Even so, the classical republicans were sensitive to the particular dangers of territorial expansion. They especially worried that by upsetting the domestic balance of wealth and power, imperial conquest would undermine freedom at home, and accordingly they sought remedies through various cooperative and federal arrangements (Deudney 2007; Bohman 2008). Whether optimally securing republican freedom under modern conditions will ultimately require some sort of global republic, however, remains a topic of debate (see Pettit 2010; Martí 2010; Maynor 2015).

Beyond narrow security concerns, however, contemporary civic republicans have recently begun to explore the implications of republican freedom for global economic justice. Supposing the ideal is suitably universalized, and thus every human being’s non-domination counts the same, are republicans committed to cosmopolitan policies of global redistribution? Here a wide range of views can be found in the literature. Pettit (2010, 2014) argues no, on the grounds that economic justice is mainly important indirectly for preserving domestic republican institutions, whereas Lovett (2016b) argues yes, on the grounds that poverty and severe inequality directly expose individuals to domination. In between these positions, Laborde (2010), and Laborde and Ronzoni (2016) maintain that our global obligations to promote non-domination are similar but ultimately weaker than our domestic ones. Finally, Bachvarova (2013) suggests that republicanism is best suited to address relational rather than distributive global justice.

Perhaps the greatest challenge to contemporary civic republican theory, however, is the problem of state borders and global migration. Republicans are in a strong position to advocate for stateless persons, refugees, and resident non-citizens who, in various ways, are clearly vulnerable to avoidable domination (Bohman 2009; Benton 2010). Much less obvious, however, is how to address the issue of international freedom of movement. Traditionally committed to a strong conception of citizenship, the republican ideal of political liberty has often seemed inseparable from the existence of bounded communities of fellow free citizens. Pettit (2012, 161–2) claims that since states have no choice but to maintain borders, the existence of migration controls as such cannot count as dominating, while Costa (2016) disagrees. Honohan (2014) insists that any migration controls a given state does implement should be non-arbitrary, but as Fine (2014) observes, this does not settle the ultimate question of whether freedom of movement can be reconciled with the need to maintain civic community. 


5. Conclusion


In many respects, civic republicanism remains a still underdeveloped
political doctrine. Further work is required in all the areas
discussed above, and there are many issues central to the concerns of
contemporary political theorists and philosophers that contemporary civic
republicans have only recently begun to examine.  Among the latter,
there are now at least initial treatments of multiculturalism (Laborde
2008; Lovett 2010; Honohan 2013; Bachvarova 2014), education policy (Peterson 2011; Hinchliffe 2014; Macleod 2015), and intergenerational justice (Beckman 2016; Katz 2017) among other topics, though substantial
work certainly remains to be done. Nevertheless, civic republicanism
is a dynamic and growing field, which stands to make continuing
positive contributions to debate in contemporary social and political
theory.
The contemporary civic republican interpretation carries with it
what could be seen as a significant drawback, namely, that it reduces the distance between classical republicanism and the
mainstream liberal tradition. At one level, this should surprise no
one. After all, classical republicans and classical liberals shared
many political commitments (constitutionalism and the rule of law, for
example), and many figures are regarded as central to both traditions
(Montesquieu, for example). The difficulty arises, however, from the
suggestion that on the new instrumental interpretation, republicanism
for all intents and purposes collapses into liberalism (Larmore 2001; Patten 1996). Indeed, at one point in his
Political Liberalism, Rawls explicitly states that his theory
has “no fundamental opposition” with a non-perfectionist,
instrumental interpretation of republicanism (1993, 205). What then
is the advantage of civic republicanism over mainstream liberalism (Herzog 1986; Goodin 2003; Brennan and Lomasky 2006)?
The standard reply among contemporary civic republicans is
to argue that there is indeed a connection between republicanism and
liberalism, but that liberalism is “an impoverished or incoherent
republicanism” (Viroli 2002, 61)—a bastard offshoot, so to
speak, of what was originally a considerably more appealing political
philosophy. The republican critique of liberalism is thus best understood as a critique of various problematic tendencies that developed within the liberal tradition as it increasingly diverged from its republican roots. 
 The most important of these is the tendency in the liberal tradition, especially beginning with Bentham, Paley, and Constant, to displace the robust conception of liberty as independence from arbitrary or uncontrolled power with a weaker conception of liberty as non-interference. The significance of this substitution will be easier to assess after the discussion below, but in the main it comes down to this: because republican liberty is inherently incompatible with any form of dependency or mastery, its social implications are considerably more radical than those of mere negative liberty. This is precisely why many liberal authors took pains to distance themselves from republicanism in the first place, as they openly admitted: “those definitions of liberty ought to be rejected, which, by making that essential to civil freedom which is unattainable in experience, inflame expectations that can never be gratified,” observed Paley (1785, 315; cf. Pettit 1997).
What is more, on the view of liberty as non-interference, any sort of public law or policy intervention will count as an interference and, ergo, as a reduction in freedom. Liberals committed to the received view of negative liberty will thus tend to be overly hostile to government action (Pettit 1997, 2009). On the republican view, by contrast, public laws or policy interventions need not always count as reductions in freedom. Provided the law or policy is adopted and implemented in an appropriately non-arbitrary manner, the citizens’ freedom remains untouched. Indeed, if the law or policy ameliorates dependency, or curtails the arbitrary powers some in the community exercise over others, freedom may be enhanced. In the classical tradition, this idea was often expressed as the claim that, in the words of Blackstone, “laws, when prudently framed, are by no means subversive but rather introductive of liberty” and thus “where there is no law, there is no freedom” (1765,
122). The grounds for this claim will be explained further below.
However interesting the debates discussed in the
previous section, one may still wonder whether republicanism has
anything valuable to contribute to contemporary normative political
theory and philosophy. One reason many people remain skeptical has to
do with the fact that the classical republican writings often express
views that are decidedly elitist, patriarchal, and militaristic. How
could the basis for an appealing contemporary political program be
found in such writings (Goldsmith 2000; Maddox 2002; Goodin 2003; McCormick 2003)?
 That the classical republicans often expressed these very
unappealing views is not disputed. But what are we to make of this
fact? There are two possibilities. On the one hand, the parochialism
of the classical republicans might reflect logical consequences of
their core value commitments, in which case we cannot adopt the latter
without taking on board the former. On the other hand, it might merely
reflect the accidental prejudices of their day, in which case it can
easily be dispensed with as we modernize the republican program. Now
according to the civic humanist reading of the tradition, the
classical republicans were committed to a perfectionist conception of
the human good as active citizenship and civic virtue. On this view,
it is clear that some individuals will be more successful than others
in attaining the good so understood—some are more adept at
politics than others, some are more capable of heroic displays of
virtue than others, and so on. Indeed, political power and public
honor are, to some extent, positional goods, meaning that their
distribution among the members of a community will necessarily be
unequal. It follows that, on the civic humanist reading of the
tradition, the elitist bent of the classical republican writings is a
consequence of their core values. As Arendt writes, it is “the
sign of a well-ordered republic” that only the politically
virtuous elite “would have the right to be heard in the conduct
of the business of the republic” (1963, 279).
The civic republicans, naturally, reject this view. There is nothing
inherently elitist about the ideal of freedom when this is understood
negatively as independence from arbitrary or uncontrolled power. The classical
republicans, to be sure, typically confined the extension of this ideal
to a narrow range of propertied, native-born male citizens. But on the
civic republican reading of the tradition, this merely reflects an
unnecessary prejudice we can easily dispense with. The elitism of the tradition long concealed the potentially radical implications of freedom as non-domination; suitably universalized now at last, republicanism is revealed to be a strikingly progressive political doctrine (Pettit 1997, 2014; Maynor 2003; Lovett 2009; Gourevitch 2015).
The remainder of this section will sketch some of the wide-ranging
applications of a universalized republicanism, dedicated to the
promotion of freedom as non-domination. Much of the contemporary
republican program, as one would expect, bares some familial
relationship with the political commitments of the classical
republicans. There are also divergences, however. Contemporary civic
republicans draw inspiration from the classical tradition, but they do
not aim to anachronistically implement the republicanism of yore for
its own sake.
 Contemporary civic republicans aim to promote freedom, understood
as independence from arbitrary power. Roughly speaking, there are two
directions from which republican freedom might be threatened. First,
there is the obvious danger of an autocratic or despotic government
assuming arbitrary powers over its subjects; this concern, and
republican remedies for it, will be discussed below. But there is a
second danger to republican freedom as well—one that concerns
contemporary civic republicans just as much as the first. (Absent this
second concern, republican policy would indeed often seem
“indeterminate,” as observed by McMahon 2005 and Costa
2007.)  This is the danger that some individuals or groups within
civil society will succeed in assuming arbitrary or uncontrolled
powers over others. A few examples will help clarify this second
danger.
Imagine for a moment there were no system of domestic criminal and
civil law. In this case, citizens would not know where they stood with
one another; their interrelations would be governed simply by
force—which is to say, by the arbitrary whim of the momentarily
stronger party. In order to enjoy some degree of republican freedom,
therefore, it is absolutely essential to introduce a domestic legal
system so as to govern the citizens’ mutual relations (Lovett 2016a). Notice
that, on the republican view of freedom, the laws do not merely protect
some freedoms at the expense of others (as on the non-interference
view), but rather themselves actually introduce or enable that freedom.
On this view, only when their interrelations are mutually governed by a
system of public and stable rules is it possible for fellow
citizens to enjoy some measure of independence from arbitrary rule
(Pettit 1989, 1997, 2012; Viroli 2002; Dagger 2009).
This connection between the rule of law and freedom is a common theme
in the classical republican literature. Contemporary civic republicans
observe, however, that even when the rule of law is firmly
established, there remain many other potential dangers of which the
classical republicans were less well aware. For example, while markets as such need not involve domination (Pettit 2006), and indeed when well-ordered might reduce it (Taylor 2017), republicans’ enthusiasm for markets will have definite limits. Specifically, there is the danger of basic needs deprivation, which can place the least advantaged
members of society in a position of economic vulnerability (Spitz 1993; Pettit
1997; Viroli 2002). In order to satisfy their basic needs, individuals
may well submit themselves to the arbitrary power of exploitative
employers or become dependent on the whims of voluntary charity
(Dagger 2006; Lovett 2009; Gourevitch 2015). Ensuring the enjoyment of republican
freedom will therefore require some public provision for otherwise
unmet basic needs.
 Yet another danger to republican freedom arises in the context of
family life and gender relations. Traditional family law subjected
both wives and children to considerable arbitrary power: circumstances
in the case of the latter, circumscribed opportunities in the case of
the former, ensured the nearly complete dependency of both on the
family they happened to be in. The contemporary civic republican
program is thus congenial to both an expansion of children’s
rights, and the elimination of sex domination (Pettit 1997; Phillips
2000; Costa 2013; Halldenius 2015).
It is always important from a civic republican point of view to be on
guard against the introduction of new forms of dependency and
arbitrary power through those very laws and policies designed to
enhance individual freedom, however. In the area of criminal and civil
law, for example, freedom might be threatened by legal uncertainty or
prosecutorial discretion; and, of course, there are grave republican
concerns with respect to the existing system of punishment in many
western nations (Braithwaite and Pettit 1990). These dangers might
suggest the need for a more democratized system of criminal justice
(Martí 2009).  Similarly, in the public provision of basic
needs, there are republican concerns with respect to dependence on
government aid and arbitrariness in the distribution of benefits that
might point to the introduction of an unconditional basic income
(Raventos 2007; Lovett 2009; for a contrary view, see Taylor 2017). In many of these areas, however, there remains
considerable work for contemporary civic republicans in determining
the appropriate public policy implications of a universalized concern
for republican freedom.
Turning from questions of public policy to the form of government,
we return to issues more familiar to the writers in the classical
tradition. Protecting citizens from the arbitrary or uncontrolled power of their
government through good institutional design represents perhaps the
signature classical republican concern. Many of the standard devices
for achieving this aim—the rule of law, the separation of powers,
federalism, constitutionally entrenched basic rights, and so
on—have been adopted by liberals and others. Contemporary civic
republicans, naturally, remain committed to these institutional devices
in some measure (Pettit 1997, 2012, 2014; Maynor 2003).
However, contemporary civic republicans also recognize that these
sorts of devices can only go so far. The basic reason for this is that,
no matter how carefully designed, the operation and functioning of
government necessarily entails considerable discretion on the part of
public authorities (Pettit 1997; Richardson 2002). There are two
especially prominent instances of this. First, it is clear that no
matter how detailed and carefully-crafted it is, no system of explicit
rules and regulations can possibly cover all contingencies and
circumstances. It follows that discretionary authority must inevitably
be left in the hands of courts, public agencies, and administrative
bureaucracies. Second, even apart from this, there remains extensive
discretion in the hands of legislatures to set public law and policy in
the first place. A daily-changing system of rules is no better than
having no rules at all.  
The standard republican remedy for this problem is enhanced
democracy. It must, however, be democracy of the right sort. Most
contemporary civic republicans reject the populist model of democracy
according to which all public laws and policies must express the
collective will of the people in order to be considered legitimate.
Instead, they generally endorse some form of “qualified
populism” (Richardson 2002) or “contestatory
democracy” (Pettit 1997, 1999, 2001; Maynor 2003). Roughly
speaking, the idea is that properly-designed democratic institutions
should give citizens the effective opportunity to contest the
decisions of their representatives. This possibility of contestation
will make government agents wielding discretionary authority
answerable to a public understanding of the goals or ends they are
meant to serve and the means they are permitted to employ. In this
way, discretionary power can be subject to popular control in the sense
required for a secure enjoyment of republican liberty (Pettit 2012, 2014; see also Ingham 2016).
Next, of course, we will want to know how popular control might actually be put into practice.
The main challenges are commonly addressed under three headings, outlined by Pettit
(1997, 186–7). The first and most thoroughly discussed is the requirement that
discretionary authority be guided by the norm of deliberative
public reasoning. This means that the relevant decision-makers
(legislatures, courts, bureaucrats, etc.) must be required to present
reasons for their decisions, and those reasons must be subject to open
public debate (see Sunstein 1988, 1993; Pettit 1997; Richardson 2002). So,
for example, legislative processes should be designed so as to
discourage back-room bargaining on the basis of sectional interests,
and instead to encourage open public deliberation. Similarly,
bureaucratic agencies should not be allowed to merely issue
determinations on the basis of technocratic expertise without offering
reasons for their decisions that are open to public examination.
The other two requirements have not received as much attention as the
first, perhaps because both are relatively obvious. The second is that
of inclusiveness. Opportunities for democratic contestation must be
equally open to all persons and groups in the society. This
requirement follows naturally from a universalized concern for
republican liberty, and it has implications for the design of
representative institutions, campaign financing, and so on (Pettit
1997, 2012; Bellamy 2007). And the third requirement is that there exist
institutionalized forums for contestation—impartial
‘courts of appeal,’ so to speak, where citizens can raise
objections to public laws and policies (Pettit 1997, 1999, 2012). Whether
these forums should include constitutional courts with strong powers
of judicial review remains a subject of debate in the republican
literature, however (Bellamy 2007; Honohan 2009).
Among the more salient themes in the classical republican tradition
are the importance of civic virtue and the dangers of corruption. We
may understand the term ‘corruption’ simply to mean the
advancement of personal or sectional interest at the expense of the
public good, and ‘civic virtue’ as its opposite—that
is, a willingness to do one’s part in supporting the public
good. Critics of republicanism often fear that this implies extensive
self-sacrifice and frugality, a renunciation of individuality and
self-identification with the community (Herzog 1986; Goodin 2003; Brennan and Lomasky 2006). These fears are
no doubt encouraged by the civic humanist reading of the classical
tradition along perfectionist lines. Civic republicans accordingly
have been at pains to show the contrary—that civic virtue should
be understood as a strictly instrumental good, useful in establishing
and maintaining republican liberty. Far from calling for the
subjection of individual to collective aims, they argue, republican
liberty is desirable in part because it enables citizens to pursue
their private aims with assurances of security (Skinner 1984, 1991; Spitz 1993; Dagger 1997; 
Viroli 2002; Maynor 2003).
Broadly speaking, there are two topics to consider under the heading
of civic virtue. On the one hand, there is the civic virtue and danger
of its corruption on the part of public officials; on the other, there
is the civic virtue and danger of its corruption on the part of
citizens in general. With respect to the former, republicans typically
reject the view (common in the liberal tradition) that public officials
are by nature corrupt, and instead regard individuals as potentially
corruptible, but not necessarily corrupt (Pettit 1997). Working from
this assumption, it is strictly a pragmatic and empirical question which
configurations of public laws, institutions, and norms are most likely to
minimize the danger of corruption, and enhance the civic virtue of
public officials. Options here include screening procedures on the
selection of officials, rules and norms keeping some policy options out
of bounds, and both positive and negative sanctions. In designing such
institutions, it is important not to assume the worst of people, for
otherwise we might inadvertently encourage (through an evident lack of
trust) the very corrupt behavior one aims to guard against.
Promoting civic virtue on the part of the citizens in general,
however, is just as important from a republican point of view. There
are a variety of possible reasons for this. For the most part, they
stem from the observation that the widespread enjoyment of republican
liberty is most likely to be maximized in a community where the
citizens are committed to that ideal, and each is willing to do his or
her part in realizing it. For example, through collective political
action, citizens can bring instances of domination to public attention;
they can support laws and policies that would expand republican
freedom; and they can do their part in defending republican
institutions when called upon to do so. Promoting this sort of
commitment to republican ideals will require a fairly robust program of
civics education, together with a culture that rewards virtue with
public esteem (Dagger 1997; Pettit 1997; Brennan and Pettit 2003; Maynor
2003; Costa 2009). Again, it should be emphasized here that citizens do not enjoy
republican freedom, on the civic republican view, in being
virtuous. Indeed, this could not be the case since, as argued earlier,
the degree of republican freedom enjoyed is rather a question of how
the laws, institutions, and norms of the community are ordered. Civic
virtue is, however, instrumentally useful both in bringing
about the right sorts of laws, institutions, and norms, and in ensuring
their durability and reliability.
Finally, it is worth mentioning the connection between civic virtue
(both on the part of public officials and citizens in general) and the
rule of law. The significance of the rule of law for republican
liberty was discussed above; in the classical republican tradition,
this was expressed as the “empire of law” ideal—the
notion that in a free republic laws, not men, rule. Of course this
cannot ever be literally true, but it can be approximated in a sort of
artificial way, so that life can be experienced as if it were
true within a given community. This requires, however, that the law be
widely regarded as clear, predictable, and legitimate, and this in
turn is possible only when there is a generally high level of
compliance and when legal rules are embedded in a shared network of
informal social norms (Pettit 1997; Lovett 2016a).
The classical republicans were fond of extolling the martial valor of Rome and other ancient republics, and they often followed Machiavelli in advocating policies and institutions that would enhance the expansionist capacities of republics. For this they have often been accused of militaristic and imperialistic tendencies (see for example Goodin 2003), but this is not entirely fair. One has to be mindful of the dangerous security environments republics have often faced. The classical republicans rarely advocated conquest for its own sake: “swords were given to men,” writes Sidney, “that none might be slaves,” not that they might enslave others (1698, 343). In a hostile world populated by autocratic rivals, Machiavelli may have been right to believe that a republic’s best defence is a good offense.
Even so, the classical republicans were sensitive to the particular dangers of territorial expansion. They especially worried that by upsetting the domestic balance of wealth and power, imperial conquest would undermine freedom at home, and accordingly they sought remedies through various cooperative and federal arrangements (Deudney 2007; Bohman 2008). Whether optimally securing republican freedom under modern conditions will ultimately require some sort of global republic, however, remains a topic of debate (see Pettit 2010; Martí 2010; Maynor 2015).
Beyond narrow security concerns, however, contemporary civic republicans have recently begun to explore the implications of republican freedom for global economic justice. Supposing the ideal is suitably universalized, and thus every human being’s non-domination counts the same, are republicans committed to cosmopolitan policies of global redistribution? Here a wide range of views can be found in the literature. Pettit (2010, 2014) argues no, on the grounds that economic justice is mainly important indirectly for preserving domestic republican institutions, whereas Lovett (2016b) argues yes, on the grounds that poverty and severe inequality directly expose individuals to domination. In between these positions, Laborde (2010), and Laborde and Ronzoni (2016) maintain that our global obligations to promote non-domination are similar but ultimately weaker than our domestic ones. Finally, Bachvarova (2013) suggests that republicanism is best suited to address relational rather than distributive global justice.
Perhaps the greatest challenge to contemporary civic republican theory, however, is the problem of state borders and global migration. Republicans are in a strong position to advocate for stateless persons, refugees, and resident non-citizens who, in various ways, are clearly vulnerable to avoidable domination (Bohman 2009; Benton 2010). Much less obvious, however, is how to address the issue of international freedom of movement. Traditionally committed to a strong conception of citizenship, the republican ideal of political liberty has often seemed inseparable from the existence of bounded communities of fellow free citizens. Pettit (2012, 161–2) claims that since states have no choice but to maintain borders, the existence of migration controls as such cannot count as dominating, while Costa (2016) disagrees. Honohan (2014) insists that any migration controls a given state does implement should be non-arbitrary, but as Fine (2014) observes, this does not settle the ultimate question of whether freedom of movement can be reconciled with the need to maintain civic community. 
In many respects, civic republicanism remains a still underdeveloped
political doctrine. Further work is required in all the areas
discussed above, and there are many issues central to the concerns of
contemporary political theorists and philosophers that contemporary civic
republicans have only recently begun to examine.  Among the latter,
there are now at least initial treatments of multiculturalism (Laborde
2008; Lovett 2010; Honohan 2013; Bachvarova 2014), education policy (Peterson 2011; Hinchliffe 2014; Macleod 2015), and intergenerational justice (Beckman 2016; Katz 2017) among other topics, though substantial
work certainly remains to be done. Nevertheless, civic republicanism
is a dynamic and growing field, which stands to make continuing
positive contributions to debate in contemporary social and political
theory.