Among the main questions about respect that philosophers have
addressed are these: (1) How should respect in general be understood?
(a) What category of thing is it? Philosophers have variously
identified it as a mode of behavior, a form of treatment, a kind of
valuing, a type of attention, a motive, an attitude, a feeling, a
tribute, a principle, a duty, an entitlement, a moral virtue, an
epistemic virtue: are any of these categories more central than
others?  (b) What are the distinctive elements of respect? (c) To what
other attitudes, actions, valuings, duties, etc. is respect similar,
and with what does it contrast? (d) What beliefs, attitudes, emotions,
motives, and conduct does respect involve, and with what is it
incompatible? (2) What are the appropriate objects of respect, i.e.,
the sorts of things that can be reasonably said to warrant respect?
(3) What are the bases or grounds for respect, i.e., the features of
or facts about objects in virtue of which it is reasonable and perhaps
obligatory to respect them? (4) What ways of acting and forbearing to
act express or constitute or are regulated by respect?  (5) What moral
requirements, if any, are there to respect certain types of objects,
and what is the scope and theoretical status of such requirements? (6)
Are there different levels or degrees of respect? Can an object come
to deserve less or no respect? (7) Why is respect morally important?
What, if anything, does it add to morality over and above the conduct,
attitudes, and character traits required or encouraged by various
moral principles or virtues? (8) What are the implications of respect
for problematic moral and sociopolitical issues such as racism and
sexism, pornography, privacy, punishment, responses to terrorism,
paternalism in health care contexts, cultural diversity, affirmative
action, abortion, and so on?
It is widely acknowledged that there are different kinds of respect,
which complicates the answering of these questions. For example,
answers concerning one kind of respect can diverge significantly from
those about another kind. Much philosophical work has gone into
explicating differences and links among the various kinds. One general
distinction is between respect simply as behavior and respect as an
attitude or feeling which may or may not be expressed in or signified
by behavior.  We might speak of drivers respecting the speed limit,
hostile forces as respecting a cease fire agreement, or AIDS as not
respecting national borders, and in such cases we can be referring
simply to behavior which avoids violation of or interference with some
boundary, limit, or rule, without any reference to attitudes,
feelings, intentions, or dispositions, and even, as in the case of the
AIDS virus, without imputing agency (Bird 2004). In such cases the
behavior is regarded as constitutive of respecting.  In other cases,
we take respect to be or to express or signify an attitude or feeling,
as when we speak of having respect for another person or for nature or
of certain behaviors as showing respect or disrespect. In what
follows, I will focus chiefly on respect as attitude or feeling. There
are, again, several different attitudes or feelings to which the term
“respect” refers.  Before looking at differences, however, it is
useful first to note some elements common among varieties.
An attitude of respect is, most generally, a relation between a
subject and an object in which the subject responds to the object from
a certain perspective in some appropriate way. Respect necessarily has
an object: respect is always directed toward, paid to, felt about,
shown for some object. While a very wide variety of things can be
appropriate objects of one kind of respect or another, the subject of
respect (the respecter) is always a person, that is, a conscious
rational being capable of recognizing and acknowledging things, of
self-consciously and intentionally responding to them, of having and
expressing values with regard to them, and of being accountable for
disrespecting or failing to respect them. Though animals may love or
fear us, only persons can respect and disrespect us or anything
else. Respect is a responsive relation, and ordinary discourse about
respect identifies several key elements of the response, including
attention, deference, judgment, acknowledgment, valuing, and
behavior. First, as suggested by its derivation from the Latin
respicere, which means “to look back at” or
“to look again,” respect is a particular mode of
apprehending the object: the person who respects something pays
attention to it and perceives it differently from someone who does not
and responds to it in light of that perception. This perceptual
element is common also to synonyms such as regard (from “to
watch out for”) and consideration (“examine (the stars)
carefully”). The idea of paying heed or giving proper attention
to the object which is central to respect often means trying to see
the object clearly, as it really is in its own right, and not seeing
it solely through the filter of one's own desires and fears or likes
and dislikes. Thus, respecting something contrasts with being
oblivious or indifferent to it, ignoring or quickly dismissing it,
neglecting or disregarding it, or carelessly or intentionally
misidentifying it. An object can be perceived by a subject from a
variety of perspectives; for example, one might rightly regard another
human individual as a rights-bearer, a judge, a superlative singer, a
trustworthy person, or a threat to one's security. The respect one
accords her in each case will be different, yet all will involve
attention to her as she really is as a judge, threat, etc. It is in
virtue of this aspect of careful attention that respect is sometimes
thought of as an epistemic virtue.
As responsive, respect is object-generated rather than wholly
subject-generated, something that is owed to, called for, deserved,
elicited, or claimed by the object.  We respect something not because
we want to but because we recognize that we have to respect it (Wood
1999); respect involves “a deontic experience”—the
experience that one must pay attention and respond
appropriately (Birch 1993). It thus is motivational: it is the
recognition of something “as directly determining our will
without reference to what is wanted by our inclinations” (Rawls
2000, 153). In this way respect differs from, for example, liking and
fearing, which have their sources in the subject's interests or
desires. When we respect something, we heed its call, accord it its
due, acknowledge its claim to our attention. Thus, respect involves
deference, in the most basic sense of yielding: self-absorption and
egocentric concerns give way to consideration of the object, one's
motives or feelings submit to the object's reality, one is disposed to
act in obedience to the object's demands.
At the same time, respect is also an expression of agency: it is
deliberate, a matter of directed rather than grabbed attention, of
reflective consideration and judgment. In particular, the subject
judges that the object is due, deserves, or rightfully claims a
certain response in virtue of some feature of or fact about the object
that warrants that response. This feature or fact is the ground or
basis in the object, that in virtue of which it calls for respect. The
basis gives us a reason to respect the object; it may also indicate
more precisely how to respect it. Respect is thus reason-governed: we
cannot respect a particular object for just any old reason or for no
reason at all. Rather, we respect an object for the reason that it
has, in our judgment, some respect-warranting characteristic, that it
is, in our view, the kind of object that calls for that kind of
response (Cranor 1975; but see Buss 1999 for disagreement). And these
reasons are categorical, in the sense that their weight or stringency
does not depend on the subject's interests, goals, or desires; hence
acting against these reasons, other things equal, is wrong (Raz
2001). Respect is thus both subjective and objective. It is subjective
in that the subject's response is constructed from her understanding
of the object and its characteristics and her judgments about the
legitimacy of its call and how fittingly to address the call. An
individual's respect for an object can thus be inappropriate or
unwarranted, for the object may not have the features she takes it to
have, or the features she takes to be respect-warranting might not be,
or her idea of how properly to treat the object might be
mistaken. But, as object-generated, the logic of respect is the logic
of objectivity and universality, in four ways. First, in respecting an
object, we respond to it not as an extension of feelings, desires, and
interests we already have, but as something whose significance is
independent of us. Second, we experience the object as constraining
our attitudes and actions. Third, our reasons for respecting something
are, we logically have to assume, reasons for other people to respect
it (or at least to endorse our respect for it from a common point of
view). Respect is thus, unlike erotic or filial love, an impersonal
response to the object. Fourth, respect is universalizing, in the
sense that if F is a respect-warranting feature of object O, then
respecting O on account of F commits us, other things equal, to
respecting other things that also have feature F. In respect, then,
subjectivity defers to objectivity.
There are many different kinds of objects that can reasonably be
respected and many different reasons why they warrant respect; thus
warranted responses can take different forms beyond attention,
deference, and judgment. Some things are dangerous or powerful and
respect of them can involve fear, awe, self-protection, or
submission. Other things have authority over us and the respect they
are due includes acknowledgment of their authority and perhaps
obedience to their authoritative commands. Other forms of respect are
modes of valuing, appreciating the object as having an objective worth
or importance that is independent of, perhaps even at variance with,
our antecedent desires or commitments. Thus, we can respect things we
don't like or agree with, such as our enemies or someone else's
opinion. Valuing respect is kin to esteem, admiration, veneration,
reverence, and honor, while regarding something as utterly worthless
or insignificant or disdaining or having contempt for it is
incompatible with respecting it. Respect also aims to value its object
appropriately, so it contrasts with degradation and discounting. The
kinds of valuing that respect involves also contrast with other forms
of valuing such as promoting or using (Anderson 1993, Pettit
1989). Indeed, regarding a person merely as useful (treating her as
just a sexual object, an ATM machine, a research subject) is commonly
identified as a central form of disrespect for persons, and many
people decry the killing of endangered wild animals for their tusks or
hides as despicably disrespectful of nature. Respect is sometimes
identified as a feeling; it is typically the experiencing of something
as valuable that is in focus in these cases.
Finally, respect is generally regarded as having a behavioral
component. In respecting an object, we often consider it to be making
legitimate claims on our conduct as well as our thoughts and feelings
and are disposed to behave appropriately. Appropriate behavior
includes refraining from certain treatment of the object or acting
only in particular ways in connection with it, ways that are regarded
as fitting, deserved by, or owed to the object. And there are very
many ways to respect things: keeping our distance from them, helping
them, praising or emulating them, obeying or abiding by them, not
violating or interfering with them, destroying them in some ways
rather than letting them be destroyed in others, protecting or being
careful with them, talking about them in ways that reflect their worth
or status, mourning them, nurturing them. One can behave in respectful
ways, however, without having respect for the object, as when a teen
who disdains adults behaves respectfully toward her friend's parents
in a scheme to get the car, manipulating rather than respecting
them. To be a form or expression of respect, behavior has to be
motivated by one's acknowledgment of the object as calling for that
behavior, and it has to be motivated directly by consideration that
the object is what it is, without reference to one's own interests and
desires. On the other hand, certain kinds of feelings would not count
as respect if they did not find expression in behavior or involved no
dispositions to behave in certain ways rather than others, and if they
did not spring from the beliefs, perceptions, and judgments that the
object is worthy of or calls for such behavior.
 

The attitudes of respect, then, have cognitive dimensions (beliefs,
acknowledgments, judgments, deliberations, commitments), affective
dimensions (emotions, feelings, ways of experiencing things), and
conative dimensions (motivations, dispositions to act and forbear from
acting); some forms also have valuational dimensions. The attitude is
typically regarded as central to respect: actions and modes of
treatment typically count as respect insofar as they either manifest
an attitude of respect or are of a sort through which the attitude of
respect is characteristically expressed; a principle of respect is one
that, logically, must be adopted by someone with the attitude of
respect or that prescribes the attitude or actions that express it
(Frankena 1986, Downie and Telfer 1969).
That it is the nature of the object that determines its
respect-worthiness, and that there are different kinds of objects
calling for correspondingly different responses has led many
philosophers to argue that there are different kinds of respect. In
what follows, three sets of distinctions will be discussed.
Speculating on the historical development of the idea that all persons
as such deserve respect, and using terms found in Kant's writings on
Achtung (the German word usually translated as
“respect”), Feinberg (1975) identifies three distinct
concepts for which “respect” has been the name. (1)
Respekt, is the “uneasy and watchful attitude that has
'the element of fear' in it” (1975,1). Its objects are dangerous
things or things with power over the subject. It is respekt
that woodworkers are encouraged to have for power tools, that a city
dweller might have for street gangs, a new sailor might be admonished
to have for the sea, a child might have for an abusive parent.
Respekt contrasts with contemptuous disregard; it is shown in
conduct that is cautious, self-protective, other-placating. (2) The
second concept, observantia, is the moralized analogue of
respekt. It involves regarding the object as making a
rightful claim on our conduct, as deserving moral consideration in its
own right, independently of considerations of personal well being. It
is observantia, Feinberg maintains, that historically was
extended first to classes of non-dangerous but otherwise worthy people
and then to all persons as such, regardless of merit or
ability. Observantia encompasses both the respect said to be
owed to all humans equally and the forms of polite respect and
deference that acknowledge different social positions. (3)
Reverentia, the third concept, is the special feeling of
profound awe and respect we have in the presence of something
extraordinary or sublime, a feeling that both humbles and uplifts
us. On Kant's account, the moral law and people who exemplify it in
morally worthy actions elicit reverentia from us, for we
experience the law or its exemplification as “something that
always trumps our inclinations in determining our wills”
(Feinberg 1975, 2). Feinberg sees different forms of power as
underlying the three kinds of respect; in each case, respect is the
acknowledgment of the power of something other than ourselves to
demand, command, or make claims on our attention, consideration, and
deference.
Hudson (1980) draws a four-fold distinction among kinds of respect,
according to the bases in the objects. Consider the following sets of
examples: (a) respecting a colleague highly as a scholar and having a
lot of respect for someone with “guts”; (b) a mountain
climber's respect for the elements and a tennis player's respect for
her opponent's strong backhand; (c) respecting the terms of an
agreement and respecting a person's rights; and (d) showing respect
for a judge by rising when she enters the courtroom and respecting a
worn-out flag by burning it rather than tossing it in the trash. The
respect in (a), evaluative respect, is similar to other
favorable attitudes such as esteem and admiration; it is earned or
deserved (or not) depending on whether and to the degree that the
object is judged to meet certain standards.  Obstacle
respect, in (b), is a matter of regarding the object as something
that, if not taken proper account of in one's decisions about how to
act, could prevent one from achieving one's ends. The objects of (c)
directive respect are directives: things such as requests,
rules, advice, laws, or rights claims that may be taken as guides to
action. One respects a directive when one's behaviors intentionally
comply with it. The objects of (d) institutional respect are
social institutions or practices, the positions or roles defined
within an institution or practice, and persons or things that occupy
the positions or represent the institution. Institutional respect is
shown by behavior that conforms to rules that prescribe certain
conduct as respectful. These four forms of respect differ in several
ways. Each identifies a quite different kind of feature of objects as
the basis of respect. Each is expressed in action in quite different
ways, although evaluative respect need not be expressed at all, one
can have institutional respect for an institution (e.g., the criminal
justice system) without showing it for a particular element of it (the
judge in this trial), and directive respect is not an attitude that
one might or might not express but a mode of conduct motivated by a
recognition of the directive's authority.  Evaluative respect
centrally involves having a favorable attitude toward the object,
while the other forms do not. Directive respect does not admit of
degrees (one either obeys the rule or doesn't), but the others do (we
can have more evaluative respect for one person than another). Hudson
uses this distinction to argue that respect for persons is not a
unique kind of respect but should be conceived rather as involving
some combination or other of these four.
To Hudson's four-fold classification, Dillon (1992a) adds a fifth
form, care respect, which is exemplified in an
environmentalist's deep respect for nature. Care respect involves
regarding the object as having profound and perhaps unique value and
so cherishing it, and perceiving it as fragile or calling for special
care and so acting or forbearing to act out of felt benevolent concern
for it. This analysis of respect draws explicitly from a feminist
ethics of care and has been influential in feminist and non-feminist
discussions of respecting persons as unique, particular
individuals.
Darwall (1977) distinguishes two kinds of respect: recognition
respect and appraisal respect. Recognition respect is
the disposition to give appropriate weight or consideration in one's
practical deliberations to some fact about the object and to regulate
one's conduct by constraints derived from that fact. (Frankena 1986
and Cranor 1982, 1983 refer to this as “consideration
respect.”) A wide variety of objects can be objects of
recognition respect, including laws, dangerous things, someone's
feelings, social institutions, nature, the selves individuals present
in different contexts, and persons as such. Appraisal respect, by
contrast, is an attitude of positive appraisal of a person or their
merits, which are features of persons that manifest excellences of
character.  Individuals can be the objects of appraisal respect either
as persons or as engaged in some pursuit or occupying some
role. Evaluation is always done in light of some qualitative
standards, and different standards can apply to one and the same
individual. Thus, appraisal respect is a matter of degree, depending
on the extent to which the object meets the standards (so, we can
respect someone more or less highly and respect one person more highly
than another), and it can co-exist with (some) negative assessments of
an individual or her traits (judged in light of other standards). We
can have appraisal respect for someone's honesty even while thinking
her lazy, and we can highly respect someone else as altogether a
morally fine person; we can respect an individual as an excellent
teacher or carpenter yet regard her as far from a moral
exemplar. Darwall (1977) distinguishes appraisal respect, which is
based on assessment of character traits, from esteem, another attitude
of positive assessment whose wider basis include any features in
virtue of which one can think well of someone. However, other
philosophers treat “esteem” and (appraisal)
“respect” as synonyms, and Darwall (2004) calls appraisal
respect a form of esteem.
The recognition/appraisal distinction has been quite influential and
is widely regarded as the fundamental distinction. If it is, then it
should encompass the other distinctions (although some fine-tuning
might be necessary). And indeed, evaluative respect and perhaps
reverentia for morally good persons are essentially
the same as appraisal respect, while respekt, obstacle
respect, observantia, directive respect, institutional
respect, and care respect can be analyzed as forms of recognition
respect. Some philosophers, however, have found the
recognition/appraisal distinction to be inadequate. Neither
reverentia for the moral law nor the felt experience of
reverential respect for the sublimity of persons as such (Buss 1999)
are forms of appraisal respect, yet because recognition respect is
analyzed, first, as holding only in deliberative contexts, and second,
as not essentially involving feeling, reverentia seems also
not to be a form of recognition respect. Moreover, while valuing the
object is not part of Darwall's analysis of recognition
respect—and it is not essential to some forms of recognition
respect (e.g., directive respect) and is only indirectly involved in
other forms (in obstacle respect, we don't value the obstacle but do
value the goal it blocks us from reaching)—valuing is essential
to some forms of respect that are not appraisal respect. In
particular, valuing persons intrinsically is widely regarded as the
heart of the respect that all persons are thought to be owed simply as
persons. However, it is not sufficient simply to gloss recognition
respect as recognizing the value of the object, for one can recognize
the value of something and yet not value it, as an insurance appraiser
does, or take the value of something, say, a person's child, into
account in deliberating about how best to revenge oneself on that
person. Respect for some categories of objects is not just a matter of
taking the object's value into consideration but of valuing the
object, and valuing it intrinsically. Analyzing appraisal respect as
just the positive assessment of someone's character traits as good is
similarly problematic, for one can evaluate something highly and yet
not value it. For example, one can appraise someone's moral
performance as stellar and hate or envy her for precisely that
reason. Respect in the appraisal sense is not just evaluating but also
valuing the object positively. The recognition/appraisal distinction
thus seems to obscure another very important distinction between what
we might call valuing respect and non-valuing respect. Appraisal
respect is a form of valuing respect, but recognition respect includes
both valuing and non-valuing forms.  There are, of course, different
modes of valuing, and at least three distinctions are relevant to
respect: (a) between moral and non-moral valuing (or, valuing from a
moral or a nonmoral point of view), (b) between comparative and
non-comparative valuing, and (c) between valuing intrinsically
(valuing it in itself, apart from valuing anything else) and valuing
extrinsically (for example, because of its relation to something else
of value) (Anderson 1993). A complete account of respect would need to
work out a taxonomy that incorporates these valuing distinctions.
In the rest of this article, I will discuss respect and self-respect
using Darwall's term “recognition respect,” Hudson's term
“evaluative respect,” and Feinberg's “reverential
respect” (the last for the valuing feeling that is motivational
without being deliberative), specifying the valuing dimensions as
necessary.
In everyday discourse, the valuing sense of respect, especially when
used about people, most commonly means thinking highly of someone,
i.e., evaluative respect. However, philosophical attention to respect
has tended to focus on recognition (or, sometimes, reverential)
respect that acknowledges or values the object from a moral point of
view. These discussions tend to relate such respect to the concepts of
moral standing or moral worth. Moral standing, or moral
considerability, is the idea that certain things matter morally in
their own right and so are appropriate objects of direct fundamental
moral consideration or concern (Birch 1993, P. Taylor
1986). Some form of recognition respect is, on some accounts, a
primary mode of such moral consideration. Alternatively, it is argued
that certain things have a distinctive kind of intrinsic and
incomparable moral worth or value, often called “dignity,”
in virtue of which they ought to be accorded some valuing form of
moral recognition or reverential respect. Discussions that focus on
moral standing or moral worth address questions such as: What things
fall within the domain of basic moral consideration or have this
distinctive moral worth? What confers moral standing on objects, or
what is the basis of their moral worth? Are there different levels of
moral standing and, if so, do objects at different levels warrant
different modes of moral respect? And what sorts of treatment are
constitutive of, express, or are compatible with such moral respect?
In modern philosophical discussions, humans are universally regarded
as the paradigm objects of moral respect; if anything has moral
standing or dignity and so warrants respect, it is the individual
human being. Although some theorists argue that nature (or, all living
beings, species, ecosystems) or societies (or, cultures, traditions)
also warrant the moral consideration and valuing of respect, most
philosophical discussion of respect has focused on respect for
persons.
People can be the objects or recipients of different forms of
respect. We can (directive) respect a person's legal rights, show
(institutional) respect for the president by calling him
“Mr. President,” have a healthy (obstacle) respect
(respekt) for an easily angered person, (care) respect
someone by cherishing her in her concrete particularity,
(evaluatively) respect an individual for her commitment to a worthy
project, and accord one person the same basic moral respect we think
any person deserves.  Thus the idea of respect for persons is
ambiguous. Because both institutional respect and evaluative respect
can be for persons in roles or position, the phrase “respecting
someone as an R” might mean either having high regard for a
person's excellent performance in the role or behaving in ways that
express due consideration or deference to an individual qua holder of
that position. Similarly, the phrase “respecting someone as a
person” might refer to appraising her as overall a morally good
person, or to acknowledging her standing as an equal in the moral
community, or to attending to her as the particular person she is as
opposed to treating her like just another body. In the literature of
moral and political philosophy, the notion of respect for persons
commonly means a kind of respect that all people are owed morally just
because they are persons, regardless of social position, individual
characteristics or achievements, or moral merit. The idea is that
persons as such have a distinctive moral status in virtue of which we
have special categorical obligations to regard and treat them in ways
that are constrained by certain inviolable limits. This is sometimes
expressed in terms of rights: persons, it is said, have a fundamental
moral right to respect simply because they are persons. And it is a
commonplace that persons are owed or have a right to equal respect. It
is obvious that we could not owe every individual evaluative respect,
let alone equal evaluative respect, since not everyone acts morally
correctly or has an equally morally good character. So, if it is true
that all persons are owed or have a moral right to respect just as
persons, then the concept of respect for person has to be analyzed as
some form or combination of forms of recognition or reverential
respect. For a variety of reasons, however, it is controversial
whether we do indeed have a moral obligation to respect all persons,
regardless of merit, and if so, why. There are disagreements, for
example, about the scope of this claim, the grounds for respect, and
the justification for the obligation. There is also a divergence of
views about the kinds of treatment that are respectful of persons.
One source of controversy concerns the scope of the concept
 of a person. Although in everyday discourse the word
“person” is synonymous with “human being,”
some philosophical discussions treat it as a technical term whose
range of application might be wider than the class of human beings
(just as, for legal purposes, business corporations are regarded as
persons). This is because some of the reasons that have been given for
respecting persons have the logical consequence that non-human things
warrant the same respect on the very same grounds as
humans. Consequently, one question an account of respect for persons
has to address is: Who or what are persons that are owed respect?
Different answers have been offered, including all human beings; all
and only those humans who are themselves capable of respecting
persons; all beings capable of rational activity, whether human or
not; all beings capable of functioning as moral agents, whether human
or not. The second, third and fourth answers would seem to exclude
deceased humans and humans who lack sufficient mental capacity, such
as the profoundly retarded, the severely mentally ill and senile,
those in persistent vegetative states, the pre-born, and perhaps very
young children. The third and fourth answers might include artificial
beings (androids, sophisticated robots), spiritual beings (gods,
angels), extraterrestrial beings, and certain animals (apes,
dolphins).
In trying to clarify who or what we are obligated to respect, we are
naturally led to a question about the ground or basis of respect: What
is it about persons that makes them matter morally and makes them
worthy of respect? One common way of answer this question is to look
for some morally significant natural quality that is common to all
beings that are noncontroversially owed respect (for example, all
normal adult humans). Candidate qualities include the ability to be
moved by considerations of moral obligation, the ability to value
appropriately, the ability to reason, and the ability to engage in
reciprocal relationships. Some of these apply only to humans, others
to other beings as well. Even regarding humans, there is a question of
scope: Are all humans owed respect? If respect is something
to which all human beings have an equal claim, then, it has been
argued, the ground quality has to be one that all humans possess
equally or in virtue of which humans are naturally equal, or a
threshold quality that all humans possess, with variations above the
threshold ignored. Some philosophers have argued that certain
capacities fit the bill; others argue that there is no quality
possessed by all humans that could be a plausible ground for a moral
obligation of equal respect. Some draw from this the conclusion that
respect is owed not to all but only to some human beings; others
conclude that the obligation to respect all humans is groundless:
rather than being grounded in some fact about humans, respect confers
moral standing on them. But the last view still leaves the questions:
why should this standing be conferred on humans? And is it conferred
on all humans? Yet another question of scope is: Must persons
always be respected? One view is that individuals forfeit
their claim to respect by, for example, committing heinous crimes of
disrespect against other persons, such as murder in the course of
terrorism or genocide. Another view is that there are no circumstances
under which it is morally justifiable to not respect a person, and
that even torturers and child-rapists, though they may deserve the
most severe condemnation and punishment and may have forfeited their
rights to freedom and perhaps to life, still remain persons to whom we
have obligations of respect, since the grounds of respect are
independent of moral merit or demerit.
Beyond the question of the ground or basis of respect for persons,
there is a further question of justification to be addressed, for it
is one thing to say that persons have a certain valuable quality, but
quite another thing to say that there is a moral obligation to respect
persons. So we must ask: What reasons do we have for believing that
the fact that persons possess quality X entails that we are morally
obligated to respect persons by treating them in certain ways? (Hill
1997). Another way of asking a justification question seeks not a
normative connection between qualities of persons and moral
obligation, but an explanation for our belief that humans (and perhaps
other beings) are owed respect, for example: What in our experience of
other humans or in our evolutionary history explains the development
and power of this belief?  Our actual felt experiences of reverential
respect play a significant role in some of these explanatory accounts;
what justifies accepting our experience of respect for humans (or
other beings) as grounds for an obligation is its coherence with our
other moral beliefs (Buss 1999, Margalit 1996, Gibbard 1990).
Finally, there are questions about how we are supposed to respect
persons, such as: What standards for conduct and character give
appropriate expression to the attitude of respect? Some philosophers
argue that the obligation to respect person functions as a negative
constraint: respect involves refraining from regarding or treating
persons in certain ways.  For example, we ought not to treat them as
if they were worthless or had value only insofar as we find them
useful or interesting, or as if they were mere objects or specimens,
or as if they were vermin or dirt; we ought not to violate their basic
moral rights, or interfere with their efforts to make their own
decisions and govern their own conduct, or humiliate them, or treat
them in ways that flout their nature and worth as persons. Others
maintain that we also have positive duties of respect: we ought, for
example, to try to see each of them and the world from their own
points of view, or help them to promote their morally acceptable ends,
or protect them from their own self-harming decisions. And some
philosophers note that it may be more respectful to judge someone's
actions or character negatively or to punish someone for wrongdoing
than to treat them as if they were not responsible for what they did,
although requirements of respect would impose limits on how such
judgments may be expressed and how persons may be punished. Another
question is whether treating people with respect requires treating
them equally. One view is that the equality of persons entails equal
treatment; another view is that equal treatment would involve failing
to respect the important differences among persons. On the latter
view, it is respectful to deal with each individual impartially and
exclusively on the basis of whatever aspects of the individual or the
situation are relevant (Frankfurt 1999).
The most influential position on these issues is found in the moral
philosophy of Immanuel Kant (1785, 1788, 1797). Indeed, most
contemporary discussions of respect for persons explicitly claim to
rely on, develop, or challenge some aspect of Kant's ethics. Central
to Kant's ethical theory is the claim that all persons are owed
respect just because they are persons, that is, free rational beings.
To be a person is to have a status and worth that is unlike that of
any other kind of being: it is to be an end in itself with
dignity. And the only response that is appropriate to such a being is
respect.  Respect (that is, moral recognition respect) is the
acknowledgment in attitude and conduct of the dignity of persons as
ends in themselves.  Respect for such beings is not only appropriate
but also morally and unconditionally required: the status and worth of
persons is such that they must always be respected.  Because we are all
too often inclined not to respect persons, not to value them as they
ought to be valued, one formulation of the Categorical Imperative,
which is the supreme principle of morality, commands that our actions
express due respect for the worth of persons: “Act in such a way
that you treat humanity, whether in your own person or the person of
any other, never simply as a means but always at the same time as an
end” (Grundlegung zur Metaphysik der Sitten
(Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals) (1785/1996, 4:429). Our
fundamental moral obligation, then, is to respect persons; morally
right actions are thus those that express respect for persons as ends
in themselves, while morally wrong actions are those that express
disrespect or contempt for persons by not valuing them as ends in
themselves (Wood 1999). In addition to this general commandment, Kant
argues that there are also more specific duties of respect for other
persons and self-respect, to which we'll return. For now, we must
address the question, What is it to be an end in itself and to possess
dignity?
The concept of an end has several meanings for Kant.  In one sense, to
be an end is to have some kind of value or worth. Most things have
value as the objects of our desires, interests, or affections; they
are the ends we pursue or produce, our subjective ends. But the worth
of an end in itself is worth that is not relative to, conditional on,
or derived from being the object of anyone's desires or
affections. Rather, its worth is intrinsic to it, unconditional,
incomparable, and objective. Kant calls this distinctive worth which
only ends in themselves possess “dignity.” In Kant's
theory of value dignity is the supreme value; thus ends in themselves
are to be valued morally above all other entities. Kant argues that
rational beings are the only entities that are ends in themselves and
that all rational beings are ends in themselves. The term
“person” means a being whose rational nature
“already marks them out as ends in themselves…and an
object of respect” (Groundwork 4: 428). In arguing for
respect for the dignity of persons, Kant explicitly rejects two other
conceptions of human value: the aristocratic idea of honor that
individuals differentially deserve according to their social rank,
individual accomplishments, or moral virtue (see Berger 1983 for a
discussion of the aristocratic dimensions of honor), and the view,
baldly expressed by Hobbes, that:
In Die Metaphysik der Sitten (The Metaphysics of
Morals) (1797) Kant grants that if we think of humans as merely
one kind of animal among others “in the system of nature,”
we can ascribe a price to them, an extrinsic value that depends on
their usefulness; but, he argues,
Against the aristocratic view Kant argues that although individuals
as members of some social community or other may have or lack
meritorious accomplishment or status or may deserve honor (or
evaluative respect) to different degrees or not at all, all persons as
members of the moral community, the community of all and only ends in
themselves, are owed the same (moral recognition) respect, for the
dignity that they possesses as rational is unconditional and
independent of all other facts about or features of them. Dignity is
also incomparable worth: it can't be compared with, exchanged for, or
replaced by any other value, whereas the very purpose of a price is to
establish comparative value. And dignity is absolute or objective
worth, which means that it is a value that everyone has compelling
reason to acknowledge, regardless of their antecedent desires,
interests, or affections. This brings us to a second sense in which
persons are ends in themselves. For “end” can also mean a
limit or constraint on action (as the end of the road puts a limit on
our our travel). The rational nature of persons “constitutes the
supreme limiting condition of the freedom of action of every human
being” (Groundwork, 4: 431); it puts an absolute limit
on how we can treat them. In particular, they must never be treated
merely as means, as things that we may use however we want in order to
advance our interests, and they must always be treated as the
supremely valuable beings that they are. Note that it is not wrong to
treat persons as means to our ends; indeed we could not get along in
life if we could not make use of the talents, abilities, service, and
labor of other people. What we must not do is to treat persons as mere
means to our ends, to treat them as if the only value they have is
what derives from their usefulness to us.  We must always treat them
“at the same time as an end.” To respect persons is thus
to regard them as absolutely, unconditionally, and incomparably
valuable, to value them in themselves and not just in comparison to
others or insofar as they are valuable to someone or could be useful
as a means for furthering some purpose, and to acknowledge in a
practical way that their dignity imposes absolute constraints on our
treatment of them.
As the Categorical Imperative indicates, it is humanity in persons,
strictly speaking, that has dignity; that is, it is in virtue of the
humanity in them that people are and so ought to be treated as ends in
themselves.  Commentators generally identify humanity (that which
makes us distinctively human beings and sets us apart from all other
animal species) with two closely related aspects of rationality: the
capacity to set ends and the capacity to be autonomous, both of which
are capacities to be a moral agent (for example, Wood 1999, Korsgaard
1996, Hill 1997). The capacity to set ends, which is the power of
rational choice, is the capacity to value things through rational
judgment: to determine, under the influence of reason independently of
antecedent instincts or desires, that something is valuable or
important, that it is worth seeking or valuing. It is also, thereby,
the capacity to value ends in themselves, and so it includes the
capacity for respect (Velleman 1999). The capacity to be autonomous is
the capacity to be self-legislating and self-governing, that is, (a)
the capacity to legislate moral laws that are valid for all rational
beings through one's rational willing by recognizing, using reason
alone, what counts as a moral obligation, and (b) the capacity then to
freely resolve to act in accordance with moral laws because they are
self-imposed by one's own reason and not because one is compelled to
act by any forces external to one's reason and will, including one's
own desires and inclinations. The capacity to be autonomous is thus
also the capacity to freely direct, shape, and determine the meaning
of one's own life, and it is the condition for moral
responsibility. But why does the possession of these capacities make
persons ends in themselves? Kant argues that moral principles must be
categorical imperatives, which is to say that they must be rational
requirements to which we are unconditionally subject, regardless of
whatever inclinations, interests, goals, or projects we might
have. But there could be categorical imperatives only if there is
something of absolute worth. Only persons have this kind of worth, and
they have it because the capacity to set ends, or to confer value on
things, is the source of all objective value (as Korsgaard 1996 and
Wood 1999 have argued), and the capacity for autonomy is the source,
on the one hand, both of the obligatoriness of moral law and of
responsible moral actions, and on the other, of all realized human
goodness. As the sources of all value and of morality itself, then,
these rational capacities are the basis of the absolute worth or
dignity of rational beings. Kant maintains that all rational beings
necessarily attribute this value to themselves and that they must, on
reflection, acknowledge that every other rational being has the same
value and on the same grounds: because of the rational nature that is
common to all persons. It is thus not as members of the biological
species homo sapiens that we have dignity and so are owed
moral recognition respect, but as rational beings who are capable of
moral agency.
There are several important consequences of this view regarding the
scope of recognition respect for persons. First, while all normally
functioning human beings possess the rational capacities that ground
recognition respect, there can be humans in whom these capacities are
altogether absent and who therefore, on this view, are not persons and
are not owed respect. Second, these capacities may be possessed by
beings who are not biologically human, and such beings would also be
persons with dignity whom we are morally obligated to respect. Third,
because dignity is an absolute worth grounded in the rational
capacities for morality, it is in no way conditional on how well or
badly those capacities are exercised, on whether a person acts morally
or has a morally good character or not. Thus, dignity cannot be
diminished or lost through vice or morally bad action, nor can it be
increased through virtue or morally correct action. Because personhood
and dignity are not matters of degree, neither is the recognition
respect owed to persons. Once a person, always a person (barring, say,
brain death), and so individuals cannot forfeit dignity or the right
to recognition respect no matter what they do.  It follows that even
the morally worst individuals must still be regarded as ends in
themselves and treated with respect. Of course, wrongdoing may call
for punishment and may be grounds for forfeiting certain rights, but
it is not grounds for losing dignity or for regarding the wrongdoer as
worthless scum. Recognition respect is not something individuals have
to earn or might fail to earn, but something they are owed simply
because they are rational beings.  Finally, because dignity is
absolute and incomparable, the worth of all rational beings is
equal. Thus the morally worst persons have the same dignity as the
morally best persons, although the former, we might say, fail to live
up to their dignity. What grounds dignity is something that all
persons have in common, not something that distinguishes one
individual from another. Thus each person is to be respected as an
equal among equals, without consideration of their individual
achievements or failures, social rank, moral merit or demerit, or any
feature other than their common rational nature. However, the equality
of all rational beings does not entail that each person must be
treated the same as every other persons, nor does it entail that
persons cannot also be differentially evaluated and valued in other
ways for their particular qualities, accomplishments, merit, or
usefulness. But such valuing and treatment must always be constrained
by the moral requirement to accord recognition respect to persons as
ends in themselves.
In The Metaphysics of Morals, Kant develops the implications
of this view of persons as ends in themselves. In his doctrine of
justice he argues that persons, by virtue of their rational nature,
are bearers of fundamental rights, including the innate right to
freedom, which must be respected by other persons and by social
institutions. The dignity of persons also imposes limits on
permissible reasons for and forms of legal punishment. In his doctrine
of virtue, Kant discusses specific moral duties of recognition respect
for other persons, as well as duties of self-respect, to which we'll
return below. Here, Kant explicitly invokes the notion of respect as
observantia. We have no moral duty to feel respect for
others, he holds, for we cannot have a moral duty to have any feeling,
since feelings are not directly controllable by our will. Rather, the
respect we owe others is “to be understood as the maxim of
limiting our self-esteem by the dignity of humanity in another person,
and so as respect in the practical sense” (MM, 6:449).
This duty of recognition respect owed to others requires two things:
first, that we adopt as a regulating policy a commitment to control
our own desire to think well of ourselves (this desire being the main
cause of disrespect), and, second, that we refrain from treating
others in the following ways: treating them merely as means (valuing
them as less than ends in themselves), showing contempt for them
(denying that they have any worth), treating them arrogantly
(demanding that they value us more highly than they value themselves),
defaming them by publicly exposing their faults, and ridiculing or
mocking them. We also have duties of love to others, and Kant argues
that in friendship respect and love, which naturally pull in opposite
directions, achieve a perfect balance.
Subsequent work in a Kantian vein on the duty of respect for others
has expanded the list of ways that we are morally required by respect
to treat persons. In particular, although Kant says that the duties of
recognition respect are strictly negative, consisting in not engaging
in certain conduct or having certain attitudes, many philosophers have
argued that respecting others involves positive actions and attitudes
as well. The importance of autonomy and agency in Kant's moral
philosophy has led many philosophers to highlight respect for
autonomy.  Thus, we respect others as persons (negatively) by doing
nothing to impair or destroy their capacity for autonomy, by not
interfering with their autonomous decisions and their pursuit of
(morally acceptable) the ends they value, and by not coercing or
deceiving them or treating them paternalistically.  We also respect
them (positively) by protecting them from threats to their autonomy
(which may require intervention when someone's current decisions seem
to put their own autonomy at risk) and by promoting autonomy and the
conditions for it (for example, by allowing and encouraging
individuals to make their own decisions, take responsibility for their
actions, and control their own lives).  Some philosophers have
highlighted Kant's claim that rationality is the ground for
recognition respect, arguing that to respect others is to engage with
them not as instruments or obstacles but as persons who are to be
reasoned with. So, for example, we should employ considerations that
are accessible to other persons and provide them with genuine reasons
in our dealings with them rather than trying to manipulate them
through nonrational techniques such as threat or bribery, act toward
them only in ways to which they could give rational consent, and be
willing to listen to them and take their reasons seriously. The
importance of the capacity to set ends and value things has been taken
by some philosophers to entail that respect also involves
consideration for the interests of others; so, we should help them to
promote and protect what they value and to pursue their ends, provided
these are compatible with due respect for other persons, and we should
make an effort to appreciate values that are different from our
own. Kant's emphasis in the doctrine of justice on the fundamental
rights that persons have has led still others to view the duty of
recognition respect for persons as the duty to respect the moral
rights they have as persons; some have claimed that the duty to
respect is nothing more than the duty to refrain from violating these
rights (Benn 1988, Feinberg 1970).
One final dimension of Kant's discussions of respect that is worth
mentioning is his attention to the feeling of respect
(reverentia). In the Groundwork Kant identifies the
object of the feeling of respect as the moral law and says that
respect for the moral law is the only moral motive
(Groundwork 4:400). Reverential respect is unlike any other
feeling humans experience in that it is not dependent on empirical
desires or any other contingencies of the individual agent's
psychology, situation, or history, but is “self-produced by
means of a rational concept,” that is, the moral law which, as
rational beings, we impose on ourselves. The unique moral feeling of
reverential respect both the experience of the objective worth of the
moral law (Wood 1999) and the experience of the supreme and absolute
authority that the moral law has over us (Grenberg 1999), the felt
consciousness of the immediate “subordination of my will”
to it (Groundwork 4:401n). In Kritik der practischen
Vernuft (Critique of Practical Reason) (1788), Kant
discusses reverential respect in explaining how the moral law, a
purely rational principle, is an “incentive” or motivating
reason for choice and action in a being who is not wholly and solely
rational but whose will is also affected by inclinations and yet is
free (Critique 5:72–76). As a complex experience that
is both the cognitive recognition of the moral law and an affective
state (McCarty 1994), reverential respect is the way, and the only
way, in which are aware of the self-legislated rational principles for
action that unconditionally constrain our inclinations (Stratton-Lake
2000). In recognizing the moral law we are conscious of it in a way
that involves two contrasting yet simultaneously experienced
feelings. First, in being aware of the law as having absolute
authority, we experience the subordination of our will to its
commands. This consciousness of subordination involves a painful,
humbling feeling insofar as our self-love (our efforts to satisfy our
desires and pursue our ends) is constrained and our self-conceit (our
attempts to esteem ourselves independently of moral considerations) is
struck down by the moral law's claim to supreme authority. At the same
time, however, our awareness of the moral law involves a pleasurably
uplifting feeling insofar as we recognize our own reason to be its
only source. The moral law thus appears to us not merely as constraint
but as freely imposed self-constraint; and reverential respect, this
complex experience of the law as both unconditionally authoritative
and self-imposed and of both the restriction on our inclinations and
the “sublimity” of our “higher vocation” to be
self-legislating and self-governing (Critique 5:87–88),
is the way in which we are morally motivated by the law to do
unconditionally and so freely what it commands.  Reverential respect
is a unique feeling not only in that it is produced by reason alone
but also in that it is the only feeling that we can know a
priori, which is to say that we can know that the moral
experience of every human agent is necessarily and inescapably one of
reverential respect for the moral law, for we cannot be aware of the
moral law except reverentially (Stratton-Lake 2000).  It is, of course
and unfortunately, also true that many of us, perhaps most of us most
of the time, ignore this feeling and so act morally
inappropriately. The feeling of respect is unique also, and relatedly,
in that the susceptibility to experience it is
“hard-wired” into human nature. In Die Religion
innerhalb der Grenzen der bloßen Vernunft (Religion Within the
Boundaries of Mere Reason) (1793) Kant calls reverential respect
for the moral law as it itself sufficient to motivate action the
“predisposition to personality,” which is that
“original predisposition” in human nature which makes it
possible for us to be moral beings (Religion
6:21–23).
 
As the way in which we are motivated to obey the moral law,
reverential respect for the law is thus the way in which we are
motivated to treat persons with recognition respect as the law
commands us to do. However, there is another, deeper connection
between respect for the law and respect for persons. For the
discussion in the Critique makes it clear that reverential
respect for the moral law is at the same time reverential respect for
oneself, qua rational being, as the author of the law. Self-conceit,
trying to esteem ourselves independently of moral considerations, is
also the attempt to make our inclinations “lawgiving and the
unconditional practical principle” (Critique 5:74),
i.e., to deny that the moral law is purely rational and
unconditionally and supremely authoritative. Both attempts involve
“illusion” (5:75), pretending that we do not feel
reverence for the absolute worth and authority of the moral law and
for our reason as its author and as supreme governor of our
inclinations. In the Metaphysics of Morals Kant says that
feeling of reverential self-respect, which the law “unavoidably
forces from” us (MM 6:403), is part of the subjective
basis of morality, the predispositions to feeling that make possible
for beings like us to acknowledge that we have binding moral duties
(MM 6:399–418), including the duty to treat ourselves
as well as others always as ends in ourselves. There is, finally, one
further interesting relation between respect for the law and respect
for persons. Although Kant says that the moral law is the sole object
of respect (Groundwork 4:400, 401n), he also says that we
experience this same humbling and uplifting feeling of respect for
morally good people (Critique 5:77ff). This feeling is both
reverential respect for the moral law which such individuals exemplify
(Groundwork 4:401n) and a mode of evaluative respect, a
“tribute” to their moral “merit”
(Critique 5:77).  Kant holds that reverence for morally good
people, like reverential respect for the moral law, is something we
necessarily and unavoidably feel, although we might pretend we don't
or refuse to acknowledge or show it. Reverential respect for morally
good persons contrasts with the duty to give recognition respect to
all persons in our attitudes and conduct, for the former is something
we can't help feeling for some people, while the latter is a way we
are obligated to comport ourselves toward all persons regardless of
our feelings and their moral performance. We might, however, regard
the two as linked, by regarding our recognition and appreciation of
the dignity of others as involving a feeling that we can't help but
experience and to which we commit ourselves to living up to in
acknowledging the moral duty to respect persons just because they are
persons (Hill 1998).
 Philosophical discussions of respect since Kant have tended, on
the one hand, to develop or apply various aspects of it, or on the
other, to take issue with it or develop alternative accounts of
respect. Some of the discussions have focused on more theoretical
issues. For example, Kant gives the notion of respect for persons a
central and vital role in moral theory. One issue that has since
concerned philosophers is whether respect for persons is the
definitive focus of morality, either in the sense that moral rightness
and goodness and hence all specific moral duties, rights, and virtues
are explainable in terms of respect or in the sense that the supreme
moral principle from which all other principles are derived is a
principle of respect for persons. Some philosophers have developed
ethical theories in which a principle of respect for persons is
identified as the fundamental and comprehensive moral requirement (for
example, Donagan 1977, Downie and Telfer 1969). Others (for example,
Hill 1993, Frankena 1986, Cranor 1975) argue that while respect for
persons is surely a very important moral consideration, it cannot be
the principle from which the rest of morality is deduced. They
maintain that there are moral contexts in which respect for persons is
not an issue and that there are other dimensions of our moral
relations with others that seem not to reduce to respect.  Moreover,
they argue, such a principle would seem not to provide moral grounds
for believing that we ought to treat mentally incapacitated humans or
nonhuman animals decently, or would (as Kant argues) make a duty to
respect such beings only an indirect duty—one we have only
because it is a way of respecting persons who value such beings or
because our duty to respect ourselves requires that we not engage in
activities that would dull our ability to treat persons
decently—rather than a direct duty to such beings (Kant 1797,
6:443).
Some theorists maintain that utilitarianism, a moral theory generally
thought to be a rival to Kant's theory, is superior with regard to
this last point.  A utilitarian might argue that it is sentience
rather than the capacity for rational autonomy that is the ground of
moral recognition respect, and so would regard mentally incapacitated
humans and nonhuman animals as having moral standing and so as worthy
of at least some moral respect in themselves.  Another issue, then, is
whether utilitarianism (or more generally, consequentialism) can
indeed accommodate a principle of respect for persons. In opposition
to the utilitarian claim, some Kantians argue that Kant's ethics is
distinguishable from consequentialist ethics precisely in maintaining
that the fundamental demand of morality is not that we promote some
value, such as the happiness of sentient beings, but that we respect
the worth of humanity regardless of the consequences of doing so
(Korsegaard 1996, Wood 1999). Thus, some philosophers argue that
utilitarianism is inconsistent with respect for persons, inasmuch as
utilitarianism, in requiring that all actions, principles, or motives
promote the greatest good, requires treating persons as mere means on
those occasions when doing so maximizes utility, whereas the very
point of a principle of respect for persons is to rule out such
trading of persons and their dignity for some other value (Benn 1988,
Brody 1982). In opposition, other theorists maintain not only that a
consequentialist theory can accommodate the idea of respect for person
(Downie and Telfer 1969, Gruzalski 1982, Landesman 1982, Pettit 1989,
Cummiskey 1990), but also that utilitarianism is derivable from a
principle of respect for persons (Downie and Telfer 1969) and that
consequentialist theories provide a better grounding for duties to
respect persons (Pettit 1989).
In addition to the debate between Kantian theory and utilitarianism,
theoretical work has also been done in developing the role of respect
for persons in Habermasian communicative ethics (Young 1997, Benhabib
1991) and in Aristotelian ethics (Thompson 2017, Rabbås 2015,
Jacobs 1995), in exploring similarities and differences between
western (Kantian) views of respect for persons and Indian
(Ghosh-Dastidar 1987), Confucian (Lu 2017, Chan 2006, Wawrytko 1982),
and Taoist views (Wong 1984), and in developing a distinctively
feminist account of respect for persons (Farley 1993, Dillon
1992a).
Other philosophical discussions have been concerned with clarifying
the nature of the respect that is owed to persons and of the persons
that are owed respect. Some of these discussions aim to refine and
develop Kant's account, while others criticize it and offer
alternatives. Darwall (2004, 2006) draws on Kant in revising his own
understanding of the nature of recognition respect for persons,
calling attention to an under-discussed dimension of the dignity of
persons on Kant's account. Dignity is not only a worth but a status or
standing, a position in the moral community. The standing is that of
an equal, for rational beings have the same dignity. But it is also a
standing or position from which claims or demands can be made. Dignity
is, as Kant says in a passage from the Metaphysics of Morals
quoted above, that “by which” rational beings
“exact” or demand respect from one another (MM,
6: 435). As Darwall puts it, dignity is “the second-personal
standing of an equal: the authority to make claims and demands on one
another as free and rational agents” and to hold each other
accountable for complying with these commands (Darwall 2004, 43,
44). Persons are just those beings who have the standing of authority
to address demands to one another as persons. Moral recognition
respect for the dignity of persons is acknowledging this authority; we
respect one another as persons when we hold each other mutually
accountable for complying with the demands that we acknowledge each
person has the authority to make of each other person as free and
rational agents. The reciprocal relations among persons as
authoritative claims-makers and mutually accountable claims-responders
is, in Darwall's view, one way of understanding the constitution of
rational beings into the community of equal persons that Kant calls in
the Groundwork a “kingdom of ends.”
 Another area of interest has been the connections between respect
and other attitudes and emotions, especially love and between respect
and virtues such as trust. For example, Kant (1797) argues that we
have duties of love to others just as we have duties of respect.
However, neither the love nor the respect we owe is a matter of
feeling (or, is pathological, as Kant says), but is, rather, a duty to
adopt a certain kind of maxim, or policy of action: the duty of love
is the duty to make the ends of others my own, the duty of respect is
the duty to not degrade others to the status of mere means to my ends
(Kant 1779, 6: 449–450). Love and respect, in Kant's view, are
intimately united in friendship; nevertheless, they seem to be in
tension with one another and respect seems to be the morally more
important of the two, in that the duties of respect are stricter and
respect constrains and limits love within friendship. Critics object
to what they see here as Kant's devaluing of emotions, maintaining
that emotions are morally significant dimensions of persons both as
subjects and as objects of both respect and love. In response, some
philosophers contend that respect and love are more similar and
closely connected in Kant's theory than is generally recognized
(Velleman 1999, Baron 1997, R. Johnson 1997). Others have developed
accounts of respect that is or incorporates a form of love (agape) or
care (Dillon 1992a, Downie and Telfer 1969, Maclagan 1960) and some
have argued that emotions are included among the bases of dignity and
that a complex emotional repertoire is necessary for Kantian respect
(Wood 1999, Sherman 1998a, Farley 1993). In a related vein, some
philosophers maintain that it is possible to acknowledge that another
being is a person, i.e., a rational moral agent, and yet not have or
give respect to that being. What is required for respecting a person
is not simply recognizing what they are but emotionally experiencing
their value as a person (Thomas 2001a, Buss 1999, Dillon 1997).
Another source of dissatisfaction with Kant's account has been with
his characterization of persons and the quality in virtue of which
they must be respected. In particular, Kant's view that the rational
will which is common to all persons is the ground of respect is
thought to ignore the moral importance of the concrete particularity
of each individual, and his emphasis on autonomy, which is often
understood to involve the independence of one person from all others,
is thought to ignore the essential relationality of human beings(for
example, Noggle 1999, Farley 1993, Dillon 1992a, E. Johnson
1982). Rather than ignoring what distinguishes one person from
another, it is argued, respect should involve attending to each person
as a distinctive individual and to the concrete realities of human
lives, and it should involve valuing difference as well as sameness
and interdependence as well as independence. Other critics respond
that respecting differences and particular identities inevitably
reintroduces hierarchical discrimination that is antithetical to the
equality among persons that the idea of respect for persons is
supposed to express (for example, Bird 2004). Identity and difference
may, however, be appropriate objects of other forms of consideration
and appreciation.
The idea of respect for particularity and relationality has also
become an important topic recently in political philosophy. One issue
is how persons ought to be respected in multicultural liberal
democratic societies (for example, Balint 2006, Tomasi 1995, C. Taylor 1992,
Kymlicka 1989).  Respect for persons is one of the basic tenets of
liberal democratic societies, which are founded on the ideal of the
equal dignity of all citizens and which realize this ideal in the
equalization of rights and entitlements among all citizens and so the
rejection of discrimination and differential treatment.  Some writers
argue that respecting persons requires respecting the traditions and
cultures that permeate and shape their individual identities (Addis
1997). But as the citizenry of such societies becomes increasingly
more diverse and as many groups come to regard their identities or
very existence as threatened by a homogenizing equality, liberal
societies face the question of whether they should or could respond to
demands to respect the unique identity of individuals or groups by
differential treatment, such as extending political rights or
opportunities to some cultural groups (for example, Native Americans,
French Canadians, African-Americans) and not others.
 The idea that all persons are owed respect has been applied in a
wide variety of contexts. For instance, some philosophers employ it to
justify various positions in normative ethics, such as the claim that
persons have moral rights (Benn 1971, Feinberg 1970, Downie and Telfer
1969) or duties (Fried 1978, Rawls 1971), or to argue for principles
of equality (Williams 1962), justice (Narveson 2002a and 2002b,
Nussbaum 1999), and education (Andrews 1976). Others appeal to respect
for persons in addressing a wide variety of practical issues such as
abortion, racism and sexism, rape, punishment, physician-assisted
suicide, pornography, affirmative action, forgiveness, terrorism,
sexual harassment, cooperation with injustice, treatment of gays and
lesbians, sexual ethics, and many others.  In political philosophy,
respect persons has been been used to examine issues of global
inequality (e.g., Moellendorf 2010). One very important application
context is biomedical ethics, where the principle of respect for
autonomy is one of four basic principles that have become “the
backbone of contemporary Western health care ethics” (Brannigan
and Boss 2001, 39; see also Beauchamp and Childress 1979/2001 and, for
example, Munson 2000, Beauchamp and Walters 1999). The idea of respect
for patient autonomy has transformed health care practice, which had
traditionally worked on physician-based paternalism, and the principle
enters into issues such as informed consent, truthtelling,
confidentiality, respecting refusals of life-saving treatment, the use
of patients as subjects in medical experimentation, and so on.
Although persons are the paradigm objects of moral recognition
respect, it is a matter of some debate whether they are the only
things that we ought morally to respect. One serious objection raised
against Kant's ethical theory is that in claiming that only rational
beings are ends in themselves deserving of respect, it licenses
treating all things which aren't persons as mere means to the ends of
rational beings, and so it supports morally abhorrent attitudes of
domination and exploitation toward all nonpersons and toward our
natural environment. Taking issue with the Kantian position that only
persons are respectworthy, many philosophers have argued that such
nonpersons as humans who are not agents or not yet agents, human
embryos, nonhuman animals, sentient creatures, plants, species, all
living things, biotic communities, the natural ecosystem of our
planet, and even mountains, rocks, and the AIDS virus have moral
standing or worth and so are appropriate objects of or are owed moral
recognition respect. Of course, it is possible to value such things
instrumentally insofar as they serve human interests, but the idea is
that such things matter morally and have a claim to respect in their
own right, independently of their usefulness to humans.
A variety of different strategies have been employed in arguing for
such respect claims. For example, the concept of moral respect is
sometimes stripped down to its bare essentials, omitting much of the
content of the concept as it appears in respect for persons
contexts. The respect that is owed to all things, it can be argued, is
a very basic form of attentive contemplation of the object combined
with a prima facie assumption that the object might have
intrinsic value. This does not involve the valuing commitments that
respect for persons does, since respectful consideration might reveal
that the object does not have any positive value. What we owe
everything is an opportunity to reveal any value it might have, rather
than assuming that only persons have the kind of value that morally
warrants attention (Birch 1993).
Another strategy is to argue that the true grounds for moral worth
and respect are other than or wider than rationality. One version of
this strategy (employed by P. Taylor 1986) is to argue that all living
things, persons and nonpersons, have equal inherent worth and so
equally deserve the same kind of moral respect, because the ground of
the worth of living things that are nonpersons is continuous with the
ground of the worth for persons. For example, we regard persons as
respect-worthy inasmuch as they are agents, centers of autonomous
choice and valuation, and we can similarly regard all living things as
respect-worthy in virtue of being quasi-agents, centers of organized
activity that pursue their own good in their own unique way. It
follows from this view that humans must not be regarded as having a
moral status superior to other living beings and so human interests
may not be regarded as always trumping claims of nonhumans. Respect
for all living things would require settling conflicts between persons
and nonpersons in ways that are fair to both.
A third strategy, which is employed within Kantian ethics, is to
argue that respect for persons logically entails respect for
nonpersons. For example, one can argue that rational nature is to be
respected not only by respecting humanity in someone's person but also
by respecting things that bear certain relations to rational nature,
for example, by being fragments of it or necessary conditions of
it. Respect would thus be owed to humans who are not persons and to
animals and other sentient beings (Foreman 2017, Rocha 2015, Wood 1998). Alternatively, one can
argue that respect for persons requires respecting their values, and
since many people value nature or other categories of nonpersons
intrinsically and not just instrumentally, respect for persons
requires (under certain conditions) also respecting what they respect
(Gaus 1998). Yet another strategy is to reject the Kantian notion that
there is but one kind or level of moral status or worth that warrants
but one kind or level of respect. Instead, one might argue, we can
acknowledge that rational moral agents have the highest moral standing
and worth and are owed maximal respect, and also maintain that other
beings have lesser but still morally significant standing or worth and
so deserve less but still some respect. So, although it is always
wrong to use moral agents merely as means, it may be justifiable to
use nonpersons as means (for example, to do research on human embryos
or human cadavers, destroying them in the process, or to kill animals
for food) provided their moral worth is also respectfully acknowledged
(for example, by not using them for trivial purposes, by destroying
them only in certain ways, or by having an attitude of regret or loss
because something of genuine moral value is sacrificed) (Meyer and
Nelson, 2001). Much philosophical work has been done, particularly in
environmental ethics, to determine the practical implications of the
claim that things other than persons are owed respect (e.g., Corral 2015, Foreman 2015, Schmidtz
2011, Bognar 2011, Connolly 2006, Wiggins 2000, Westra
1989). Certainly a wide variety of human practices, ranging from
agriculture and urban development to recreation and energy use to
technological and biomedical research, might have to be profoundly
altered by a recognition of moral duties of respect to nonpersons.
While there is much controversy about respect for persons and other
things, there is surprising agreement among moral and political
philosophers about at least this much concerning respect for oneself:
self-respect is something of great importance in everyday life.
Indeed, it is regarded both as morally required and as essential to
the ability to live a satisfying, meaningful, flourishing life—a
life worth living—and just as vital to the quality of our lives
together. Saying that a person has no self-respect or acts in a way no
self-respecting person would act, or that a social institution
undermines the self-respect of some people, is generally a strong
moral criticism. Nevertheless, as with respect itself, there is
philosophical disagreement, both real and merely apparent, about the
nature, scope, grounds, and requirements of self-respect.
Self-respect is often defined as a sense of worth or as due respect
for oneself; it is frequently (but not always correctly) identified
with or compared to self-esteem, self-confidence, dignity, self-love,
a sense of honor, self-reliance, pride, and it is contrasted (but not
always correctly) with servility, shame, humility, self-abnegation,
arrogance, self-importance. In addition to the questions philosophers
have addressed about respect in general, a number of other questions
have been of particular concern to those interested in self-respect,
such as: (1) What is self-respect, and how is it different from
related notions such as self-esteem, self-confidence, pride, and so
on?  (2) Are there objective conditions—for example, moral
standards or correct judgments—that a person must meet in order
to have self-respect, or is self-respect a subjective phenomenon that
gains support from any sort of self-valuing without regard to
correctness or moral acceptability? (3) Does respecting oneself
conceptually or causally require or lead to respecting other persons
(or anything else)? And how are respect for other persons and respect
for oneself alike and unalike? (4) How is self-respect related to such
things as moral rights, virtue, autonomy, integrity, and identity? (5)
Is there a moral duty to respect ourselves as there is a duty to
respect others?  (6) What features of an individual's psychology and
experience, what aspects of the social context, and what modes of
interactions with others support or undermine self-respect? (7) Are
social institutions and practices to be judged just or unjust (at
least in part) by how they affect self-respect? Can considerations of
self-respect help us to better understand the nature and wrongness of
injustices such as oppression and to determine effective and morally
appropriate ways to resist or end them?
Most generally, self-respect is a moral relation of persons (and only
persons) to themselves that concerns their own intrinsic worth.
Self-respect is thus essentially a valuing form of respect.  Like
respect for others, self-respect is a complex of multilayered and
interpenetrating phenomena; it involves all those aspects of
cognition, valuation, affect, expectation, motivation, action, and
reaction that compose a mode of being in the world at the heart of
which is an appreciation of oneself as having morally significant
worth. Unlike some forms of respect, self-respect is not something one
has only now and again or that might have no effect on its
object. Rather, self-respect has to do with the structure and
attunement of an individual's identity and of her life, and it
reverberates throughout the self, affecting the configuration and
constitution of the person's thoughts, desires, values, emotions,
commitments, dispositions, and actions. As expressing or constituting
one's sense of worth, it includes an engaged understanding of one's
worth, as well as a desire and disposition to protect and preserve
it. Accounts of self-respect differ in their characterizations of the
beliefs, desires, affects, and behaviors that are constitutive of it,
chiefly because of differences concerning the aspects or conception of
the self insofar as it is the object of one's respect and the nature
and grounds of the worth of the self or aspects of the self.
 Most theorists agree that as there are different kinds of respect,
so there are different kinds of self-respect.  However, we clearly
cannot apply all kinds of respect to ourselves: it makes no sense to
talk of directive respect for oneself, for instance, and although one
might regard oneself or some of one's characteristics as obstacles
(“I'm my own worst enemy”), this would not generally be
considered a form of self-respect. Because the notion of self-worth is
the organizing motif for self-respect, and because in the dominant
Western tradition two kinds of worth are ascribed to persons, two
kinds of self-respect can be distinguished.
The first, recognition self-respect, centers on what we can call
status worth, which is worth that derives from such things as one's
essential nature as a person, membership in a certain class, group, or
people, social role, or place in a social hierarchy. Kantian dignity
is one form, but not the only form, of status worth. Evaluative
self-respect, in contrast, has to do with acquired worth, merit, based
on the quality of one's character and conduct. We earn or lose moral
merit, and so deserve or don't deserve evaluative self-respect,
through what we do or become. Different sources of status worth yield
different configurations of recognition self-respect, but most
contemporary discussions, heavily influenced by Kant, focus on
dignity-based recognition self-respect.  Recognition respect for
oneself as a person, then, involves living in light of an
understanding and appreciation of oneself as having dignity and moral
status just in virtue of being a person, and of the moral constraints
that arise from that dignity and status. All persons are morally
obligated or entitled to have this kind of self-respect.  Because the
dominant Kantian conception of persons grounds dignity in three
things—equality, agency, and individuality—we can further
distinguish three kinds of recognition self-respect.  The first is
respect for oneself as a person among persons, as a member of the
moral community with a status and dignity equal to every other person
(see, for example, Thomas 1983a, Boxill 1976, Hill 1973). This
involves having some conception of the kinds of treatment from others
that would count as one's due as a person and treatment that would be
degrading or beneath one's dignity, desiring to be regarded and
treated appropriately, and resenting and being disposed to protest
disregard and disrespectful treatment.  Thinking of oneself as having
certain moral rights that others ought not to violate is part of this
kind of self-respect; servility (regarding oneself as the inferior of
others) and arrogance (thinking oneself superior to others) are among
its opposites.
The second kind of recognition self-respect involves an
appreciation of oneself as an agent, a being with the ability and
responsibility to act autonomously and value appropriately (see, for
example, G. Taylor 1985, Telfer 1968). Persons who respect themselves
as agents take their responsibilities seriously, especially their
responsibilities to live in accord with their dignity as persons, to
govern themselves fittingly, and to make of themselves and their lives
something they believe to be good. So, self-respecting persons regard
certain forms of acting, thinking, desiring, and feeling as befitting
them as persons and other forms as self-debasing or shameful, and they
expect themselves to adhere to the former and avoid the latter. They
take care of themselves and seek to develop and use their talents and
abilities in pursuit of their plans, projects, and goals. Those who
are shameless, uncontrolled, weak-willed, self-consciously
sycophantic, chronically irresponsible, slothfully dependent,
self-destructive, or unconcerned with the shape and direction of their
lives may be said to not respect themselves as agents.
A third kind of recognition self-respect involves the appreciation of
the importance of being autonomously self-defining. One way a
self-respecting individual does this is through having, and living in
light, of a normative self-conception, i.e., a conception of being and
living that she regards as worthy of her as the particular person she
is. Such a self-conception both gives expression to ideals and
commitments that shape the individual’s identity, and also
organizes desires, choices, pursuits, and projects in ways that give
substance and worth to the self.  Self-respecting people hold
themselves to personal expectations and standards the disappointment
of which they would regard as unworthy of them, shameful, even
contemptible (although they may not apply these standards to others)
(Hill 1982). People who sell out, betray their own values, live
inauthentic lives, let themselves be defined by others, or are
complacently self-accepting lack this kind of recognition
self-respect.
To these three Kantian kinds of recognition
self-respect we can add a fourth, which has to do with the fact that
it is not just as abstract human beings or as agents with personal and
universalizable moral goals and obligations that individuals can, do,
or should respect themselves but also as concrete persons embedded in
particular social structures and occupying various social positions
with status-related responsibilities they must meet to be
self-respecting (Middleton 2006). This last kind also has political
implications, as discussed below.
Evaluative self-respect, which expresses confidence in one's merit as
a person, rests on an appraisal of oneself in light of the normative
self-conception that structures recognition self-respect. Recognition
self-respecting persons are concerned to be the kind of person they
think it is good and appropriate for them to be and they try to live
the kind of life such a person should live. Thus they have and try to
live by certain standards of worthiness by which they are committed to
judge themselves. Indeed, they stake themselves, their value and their
identities, on living in accord with these standards. Because they
want to know where they stand, morally, they are disposed to
reflectively examine and evaluate their character and conduct in light
of their normative vision of themselves. And it matters to them that
they are able to “bear their own survey,” as Hume says
(1739 (1971), 620). Evaluative self-respect contains the judgment that
one is or is becoming the worthy kind of person one seeks to be, and,
more significantly, that one is not in danger of becoming an unworthy
kind of person (Dillon 2004). Evaluative self-respect holds, at the least, the
judgment that one “comes up to scratch,” as Telfer (1968)
puts it. Those whose conduct is unworthy or whose character is
shameful by their own standards do not deserve their own evaluative
respect. However, people can be poor self-appraisers and their
standards can be quite inappropriate to them or to any person, and so
their evaluative self-respect, though still subjectively satisfying,
can be unwarranted, as can the loss or lack of it. Interestingly,
although philosophers have paid scant attention to evaluative respect
for others, significant work has been done on evaluative
self-respect. This may reflect an asymmetry between the two: although
our evaluative respect for others may have no effect on them, perhaps
because we don't express it or they don't value our appraisal, our own
self-evaluation matters intensely to us and can powerfully affect our
self-identity and the shape and structure of our lives. Indeed, an
individual's inability to stomach herself can profoundly diminish the
quality of her life, even her desire to continue living.
Some philosophers have contended that a third kind of self-valuing
underlies both recognition and evaluative self-respect. It is a more
basic sense of worth that enables an individual to develop the
intellectually more sophisticated forms, a precondition for being able
to take one's qualities or the fact that one is a person as grounds of
positive self-worth. It has been called “basic psychological
security” (Thomas 1989), “self-love” (Buss 1999),
and “basal self-respect” (Dillon 1997). Basal self-valuing
is our most fundamental sense of ourselves as mattering and our
primordial interpretation of self and self-worth. Strong and secure
basal self-respect can immunize an individual against personal failing
or social denigration, but damage to basal self-respect, which can
occur when people grow up in social, political, or cultural
environments that devalue them or “their kind,” can make
it impossible for people to properly interpret themselves and their
self-worth, because it affects the way in which they assess reality
and weigh reasons.  Basal self-respect is thus the ground of the
possibility of recognition and evaluative self-respect.
 It is common in everyday discourse and philosophical discussion to
treat self-respect and self-esteem as synonyms. It is true that
evaluative self-respect and self-esteem both involve appraising
oneself favorably in virtue of one's behavior and personal traits, and
that a person can have or lack either one undeservedly. However, many
philosophers have argued that the two attitudes are importantly
different (for example, Darwall 1977, Sachs 1981, Chazan 1998, Harris,
2001, Dillon 2004, 2013). One way of distinguishing them is by their
grounds and the points of view from which they are
appraised. Evaluative self-respect involves an assessment from a moral
point of view of one's character and conduct, while self-esteem can be
based on personal features that are unrelated to character, and the
assessment it involves need not be from a moral point of view: one can
have a good opinion of oneself in virtue of being a good joke-teller
or having won an important sports competition and yet not think one is
a good person because of it (Darwall 1977). Another way of
distinguishing them focuses on what it is to lose them: one would lose
evaluative respect for oneself if one judged oneself to be shameful,
contemptible, or intolerable, but self-esteem can be diminished by the
belief that one lacks highly prized qualities that would add to one's
merit (Harris 2001). Self-respect is also often identified with
pride. In one sense, pride is the pleasure or satisfaction taken in
one's achievements, possessions, or associations, and in this sense
pride can be an affective element of either evaluative self-respect or
self-esteem. In another sense, pride is inordinate self-esteem or
vanity, an excessively high opinion of one's qualities,
accomplishments, or status that can make one arrogant and contemptuous
of others.  In this sense, pride contrasts with both well-grounded
evaluative self-respect and the interpersonal kind of recognition
self-respect. But pride can also be a claim to and celebration of a
status worth or to equality with others, especially other groups (for
example, Black Pride), which is interpersonal recognition
self-respect; and pride can be “proper pride,” a sense of
one's dignity that prevents one from doing what is unworthy, and in
this sense it is the agentic dimension of recognition
self-respect. Pride's opposites, shame and humility, are also closely
related to self-respect. A loss of evaluative self-respect may be
expressed in shame, but shameless people manifest a lack of
recognition self-respect; and although humiliation can diminish or
undermine recognition self-respect, humility is an appropriate
dimension of the evaluative respect of any imperfect person.
One issue with which contemporary philosophers have been concerned is
whether self-respect is an objective concept or a subjective one. If
it is the former, then there are certain beliefs, attitudes, and
dispositions a person must have to be self-respecting. A person who
thought of herself as a lesser sort of being whose interests and
well-being are less important than those of others would not count as
having recognition self-respect, no matter how appropriate she regards
her stance. If self-respect is a subjective concept, then a person
counts as having self-respect so long as she believes she is not
tolerating treatment she regards as unworthy or behaving in ways she
thinks is beneath her, regardless of whether her judgments about
herself are accurate or her standards or sense of what she is due are
judged by others to be reasonable or worthy (Massey
1983a). Psychologists, for whom “self-esteem” is the term
of practice, tend to regard the various dimensions of a person's sense
of worth as subjective. Many philosophers treat the interpersonal
dimension of recognition self-respect objectively, and it is generally
thought that having manifestly inaccurate beliefs about oneself is
good grounds for at least calling an individual's sense of worth
unjustified or compromised (Meyers 1989). But there is no consensus
regarding the standards to which individuals hold themselves and by
which they judge themselves, and certainly the standards of the
self-defining dimension of recognition self-respect are inescapably,
though perhaps not exclusively, subjective. Complicating the
objective/subjective distinction, however, is the fact of the social
construction of self-respect. What it is to be a person or to have a
status worthy of respect, what treatment and conduct are appropriate
to a person or one with such a status, what forms of life and
character have merit—all of these are given different content
in different sociocultural contexts. Individuals necessarily, though
perhaps not inalterably, learn to engage with themselves and with
issues of self-worth in the terms and modes of the sociocultural
conceptions in which they have been immersed. And different kinds of
individuals may be given different opportunities in different
sociocultural contexts to acquire or develop the grounds of the
different kinds of self-respect (Dillon 1997, Moody-Adams 1992–93,
Meyers 1989, Thomas 1983b).  Even fully justified self-respect may
thus be less than strongly objective and more than simply
subjective.
Self-respect is frequently appealed to as a means of justifying a wide
variety of philosophical claims or positions, generally in arguments
of the form: x promotes (or undermines) self-respect;
therefore, x is to that extent to be morally approved (or
objected to). For example, appeals to self-respect have been used to
argue for, among many other things, the value of moral rights
(Feinberg 1970), moral requirements or limits regarding forgiving
others or oneself (Dillon 2001; Holmgren 1998, 1993; Novitz 1998;
Haber 1991; Murphy 1982), and both the rightness and wrongness of
practices such as affirmative action. Such arguments rely on rather
than establish the moral importance of self-respect. Most philosophers
who attend to self-respect tend to treat it as important in one of two
ways, which are exemplified in the very influential work of Kant and
John Rawls. Kant argues that, just as we have a moral duty to respect
others as persons, so we have a moral duty to respect ourselves as
persons, a duty that derives from our dignity as rational beings. This
duty requires us to act always in an awareness of our dignity and so
to act only in ways that are consistent with our status as end in
ourselves and to refrain from acting in ways that abase, degrade,
defile, or disavow our rational nature. That is, we have a duty of
recognition self-respect. In The Metaphysics of Morals
(1797), Kant argues for specific duties to oneself generated by the
general duty to respect humanity in our persons, including duties to
not engage in suicide, misuse of our sexual powers, drunkenness and
other unrestrained indulgence of inclination, lying, self-deception,
avarice, and servility. Kant also maintains that the duty of
self-respect is the most important moral duty, for unless there were
duties to respect oneself, there could be no moral duties at
all. Moreover, fulfilling our duty to respect ourselves is a necessary
condition of fulfilling our duties to respect other persons.  Kant
maintains that we are always aware of our dignity as persons and so of
our moral obligation to respect ourselves, and he identifies this
awareness as a feeling of reverential respect for ourselves. This is
one of the natural capacities of feeling which we could have no duty
to acquire but that make it possible for us to be motivated by the
thought of duty. Reverence for self is, along with “moral
feeling,” conscience, and love of others, a subjective source of
morality, and it is the motivational ground of the duty of
self-respect. Kant also discusses evaluative self-respect, especially
in Critique of Practical Reason (1788) and his Lectures
on Ethics (1779), as a combination of noble pride, the awareness
that we have honored and preserved our dignity by acting in morally
worthy ways, and a healthy dose of humility, the awareness that we
inevitably fall short of the lofty requirements of the moral law. Kant
regards well-grounded evaluative self-respect as a subjective
motivation to continue striving to do right and be good.
Rawls, by contrast, views self-respect neither as something we are
morally required to have and maintain nor as a feeling we necessarily
have, but as an entitlement that social institutions are required by
justice to support and not undermine. In A Theory of Justice
(1971) he argues that self-respect is a “primary good,”
something that rational beings want whatever else they want, because
it is vital to the experienced quality of individual lives and to the
ability to carry out or achieve whatever projects or aims an
individual might have. It is, moreover, a social good, one that
individuals are able to acquire only under certain social and
political conditions. Rawls defines self-respect as including “a
person's sense of his own value, his secure conviction that his
conception of the good, his plan of life, is worth carrying
out,” and it implies “a confidence in one's ability, so
far as it is within one's power, to fulfill one's intentions”
(Rawls 1971, 440). He argues that individuals' access to self-respect is to
a large degree a function of how the basic institutional structure of
a society defines and distributes the social bases of self-respect,
which include the messages about the relative worth of citizens that
are conveyed in the structure and functioning of institutions, the
distribution of fundamental political rights and civil liberties,
access to the resources individuals need to pursue their plans of
life, the availability of diverse associations and communities within
which individuals can seek affirmation of their worth and their plans
of life from others, and the norms governing public interaction among
citizens. Since self-respect is vital to individual well-being, Rawls
argues that justice requires that social institutions and policies be
designed to support and not undermine self-respect.  Rawls argues that
the principles of justice as fairness are superior to utilitarian
principles insofar as they better affirm and promote self-respect for
all citizens.
 Rawls's view that the ability of individuals to respect themselves
is heavily dependent on their social and political circumstances has
been echoed by a number of theorists working in moral, social, and
political philosophy. For example, Margalit (1996) argues that a
decent society is one whose institutions do not humiliate people, that
is, give people good reason to consider their self-respect to be
injured (but see Bird 2010). Honneth's theory of social criticism (1995) focuses on the
way people's self-respect and self-identity necessarily depend on the
recognition of others and so are vulnerable to being misrecognized or
ignored both by social institutions and in interpersonal
interactions. A number of theorists have used the concept of
self-respect to examine the oppression of women, people of color, gays
and lesbians, and other groups that are marginalized, stigmatized, or
exploited by the dominant culture, identifying the plethora of ways in
which oppressive institutions, images, and actions can do damage to
the self-respect of members of these groups. Other writers discuss
ways that individuals and groups might preserve or restore
self-respect in the face of injustice or oppression, and the ways in
which the development of self-respect in individuals living under
oppression or injustice empowers them to participate in the monumental
struggles for justice and liberation (for example, Babbitt 2000, 1993;
Bartky 1990a, 1990b, 1990c; Boxill 1992, 1976; Collins 1990; Dillon
1997, 1995; Hay 2013, 2011; Meyers 1989, 1986; Mohr 1992, 1988;
Moody-Adams 1992–93; Statman 2002; Thomas 2001b, 1983a,
1978–79). Some theorists, especially those working within a
feminist framework, have argued that the prevailing conceptions of
self-respect in Kantian theory or in contemporary liberal societies
themselves contain features that reflect objectionable aspects of the
dominating culture, and they have attempted to reconceive self-respect
in ways that are more conducive to empowerment and emancipation (for
example, Dillon 1992c, Borgwald 2012).
In moral philosophy, theorists have also focused on connections
between self-respect and various virtues and vices, such as self-trust
(Borgwald 2012, Govier 1993), justice (Bloomfield 2011), honesty
(Mauri 2011), benevolence (Andrew 2011), humility (Dillon 2015, Grenberg 2010),
self-forgiveness (Holmgren 1998, Dillon 2001), self-improvement
(Johnson 2011), general immorality (Bagnoli 2009, Bloomfield 2008),
and arrogance (Dillon 2003, 2007, forthcoming).
Everyday discourse and practices insist that respect and self-respect
are personally, socially, politically, and morally important, and
philosophical discussions of the concepts bear this out.  Their roles
in our lives as individuals, as people living in complex relations
with other people and surrounded by a plethora of other beings and
things on which our attitudes and actions have tremendous effects,
cannot, as these discussions reveal, be taken lightly.  The
discussions thus far shed light on the nature and significance of the
various forms of respect and self-respect and their positions in a
nexus of profoundly important but philosophically challenging and
contestable concepts. These discussions also reveal that more work
remains to be done in clarifying these attitudes and their places
among and implications for our concepts and our lives.