Several terms are used to denote extra-constitutional rejection of an
existing government’s authority, either tout court or
in some particular domain: resistance, rebellion,
 secession[3],
 revolution. Resistance need not be total; it can instead involve
disobeying some particular law or laws or efforts to thwart a
government’s policies or the government’s attempt to
perform particular actions; and resistance can take a number of forms,
including acts of disobedience that are not only public but designed
to achieve maximal publicity (as in the case of civil disobedience),
as well as covert acts of noncompliance; and it may also be either
peaceful or nonviolent and disruptive or not. Rebellion, usefully
distinguished from resistance, involves a wholesale rejection of
government’s authority. But such a rejection of governmental
authority could be undertaken for quite different reasons, whether to
do away with government altogether (the anarchist’s
 goal)[4],
 to establish a new government with the same domain of territorial
authority, to create a new territorial unit out of part of the
territory of the existing government (secession), or to sever part of
the territory of the government and join it to another existing state
(irredentist secession). Revolution is commonly understood to have two
components: rejection of the existing government’s authority and
an attempt to replace it with another government, where both involve
the use of extra-constitutional means. On this reading, revolution and
rebellion share a negative aim, the wholesale rejection of a
government’s authority, but revolution includes in addition a
positive aim, to institute a new government in place of the one it has
destroyed.
Some important empirical work relevant to the morality of
revolutionary war is to be found in studies of civil war. The latter
is sometimes defined as a large scale armed conflict between state
forces and one or more nonstate parties. This definition may be too
restrictive, however, since it would exclude a large-scale armed
conflict between two or more nonstate parties under conditions in
which the government had disintegrated entirely or still existed but
was not capable of fielding forces. A broader understanding of civil
war that would encompass that kind of case would be simply that of a
large-scale intrastate armed conflict. 
The preceding terms are not always sorted out in this way in actual
political discourse. For example, the government of the United States
labeled the secession of the Southern states from the Union as a
rebellion, while many Confederates called their enterprise the Second
American Revolution; and the American colonists who strove to secede
from the British Empire tended to call themselves revolutionaries, not
secessionists or rebels. (It may be that the Americans avoided the
term “rebel” because they thought it had negative
connotations). Similarly, the Algerian secession from France is often
referred to as the Algerian Revolution and wars of colonial liberation
are rarely called secessionist conflicts, though their goal is
secession from a political order centered on a metropolitan
 state.[5]
 In what follows, the term “revolution” will be reserved
for extra-constitutional attempts to destroy an existing national
government and replace it, to the full extent of its territorial
authority, with a new government. On this way of sorting out the
various terms, secessionists and revolutionaries are necessarily
rebels, while rebels need be neither secessionists nor revolutionaries
(they may be anarchists), and secessionists, as such are not
revolutionaries.
Sometimes the term “revolution” is used in a stronger
sense, as denoting not just an extra-constitutional attempt to replace
one government with another, but also to effect a fundamental change
in the type of government, as in a revolution to overthrow an
autocracy and create in its stead a democracy. Thus some scholars on
the Left have contended that the so-called American Revolution was not
really a revolution, because it did not create or even aim at anything
other than a new form of the bourgeois state—a state controlled
by and in the interest of the class that controls the means of
production (Zinn 1980, Jennings 2000). Many American historians have
concluded otherwise, asserting that it was a revolution in the
stronger sense because it replaced a monarchy with a republic (Nash
2005; Wood 1993). On this stronger understanding of revolution as
involving a fundamental change in the type of government,
secessionists would also be revolutionaries, if the new government
they attempt to establish in part of the territory of the state would
be of a fundamentally different type. Obviously, this stronger
conception of revolution is no clearer and less contentious than
attempts to distinguish fundamentally different types of government
(hence the debate over whether the war for the independence of the
American Colonies from Britain was “really” a revolution).
For the remainder of the discussion I will use
“revolution” in the weaker sense, with the understanding
that it can also encompasses revolutions in the stronger sense. It is
worth noting, however, that the morality of revolution in the stronger
sense is, if anything, more complex than that of the weaker sense,
because the former involves not only the extra-constitutional
overthrow of the existing government but also the extra-constitutional
establishment of a new type of government. 
One more distinction is needed. Revolutions may be violent or
nonviolent and may begin nonviolently and become violent. This
distinction, though obviously important, is not so crisp as one might
think, because what counts as violence may be disputed. For example,
attempts to overthrow a government by disruptive techniques (for
example conducting general strikes, disabling power grids, or blocking
main transportation routes) are not violent in the way in which
discharging firearms or detonating explosives is, but they may
nonetheless cause lethal harms. The chief topic of this entry is
violent revolution where “violence” is understood in the
most robust way and as occurring on a large scale; in other words, the
topic is revolutionary war as “war” is usually understood
(Singer & Small 1994: 5). 
It is well worth noting, however, that there is a position on
revolution that obviates the need for a theory of just revolutionary
war, namely, the view that large-scale revolutionary violence is never
morally justified because the risks of such an endeavor are so great
and because nonviolent revolution is more efficacious. Some empirical
political scientists have argued that there is good evidence that
nonviolent revolution is more likely to achieve its ends than
revolutionary war (Chenoweth & Stephan
 2011).[6]
 Even if that is true as a generalization, the question remains as to
whether there are exceptions—cases where nonviolence is not
likely to achieve the aims of just revolution or would only achieve
them with undue costs in terms of human well-being—and whether
they can be identified ex ante.  If there are any such cases,
there is a need for a theory of just revolutionary war.
No attempt can be made here to conduct a survey of views on revolution
across the history of Western Philosophy, much less one that
encompasses other traditions. Instead, it must suffice to say that the
typical attitude toward revolution of major figures in the Western
tradition prior to the modern period was to condemn it or to
acknowledge its moral permissibility only in very narrow circumstances
(Morkevicius 2014). Augustine (City of God) and Aquinas
(Summa theologiae), for example, both condemn rebellion and
hence revolution, unambiguously urging obedience to the powers that
be. Suárez (1609) held that only “lesser
magistrates” had the authority to try to overthrow an existing
government, with the implication that revolution by those who do not
already occupy official roles was never justified.  Hobbes (1651),
whom some consider the first truly modern political philosopher in the
Western tradition, explicitly denied that revolution could ever be
justified, holding instead that a subject could only rightly resist
government authority as a matter of self-defense and then only when
the perpetration of lethal harm against her was imminent.
Views that reject revolution outright or hold it to be permissible in
only the most extreme of circumstances typically have either or both
of two rationales. The first is an overriding aversion to the
perceived risk of violent anarchy posed by attempts to overthrow a
government (the Undue Risk Argument). The second is the conviction
that the requirement of rightful authority cannot, as a matter of
logical necessity, be met in the case of revolutionary war (The
Conceptual Argument).
Consider first the Undue Risk Argument for the conclusion that
revolution is never or only rarely justified. Put most simply, the
idea here is that virtually any government is better than none and
that while it is true that revolutions (as opposed to mere rebellions)
aim not merely to destroy existing government but to replace it with
something better, they may succeed only in the first, destructive
task, or not succeed in the second, constructive task until an
unacceptable decrement in physical security has occurred. Such views
have often been grounded in a rather pessimistic view of human nature.
While some Medieval thinkers may have attributed the risk of extreme
violence when government authority is rejected to man’s
supposedly irrational and selfish nature, Hobbes (1651) in contrast
can be interpreted as attributing it to human rationality, without any
assumption that all or even most human beings are bloody-minded or
subject to overweening desires for domination. On this interpretation
of Hobbes, where there is no government—no power capable of
enforcing rules conducive to physical security—it is rational
for individuals to try to dominate others for purely defensive
reasons, even if there is only a minority of individuals who seek
domination for its own sake. It is not man’s sinful nature, but
his rationality, combined with the game-theoretic structure of the
condition of anarchy, that makes lack of government so lethally
dangerous.
At least in the classical liberal tradition, according to which
individuals have rights prior to the institution of government and in
which governments are viewed as trustees, agents of the people, the
attitude toward revolution is generally more permissive. There is a
right to revolt when government violates those natural rights for the
protection of which it was created. Locke (1689) apparently goes
further: on one interpretation, he holds that the people at its own
discretion may rightly revoke the trusteeship, that is, dissolve the
government, even in the absence of the state’s violation of
natural rights or failure to protect them. They could, for example,
dissolve the government in order to form a new one that they simply
thought was more efficient. Locke apparently attempts to dull the edge
of this rather radical conclusion by assuming, quite gratuitously,
that revolution will not occur unless the people as a whole have
already suffered greatly at the hands of the government. He might also
have thought that in cases where the present government was not
violating natural rights, dissolving it was only permissible if done
through a constitutionally sanctioned process, not through
revolution.
Locke does not explicitly consider two possibilities that have
frequently been realized in actual revolutionary circumstances: first,
that governmental oppression may not be universal but instead may
target only certain groups within society, for example, religious or
ethnic or national minorities or those who criticize government;
second, that even if there is general oppression there may not be a
sufficient spontaneous mobilization of forces to overthrow the
government. Consequently, Locke conveniently sidesteps two questions
that a theory of the morality of revolution ought to address: (1)
whether revolution to end special as opposed to general oppression is
justifiable; and (2) what means may those already committed to
revolution employ to mobilize enough others to participate in
revolution to make success possible. The first question is significant
because of the possibility that the harm to innocent
people—including a general decrease in physical
security—that revolution may entail, has somehow to be weighed
against the benefit in terms of relief from injustice that the
oppressed minority will get if the revolution ultimately succeeds.
Even if the injustices done to the minority ought to be given greater
weight in the balancing exercise, there may come a point at which
revolution fails a proportionality test if the harms to others that
will result from remedying minority rights-violations are great
enough. The second question arises because even where oppression is
general there may not be sufficiently widespread participation in
revolution to achieve success, either because significant portions of
the population, in the grip of an ideology that purports to justify
the existing political order, do not see themselves as seriously
oppressed, or because of the failure to solve collective action
problems. If either of these two conditions obtain, mobilizing enough
people to have a good chance of successful revolution may require
coercion under conditions in which those who would wield it lack
legitimacy and in which the institutional resources that could confer
legitimacy are unavailable. 
Locke took a more favorable stance toward revolution than Hobbes or
his medieval predecessors, because he did not believe that the risks
of physical insecurity attendant upon the destruction of an existing
government were as high as those thinkers did. That more optimistic
view as grounded, in turn, in his belief that the destruction of the
political order need not entail the destruction of society—that
is, of social practices and habits that effectively control the most
serious forms of violence. It is a mistake, however, to conclude
either that Hobbes was right and Locke was wrong or vice
versa about the consequences for physical security of the
destruction of government. A generalization either way would be
unhelpful. A more reasonable view is that the risks of the destruction
of government and hence of revolution vary, depending upon the
circumstances. If that is so, and if the justifiability of revolution
depends even in part on the severity of the risks of physical
insecurity it involves, then it appears that the content of a theory
of just revolutionary war must be shaped by empirical considerations.
Yet it is fair to say that many philosophers who have had something to
say about just revolutionary war, whether explicitly or by implication
in their work on interstate wars, have not taken this point to heart.
They have either not understood the importance of empirical
assumptions about the risks of revolution or made the relevant
empirical assumptions but without supplying sufficient evidence for
their validity. Without a well-evidenced empirical account of the
conditions under which attempts to overthrow the government are likely
to cause violent anarchy, and an account of the conditions under which
violent anarchy is likely to continue for some significant period of
time, both pessimism and optimism about revolution, and the
calculations of proportionality on which the justification for
revolution is supposed to depend, will be more a matter of faith than
reason.
The second or conceptual argument or denying that revolution is
justifiable is attributed to Kant on what might be called the
Rousseauian interpretation of his view, as articulated perhaps most
clearly by Christine Korsgaard (2008) and Katrin Flikschuh (2008). (1)
to be justified, an attempt to overthrow the existing political
authority would have to be an expression of, or authorized by, the
general will; otherwise it would be the imposition of a private will
or private wills and hence contrary to right; (2) but only the
existing supreme political authority can express or be the authorized
agent of the general will; therefore (3) revolution can never be
justified. This argument against revolution, unlike Hobbesian-style
undue risk arguments, does not rely upon unsupported empirical
assumptions about the uniformly dire consequences for physical
insecurity of attempts to destroy existing governments. It is
vulnerable, however, to a different objection, namely, that when
government is sufficiently tyrannical and destructive, the lesser of
evils may be for someone to act without possessing authority—in
other words, that the use of coercion, if it is necessary to achieve
the conditions for basic justice and involves the minimal amount of
coercion needed to accomplish that, can be morally justified even if
it is not wielded by an agent that possesses legitimacy (Buchanan
2013, 2016). Framed in Kantian terms, this is the view that in extreme
cases the imposition of the basic order needed for the realization of
rights can be justified even if it is the imposition of a private
will, so long as the object of that will is the common good of justice
properly conceived, so long as the coercion employed is the least
needed to do the job, and so long as the agent undertaking to create
order is likely to be capable of succeeding in doing so.
The conceptual version of Kant’s denial that revolution can be
justified is distinct from a different Kantian argument that is more
akin to the Undue Risk Argument: (i) all human beings are indefeasibly
obligated to contribute to getting out of and staying out of a
condition in which universal right cannot be realized, (ii) universal
right can only be realized where government exists and is recognized
as authoritative, (iii) to revolt is both to try to destroy the
existing government and to deny its authority, and therefore (iv)
revolution can never be justified. This second interpretation of
Kant’s view holds that to engage in revolution is not just to
create an unacceptably high risk of general insecurity but also to
violate a fundamental obligation to contribute to the conditions for
the realization of universal right. In more contemporary terms, it is
an argument against revolution based on a strong interpretation of the
Natural Duty of Justice, the obligation to help bring about and
sustain the conditions for justice. 
The Natural Duty Argument is vulnerable to an obvious objection: If
the existing government is so awful as to thwart even a decent
approximation of the realization of universal right, and if revolution
presents a better prospect for doing so, then the moral obligation to
create the conditions for the realization of universal right speaks in
favor of revolution, not against it (Finlay 2015: 19–52).
Whereas liberal political philosophers have tended to frame the
justification or revolution in terms of remedying government’s
violation of natural rights or its failure to acknowledge the
people’s revocation of its trusteeship (for example by rejecting
the results of an election), revolution in the Marxist tradition is
understood quite differently. There is one strain of Marx
interpretation according to which he rejects rights-talks altogether,
either in favor of the discourse of conflicting interests or in favor
of the vocabulary of self-realization or mankind’s overcoming of
alienation from its “species being” (Buchanan 1982). On
this interpretation, Marx held that the very concept of rights is an
ideological construct that is fostered by and in turn reinforces the
egoistic psychology of bourgeois society and will be discarded once
the transition to developed communist society occurs. If the very
concept of rights is thus both tainted and fated for obsolescence,
then the question arises as to how else the justification for
proletarian revolution might be framed (Finlay 2006). One answer that
is consistent at least with the early writings of Marx is that
proletarian revolution is needed to destroy the conditions of
alienation and create the conditions for the full realization of
man’s nature as a creative, communal being, the sort of being
who will, through processes of scientifically informed collective
decision-making, bring the natural and social world fully under
deliberate human control for the good of all (Economic &
Philosophical Manuscripts of 1844, in MER:
66–125).
Even if Marx thought that successful revolution could be correctly
described as the overcoming of alienation or more positively as the
realization of human “species being”, it is doubtful that
he thought that proletarian revolution needed to be justified
in this or any other way. There is, after all, a Marx who derides
“moralistic” socialists and who seems to hold that
successful proletarian revolution is a matter of the historically
inevitable realization of the common interests of the proletariat, and
that the revolution will be effectively motivated by those interests,
not by a commitment to any moral principle (On the Division of
Labor in Production in MER: 683–717). Such an
interpretation fits well with Marx’s understanding of his theory
of history as scientific and realistic.  According to this account,
the question of whether revolution is justified is idle; it will
occur, because the revolution in the mode of production that marks the
transition from capitalism to communism will produce a fundamental
transformation of all social relationships that will carry human
beings beyond the state and beyond politics (Critique of the Gotha
Programme, Part IV, 1875 in MER: 525–541). Call this
the Amoralist interpretation of Marx on revolution.
To the extent that the Amoralist interpretation includes an account of
the motivation (as opposed to the justification) of proletarian
revolution[7],
it is simple and rationalistic: eventually the workers will realize
that overthrow of the capitalist order is in their interests and will
act accordingly. There are two apparently fatal problems with such a
view. First, according to Marx’s own thinking, the proletariat
will mobilize against the capitalist order only when the capitalism
has reached such a pitch of alienation, exploitation, and immiseration
that the workers have nothing to lose but their chains
(Capital, Volume 1, 1894, in MER: 329–343;
Manifesto of the Communist Party, 1848, in MER:
500). Marx believes that this is bound to occur because the capitalist
system gives every capitalist an overriding incentive to keep
squeezing as much labor out of his workers as possible, even if every
capitalist reads Capital and can foresee that that the
aggregate effect of such behavior will result in the overthrow of the
system. But this means that Marx assumed that the capitalists as a
class were afflicted by a collective action problem they could not
solve—that even though it is in their collective interests to
avoid the immiseration of the proletariat, each will find it rational
to act in a way that will contribute to immiseration. On the contrary,
it can be argued that the capitalists solved their collective action
problem by the creation of the modern welfare state—a device
that sufficiently alleviates the plight of the workers to thwart
mobilization for revolution, but without destroying the dominance of
the bourgeoisie. Second, while Marx gives us no good reason to think
that the capitalists will succumb to an insoluble collective action
problem, he fails to take seriously the collective action problem
faced by the proletariat (Cohen 1978, Elster 1985). As with
revolutions generally, each individual may reason that either enough
others will mobilize to enable a successful revolution or they will
not, that her own participation in revolution is likely to come at a
significant cost, that she will reap the benefits of the revolution if
it succeeds, and that therefore the rational course of action is to
abstain from participation. The key point here is that the workers
lack the resource for solving their collective action problem that the
capitalists can use to solve theirs: control over the state and hence
access to enforcement of rules that can change incentives for
refraining from contributing to a public good. Marx not only fails to
take the proletariat’s collective action problem seriously; his
theory of alienation implies that it will be severe, because one of
the effects of capitalism is to turn workers against each other in the
competition for employment and produce among them the egoistic
psychology typical of all people living under capitalism (Buchanan
1979). In brief, the Amoralist Marx’s attempt to side-step the
question of whether or under what conditions revolution is morally
justified fails, because his interest-based account of revolutionary
motivation makes the revolution depend upon the immiseration of the
proletariat, wrongly assumes that the capitalist class will not be
able to act collectively to avoid immiseration, and wrongly assumes
that if the proletariat come to see that their interests require the
overthrow of the system they will in fact revolt.
A natural Marxian reply might be to abandon the claim that
interest-based motivation is causally sufficient for successful
proletarian revolution, holding instead that the proletariat can come
to see that capitalism is incompatible with the dignity of human
beings or with the full realization of their potential for harmonious,
creative, collective control over the natural and social world and the
abolition of all forms of exploitation and exploitation. On this view,
the motivation for revolution is a kind of perfectionist ethics or,
more modestly, a desire to end human degradation.
The idea would be that the proletarians only encounter an insoluble
collective action problem if each worker (or enough of them) operates
in the calculating mode, weighing the costs and benefits of
participation, as they decide whether to revolt. One might think that
it is a distinctive feature of some types of moral motivation that
they can lead individuals to escape the calculating mode that produces
collective action problems. Not all types of moral motivation would do
the trick, of course. If the workers were overall utility-maximizers,
each might still decide to refrain from revolution, reasoning that
either enough others will participate to enable the revolution to
succeed or they will not, regardless of whether she participates and
that her participation would simply be an unnecessary subtraction from
overall utility. Other kinds of moral motivation, including those that
are expressions of commitment to deontological principles, might in
contrast, preclude the individual from making the calculations that
produce the proletariat’s collective action problem. Such
principles can serve as “exclusionary reasons” and what
they exclude from consideration is cost-benefit calculations. 
Abandoning the Amoralist Marxian account of revolution would mean
ignoring the numerous “scientific realist” passages in
Marx’s writings and ignoring his scorn for moralistic
socialists. But there would still remain two problems, one internal to
the Marxist view and the other independent of it. The first problem is
that it is hard to see, given Marx’s views on ideology, how the
proletarian masses could, while subject to the consciousness
distorting forces of capitalism, come to rally around a perfectionist
ethic or form allegiance to any moral principle that would require the
complete overthrow of capitalism. Marx apparently thought that the
curtain of ideology would be torn aside by the immiseration of the
proletariat—that when they reached the full depths of
deprivation and degradation they would come to see that capitalism had
to go. But Marx was wrong in his prediction that immiseration would
occur: in most societies under capitalism, real wages have risen and
the welfare state has alleviated the plight of the workers--just
enough. The second problem is that recent empirical work on
revolutions indicates that in many cases—perhaps most—what
determines whether an individual will participate in the revolution or
even support it in any way is whether the regime or the
revolutionaries control the area in which the individual lives
(Kalyvas 2006, Weinstein 2007). If that is so, then it appears that in
many cases moral motivation is causally irrelevant; it is the interest
in avoiding the costs imposed by those who wield coercive power over
the individual, whether they be agents of the regime or those already
committed to the revolution, that determines participation or
nonparticipation in revolution. But if that is so, then the topic of
the morality of revolution cannot be avoided, because it will always
be appropriate to ask whether those who possess coercive power ought
to use it and if so how they ought to use it.
As was suggested earlier, in many revolutionary contexts the people
are caught in a destructive strategic interaction between the regime
and those already committed to revolution, as the regime raises the
costs of participation and the revolutionaries raise the cost of
nonparticipation. Some of the most difficult moral issues concerning
revolution pertain to the permissibility of coercive means for solving
the revolutionary collective action problem in the context of this
strategic interaction. 
By way of summary and as a broad generalization, it is fair to say
that at least since the time of Locke (1689), the dominant view on
revolution in Western Political Philosophy, both in the Liberal and
Marxist traditions, and perhaps in popular political culture as well,
has been considerably more permissive than that of Hobbes (1651) and
Kant (1797) and their medieval predecessors. For the remainder of this
essay, I will focus on broadly liberal approaches to revolution on the
assumption that, for the foreseeable future, the development of a
genuine theory of just revolutionary war is most likely to develop by
utilizing the resources of liberal political theory. This strategy is
perhaps not as restrictive as it might appear, since contemporary
liberal thought accommodates not just the idea of individual rights,
but also that of the collective right of self-determination. That is
an important qualification, because from the 1950s to the 1970s
revolution for many people in non-Western societies meant liberation
from colonial rule; and in some cases liberation was framed more in
terms of collective self-determination than in terms of the
vindication of individual rights. One important question a theory of
just revolutionary war ought to answer is whether the realization of
the right of collective self-determination is in itself a just cause
for revolutionary war or whether it is only so when collective
self-determination is the remedy for violations of basic individual
rights. This issue is addressed in the next section.
A key question that will arise at a number of points in this
investigation is whether mainstream just war theory, in spite of its
implicit focus on interstate wars provides an adequate account of the
morality of revolutionary wars. To answer this question, there are at
least seven potentially morally significant differences to keep in
mind.
First, satisfaction of the traditional jus ad bellum
requirement of “rightful authority” to make war, as
suggested above, is more difficult in the case of revolution,
especially at the beginning of the conflict, when an often tiny
minority undertakes armed struggle against the government and does so
supposedly in the name of the people, but where the standard
institutional forms or processes for legitimizing the use of violence
are unavailable to the revolutionaries. In different terms, the
problem is that revolutionaries claim to act on behalf of the people,
but under conditions in which it is difficult to see how they could be
authorized to do so. Later we will see that attempts to solve this
problem by invoking notions of consent, approval, or representation
are inadequate in many of the circumstances in which revolutions
actually occur—and ironically, especially under those conditions
in which the just cause for revolution is most compelling. 
Even contemporary theorists acknowledge that the problem of rightful
authority is especially difficult in the case of the waging of
revolutionary war, the discussion is often at too abstract because it
fails to distinguish between different domains of action in which
legitimacy can be an issue. Even if, for example, it can be shown that
a particular group of revolutionaries is the legitimate leadership in
the sense that it can be taken to represent the people as a whole and
rightly act on their behalf, it is a separate question as to whether
it has the sort of legitimacy required for certain particular
activities such as conscripting individuals to fight, using coercion
to suppress rival claimants for leadership, or “punishing”
traitors or informants.
Second, in interstate wars there is often only one claimant (on each
side) to the role of initiating and directing the use of large-scale
violence, namely, the state leadership. But in many revolutionary
wars, at least at the outset and often far into the conflict, two or
more parties engaging in revolutionary violence contend with one
another (often violently) to be acknowledged, by the people and by
other states and international organizations, as the sole legitimate
revolutionary war-maker. So, one difficult moral issue concerns the
means that rivals for leadership may use in competition with one
another. Revolutions frequently are characterized by violent struggles
for leadership, under conditions in which no contender for leadership
can claim exclusive legitimacy if any legitimacy at all. 
Third, as already noted, because those who attempt to launch
revolutions do not possess standing armies or effective authority to
raise them, they face a serious collective action problem that
established states have already solved: they must mobilize a
sufficient portion of the population to make war effectively, in spite
of the fact that it will often be rational for any given individual to
refrain from participating. Any ordinary individual may reason as
follows: whether I participate or not has virtually zero probability
of determining the outcome; but participation is a cost, perhaps an
extreme cost, to me and perhaps to my family or other close associates
as well. So, regardless of what others do, the rational thing for me
to do, whether I consider my own utility narrowly construed or include
the utility of those I care most about, is to refrain from
participating. If enough individuals reason in this way, an
insufficient number of people will be mobilized to make the revolution
succeed. Collective action problems are not always insoluble, of
course. Later we will consider several solutions to what may be called
“the revolutionary mobilization collective action problem”
(REMCAP for brevity)—each of which will be shown to raise
serious moral issues. In other words, it is one thing to say the
REMCAP can be solved, another to say it can be solved in a morally
acceptable way. By way of preview, it is worth noting that the REMCAP
has a crucial strategic dimension: while the aspiring revolutionary
leadership will try to overcome the people’s incentives for
refraining from participation, whether by providing them with benefits
conditional on participation or by imposing costs on them for
nonparticipation, the regime will attempt to counter the effort to
achieve revolutionary mobilization by providing benefits conditional
on nonparticipation or imposing costs on participation. The resulting
dynamic takes the game-theoretic structure of an arms race in which
both the revolutionary forces and the regime use violence and often
terrorism against the people (Buchanan 2013). This spiral of strategic
violence is not merely a theoretical possibility: some of the leading
empirical work on revolutions indicates that it is typical of the
revolutionary environment. One especially interesting empirical
finding is that the best predictor of whether an individual will
support the revolution or the regime is which force controls the space
the individual occupies. (Kalyvas 2006: 131–132). Empirical
studies document that the cycle of coercion and counter-coercion in
revolutionary struggles is ubiquitous (Kalyvas 2006: 10, 12, 215,
228–229). A just war theory designed for the quite different
environment of interstate wars is not likely to address the moral
problems raised by this feature of revolutionary wars. 
A fourth morally relevant difference between the typical interstate
war and revolutionary war is this: in the former, a change in their
own government is not usually a goal of the contending parties (though
one or both may aim at imposing a new form of government on the
other). The goal of revolutionary war-makers in contrast is to change
the government and on the stronger understanding of
“revolution” to make a fundamental change in the form or
character of government. Yet because revolutionaries have repudiated
or cannot avail themselves of existing political processes for
determining political aims and have not yet developed new processes
for performing that task (at least in the earlier stages of the
struggle), there may be serious disagreement among revolutionaries as
to what the goal of the revolution is, with no nonviolent, much less
legitimate process for resolving it. Many may agree that the regime
must fall, but there may be deep—and violent--disagreements as
to what should follow. This, too, makes revolution a more morally
fraught enterprise. Suppose, as was suggested earlier, that revolution
differs from mere rebellion in that the latter is simply a rejection
of governmental authority while the former involves that plus a
commitment to forming a new political order. If that is so, and if
revolutionaries lack the institutional resources to determine a common
understanding of what the new political order is to be, then the task
of evaluating the justness of a revolutionary struggle becomes more
difficult. It may be a mistake to say “X is the aim of
the revolutionary war-makers” because there may be no one aim
and the plurality of aims may be mutually inconsistent, with some
being just and others being unjust. It is true, of course that a state
that wars with another state will often have more than one war aim and
may also have inconsistent aims, but at least in the case of
reasonably well-functioning states there is an authoritative, that is,
legitimacy-conferring process for determining what the aims of the
conflict are and which are to be given priority if they conflict.
Fifth, if one party to an interstate war loses, this will not usually
involve a complete destruction of its political order or if it does
the victor will often quickly impose some order as it gains control
over the vanquished country’s territory. But revolutionary wars
present a greater risk of literal anarchy, with all of the threats to
human rights and well-being that this usually entails, because
revolutionaries, even when they succeed in defeating the regime, may
not yet have (and in some cases may never develop) the capacity to
impose order. In that sense, the stakes are often higher in
revolutionary wars and the traditional likelihood of success
requirement of just war theory may be harder to satisfy. There are two
other factors, both of which are present in many violent revolutions,
that make the problem of creating a new political order that can
provide an acceptable level of physical security especially difficult.
First, revolutionary conflicts, like other intrastate wars, are often
especially brutal, because the lines between combatants and
noncombatants tend to be blurred, because of the spiral of coercion
stemming from strategic interaction regarding revolutionary
mobilization characterized above, and because individuals and groups
often use the general context of violence to settle private conflicts
that have little or no connection to the issues for which revolution
is supposedly undertaken (Kalyvas 2006: 14). So building a secure
peace may be hindered by persisting animosity, allegations of
atrocities, and the quest for vengeance, while social capital in the
form of trust may be in short supply. Second, in the contemporary
context, it is often the case that in societies where the just cause
for revolution is most compelling, namely, what could be called
Resolute Severe Tyrannies, there are deep divisions along religious or
ethno-national lines, in large part because the tyrants have fostered
such divisions in order to prevent the people from achieving unified
opposition to the regime. Where such divisions exist and there is no
culture of tolerance and power-sharing, the destruction of the
tyrannical regime may result in violent intergroup conflicts, with no
indigenous force capable of imposing a peace settlement and building a
condition of persisting physical security. Under these conditions, to
undertake revolution is to unleash forces that may result either in
violent anarchy or unwanted foreign intervention undertaken on the
pretext of establishing order.
Sixth, at least under modern conditions, revolutionary wars have the
potential to persist longer than interstate wars as they have
traditionally been conducted, and hence are likely to involve more
human and material destruction other things being equal, because of
interventions that serve not to end them but rather to prolong them.
It is a feature of contemporary revolutionary wars that they are
seldom left to the primary parties. Instead, rival states or groups of
rival states often support different sides. In interstate wars, the
conflict typically ends when it is clear that there is an indefinitely
persisting stalemate and hence both sides are compelled to seek a
negotiated peace or when one side overwhelms the other (Wittman 1979;
Jones, Bremer & Singer 1996; Wagner 2000). But when revolutions
become proxy wars between rival powers, one state is likely to
intervene to resupply or otherwise support its proxy to break a
stalemate or prevent the other side from achieving victor. That is why
most empirical theorists of intrastate war predict that there is no
end in sight to the conflict in Syria (Jenkins 2014). This problem is
exacerbated by the fact that one or both of the sponsors of the
conflicting sides may not have as its top strategic aim a victory for
its side. Instead, the dominant goal may actually be to prolong the
conflict. To the extent that revolutionaries or regimes who oppose
them ought to take the traditional jus ad bellum requirement
of likelihood of success into account and also ought to heed the
requirement of proportionality, their task is complicated by strategic
dynamic that occurs when revolutions are not simple two party affairs,
but proxy contests between other parties as well. Intervention makes
calculations of both likelihood of success and proportionality more
problematic. And if there is a presumption against war unless
likelihood of success and proportionality are relatively certain, then
it follows that the justification for revolutionary war is even more
problematic, other things being equal, than for interstate war.
Seventh, and finally, entrenched tyrannical regimes, the most morally
compelling targets for revolution, typically use their control over
education and the media to instill propaganda designed to prevent the
people from recognizing just how rotten the regime is, how poorly the
economy is performing, how inferior the quality of life is compared
with that in better governed countries, and how widespread
dissatisfaction with the regime actually is. Hence, effective
revolutionary action may require the dissipation of false
consciousness on the part of the people. The aspiring revolutionary
leadership thus may be faced with the task of trying to dismantle the
false consciousness of those they hope to enlist in the revolutionary
struggle. In actual cases, aspiring leaders have often used violence
and sometimes terrorism in an effort to overcome the epistemic
obstacles to widespread participation in revolution. For example, they
have attacked “soft targets”—policemen or government
officials—to demonstrate to the people that “we
have the power to hurt them”. Another tactic often used
by revolutionaries to overcome epistemic obstacles is to provoke the
regime to undertake brutal responses to relatively peaceful
demonstrations, in order to reveal to all just how ruthless the regime
is. Such actions, which are condemned by mainstream jus in
bello thinking, are said to be necessary to instill the sense of
agency that false consciousness has undermined. The need to overcome
false consciousness or more generally to overcome serious epistemic
obstacles to revolution, combined with the revolutionary
leadership’s lack of effective peaceful resources for doing so,
poses difficult moral choices that are not as frequently encountered
by the leaders of states in interstate wars.
For all of these reasons, revolutionary wars tend to present
additional moral problems, over and above the daunting issues involved
in interstate wars, or, as in the case of likelihood of success and
proportionality, to involve more serious instances of difficulties
common to both kinds of war. A theory of just revolutionary war ought
to take these differences seriously and not begin with the assumption
that the commendable work that has recently been done in just war
theory—which as has been noted is mainly geared to interstate
war—can be adapted without significant modification or
augmentation to the revolutionary case. The assumption that mainstream
just war theory provides all or even most of what is needed for a
theory of just revolutionary wars seems plausible only if one traffics
in unhelpful abstractions and fails to look at the differences
revealed by the empirical literature on revolutions and the special
moral issues they raise. A major conclusion of this entry is that a
plausible moral theory of revolution must be informed by the best
empirical studies of what actually goes on in revolutionary
struggles.
“The morality of making revolutionary war” is too broad a
topic. It is necessary to factor out the distinctive moral problems
faced by those who initiate revolutionary war and aspire to recruit
and lead others in the
 struggle[8]
 and those who join the revolution once it is underway and do so
without any pretensions to being leaders. These two classes of agents
both face some common moral issues, but they also each must resolve
moral issues peculiar to their situation. 
It was noted in the preceding section that the question “Does
agent X have rightful authority to wage revolutionary
war?” needs to be abandoned in favor of more fine-grained
questions: Does agent X have the rightful authority to start a
revolutionary war, to attempt to function as a leader in the struggle,
to exercise various functions ordinarily reserved for governments such
as punishing defectors and informants, conscripting soldiers,
expropriating resources needed for war, and suppressing rival
claimants to leadership? An affirmative answer to the first question
does not guarantee affirmative answers to the rest.
We may begin with the first question: when do agents have the rightful
authority to try to initiate a revolutionary war? This is an
appropriate question to ask if one attempts to apply mainstream
jus ad bellum theory to the case of revolutionary war, since
rightful authority is generally assumed to be a requirement in jus
ad bellum. An initially plausible answer is that the agent must
stand in a certain relationship to the people on whose behalf the
revolutionary war is to be waged. Different theorists have tried to
spell out this relationship in different ways, asserting that the
initiator of revolutionary war (i) must have the consent of those on
whose behalf she claims to act, (ii) must have their approval, (iii)
must represent them, or (iv) must take responsibility for their common
good (and have the capacity to pursue it effectively). Each of these
proposals will be considered in turn. The distinction between consent
and approval is to be understood as follows: consent must be provided
ex ante, prior to the action to which consent is given;
approval is ex post, a retrospective endorsement of an action
that has already occurred.
There are two problems with the view that consent of the oppressed is
either necessary or sufficient for rightful authority to initiate
revolutionary war. First, in virtually every real world situation,
consent will not be unanimous; so two questions immediately present
themselves and a plausible answer to either is far from obvious: (1)
if consent is necessary for rightful authority, how can anyone have
rightful authority over those who do not consent; and (2) if the
consent of some is sufficient for rightful authority over all, how
many must consent (a bare majority, a supermajority, etc.)? If the
point of consent is that without it those who initiate revolutionary
war are arbitrarily putting those who do not consent at risk, then the
fact that some have consented cannot make the imposition of risks on
those who did not consent any less arbitrary. Second, in the very
circumstances when the just cause for revolution is most compelling,
namely, where the regime exercises thorough-going domination and
refuses to reform, it will be difficult if not impossible to obtain
valid consent, either because the regime will not allow any plausible
process of gaining consent or because people will be afraid to affirm
their consent out of fear of retaliation by the regime, or because the
regime’s oppression will have distorted their consciousness and
preferences to such an extent that they are incapable of giving valid
consent. John Simmons (1979) has argued that even where the best
democratic political processes are available, genuine consent cannot
be obtained; if that is so, then it is hardly likely that consent can
be gotten in the much less favorable circumstances in which the
aspiring revolutionary leadership might seek it.
Because of these difficulties with consent as a criterion for rightful
authority, one might think that approval is the appropriate notion.
However, the same problems that afflicted consent render approval
dubious. If approval is not unanimous, it is hard to see how the
approval of some can confer rightful authority over all or justify the
imposition of risks on all. But if unanimity is not required, it is
unclear how much approval should be required. 
The problems with approval and consent might lead one to opt instead
for a notion of hypothetical consent or hypothetical approval: an
agent has rightful authority to initiate (and attempt to lead) a
revolutionary war only if (or if and only if) her doing so would be
consented to or approved by a rational person and who rightly values
freedom from oppression, under those circumstances. This move presents
two difficulties. First, it assumes something very problematic,
namely, that hypothetical consent is as morally potent as actual
consent (and, even more dubiously) that hypothetical approval can
substitute for actual consent. Second, it appears that if a
determination can be made of what a rational agent who rightly values
freedom from oppression would consent to or approve of, then the whole
exercise becomes otiose, because the same result can be achieved by
calculating whether the initiation of the war satisfies the
conventional criteria of likelihood of success, just cause, and
proportionality. In other words, to the extent that the notion of what
a rational agent who rightly values freedom from oppression would
consent to or approve of can be ascertained, it appears that such an
agent would make that determination by employing the least
controversial jus ad bellum requirements. Further, different
actual people will be affected differently by the revolution if it
occurs and will weigh the risks and benefits differently, and should
do so to the extent that they are rational. If the notion of a
rational agent abstracts from these differences, it is hard to see how
what she would approve of or consent to could be relevant to whether
revolutionaries should subject actual people to the risks of
revolution. If the notion of a rational agent is particularized to the
situations of all actual individuals who would be affected by a
revolution, some would approve or consent and some would not, so there
will be no one answer to the question “Does this have rightful
authority?” because there will be no one answer to the question
“Would a rational individual who rightly values freedom from
oppression consent to this agent initiating and leading a
revolutionary war?”
Consider now the claim that those who initiate revolutionary wars (and
assume leadership of them) have rightful authority to do so if or if
and only if they represent the people (or at least those members of
the people who are oppressed).
If “represents” means what it does in the context of
ordinary democratic politics, namely, A represents B if and only if A
is authorized to act on B’s behalf through some appropriate
public political process (such as an election), then this is a
non-starter, since an oppressive regime is unlikely to allow any such
process. This standard, institutionally-based understanding of
representation would work as a criterion of rightful authority to
initiate revolutionary war only if one of two conditions were
satisfied. First, those who initiate revolutionary war were duly
chosen as representatives prior to the advent of an oppressive regime
(as when an authoritarian coup usurps an elected government). Second,
the constitutional order included pre-authorization for revolution
under certain specified conditions. It is worth noting that the French
Declaration of the Rights of Man and the Citizen explicitly included a
right (and indeed a duty) to resist tyranny and that the Inner Service
Act of the Turkish Armed Forces (articles 35 and 85) goes farther,
designating an agent of revolution by pre-authorizing the military to
depose the government if it violates the constitutional requirement of
secular government. Just as an advance directive for medical care
enables a competent patient to pre-authorize agent to act on her
behalf in the event of her losing the capacity to act, so a
constitutional provision of this sort would enable a people under
conditions of political freedom to pre-authorize some agent to
initiate revolution on its behalf should the abuse of government
authority undermine its ability to perform an act of authorization.
Neither of these two conditions will be satisfied if the country in
question never had a political system that produced bona fide
representatives of the people or never had a constitution that
pre-authorized revolution. Interestingly, current discussions of
rightful authority for waging revolutionary war do not consider the
possibility of pre-authorization for initiating and leading
revolutions, thus following the unfortunate but widespread practice of
discussing the morality of war as if institutions did not exist or
were relevant only as instruments for applying a system of moral
principles that can be fully worked out by eliciting intuitions from
cases of individual actions considered apart from any institutional
background (Buchanan 2006, 2015).
In the absence of any institutional provisions for pre-authorization,
a proponent of the notion of representativeness might offer a
different understanding of it. An agent represents the people, in a
fashion that morally empowers her to initiate and lead revolutionary
war, if she is committed to and acts appropriately to realize their
shared interest or common good (Biggar 2013). It is worth noting just
how distant this view is from any widely accepted notion of rightful
authority to make war in other contexts or for that matter of rightful
authority in any context, whether private or public. The fact that
Jones is committed to Smith’s good and able to promote it
effectively does nothing whatsoever to establish that Jones has
rightful authority over Jones, much less that he has rightful
authority to undertake actions supposedly on Jones’s behalf that
pose a danger to Jones or others. Further, this notion is incapable of
establishing exclusive rightful authority, since there may be
more than one party, each contending for the role of leadership, all
of which are committed to and capable of promoting the common good.
That is a significant problem, since one of the traditional rationales
for the rightful authority in just war theories is that there must be
some one authority on each side of an armed conflict, both to
ensure discipline among the armed forces so as to limit destruction,
to achieve adherence to jus in bello principles, and so that
it will be clear who should be party to negotiations to end the
conflict and ensure a just peace.
If for these reasons one despairs of spelling out rightful authority
in terms of actual or hypothetical consent or approval,
representativeness, or commitment to the common good, an alternative
approach may appear attractive: jettison the assumption that
initiating and attempting to lead a revolutionary war always requires
rightful authority. Argue instead that where the conditions on the
ground make rightful authority unobtainable, it can still sometimes be
morally justifiable for an agent to initiate a revolutionary war and
attempt to lead it (Fabre 2012). Such a position was sketched earlier,
in casting a critical eye on Kant’s rejection of revolution; it
can be further developed by employing an analogy with the
justification of coercion in a state of violent
anarchy—something akin to the state of nature as Hobbes
understood it. 
Suppose that there is a group of agents who have the capacity to
create basic order, lifting all out of the state of radical physical
insecurity, but who can accomplish this only by imposing a coercively
backed set of rules under conditions in which there are no
institutional resources for conferring rightful authority to perform
these tasks. Suppose in addition that there are no informal means for
conferring rightful authority, that for reasons adduced earlier,
either consent or approval cannot be ascertained due to severe
oppression or that they would fall significantly short of unanimity.
Suppose also that these agents are committed to providing physical
security for all by the least coercive and fair means that are likely
to be effective under the circumstances. Finally, suppose that they
are committed to helping to build institutions that would make the
legitimate or rightfully authorized continued use of coercion possible
and that they are publicly committed to relinquishing power should
those processes confer legitimacy on some other agents. Surely under
these conditions, such agents would be morally justified in wielding
coercive power, even if they lacked rightful authority. If that is so,
then instead of saying that coercive power may only be permissibly
wielded by rightful authorities, one ought to say instead that
rightful authority is required where the conditions for conferring
authority exists, but that where they do not, it may be morally
justifiable to wield coercive power nonetheless, at least if this is
done in such a way as to promote the emergence of conditions under
which legitimate use of coercion can exist.
In extreme cases, tyrannies are sufficiently like a state of violent
anarchy that it appears that the same conclusion holds there as well.
If a group of agents can end such a tyranny and establish a minimally
just order in which all can enjoy physical security and if it is
committed to doing so by the least coercive means and in observation
of basic principles of fairness and is also committed to helping to
establish the conditions under which the exercise of coercive power
can become legitimate or rightfully authorized, then it appears that
it would be morally justified in initiating and leading a
revolutionary war to create such conditions.
Whether or not this sort of argument for abandoning the unqualified
commitment to a principle of rightful authority in the case of
revolutionary wars is ultimately persuasive, it appears to have
sufficient initial plausibility to call into question the assumption
that if rightful authority is a requirement for just interstate wars,
then it is also so for revolutionary wars in all cases. So, one
central issue for a comprehensive theory of just revolutionary war is
whether the requirement of rightful authorization for initiating and
leading armed revolutionary struggles is unconditionally valid. If the
answer is that it is, then it appears that initiating a
revolutionary war will rarely if ever be justified. 
It does not follow, however, that joining the fight, once it has
started, is unjustified whenever the initiation of the conflict was
unjustified (Buchanan 2013). Whether various individuals are morally
justified in joining the war effort depends upon whether they have
morally acceptable reasons for doing so, not upon the morality or
immorality of the actions others took to initiate the conflict. If
that is the case, then the earlier suggestion that “the morality
of revolutionary war” must be disaggregated into the morality of
various parties is vindicated. The justification for initiating
revolution will be different from the justification for joining a
revolution. This point is not limited to revolutionary wars, but it
may be more significant in the revolutionary case, if generally
speaking the initiation of revolutionary wars is harder to justify
than some interstate wars, especially wars of self-defense or defense
of others against aggression.
There are several reasons, as already noted, why revolutionary wars
may be especially hard to justify. The most obvious, as noted in
Section 3, are that there are many ways in which the aim of
establishing a more just political order may be frustrated and hence
it may be hard to satisfy the requirement of a reasonable likelihood
of success. Another problem is the difficulty of determining that a
proportionality requirement is satisfied. Indeed, some of the most
daunting moral issues of revolutionary war arise when one attempts to
apply the standard just war requirement of proportionality as a
necessary condition for justified initiation of revolutionary war.
One issue is whether violent revolutions against “lesser
tyrannies” can ever be proportional. “Greater
tyrannies” engage in large-scale violations of the right of
physical security, killings and maimings, or they literally enslave
their peoples. “Lesser tyrannies” refrain from those
actions, but violate other important rights, including the right to
democratic government and various other civil and political rights,
such as the right to freedoms of religion, expression, and assembly.
Some theorists have argued that it would be unjustified to make war
against any party, whether another country’s armed forces or
one’s own government, that “merely” engaged in
“lesser tyranny”, because lethal force is only
proportional when it is used to combat the wrongful use of lethal
force (or to avoid being reduced to a slave). David Rodin (2003), for
example, contends that it would be wrong for the people of one country
to use lethal force to resist and invasion by another country whose
leaders were only intent on imposing a “lesser tyranny”.
In other words, he denies that the right of self-defense could ever
justify violence against an invader that “merely” wished
to destroy a nation’s sovereignty. He even goes so far as to say
that if an individual invaded one’s home and one had reason to
believe that if one resisted the invasion the invader would use lethal
force, thus triggering one’s own right to use lethal force in
defense of oneself and one’s family, one should hide from the
invader in order to avoid this escalation. Jeff McMahan (1994) argues,
in contrast, that there is no duty to avoid such an escalation, and
that even if it would be disproportionate to initiate lethal
force against an invader intent only on “lesser tyranny”,
it would not be disproportionate to respond with lethal force to an
invader who made a “conditional threat” of lethal force,
that is, who asserted that she would use lethal force in response to
any form of resistance, including nonviolent resistance (Frowe and
Lazar 2017). McMahan also asserts that one need not wait for the
realization of the “conditional threat” of the invader to
be imminent before using lethal force to counter it if that is the
only way to be assured of one’s safety (McMahan 1994). Finlay
(2015) agrees with McMahan’s conclusion and explicitly applies
it to the case of revolutionary wars, holding that it is justifiable
to make revolutionary war against a regime that is merely a
“lesser tyranny” if that regime responds with lethal force
to nonviolent resistance. The case that McMahan and Finlay develop
against Rodin’s austere view can be strengthened by noting that
under the existing international order, a norm that allows war-making
to prevent the loss of sovereignty, at least in the case of reasonably
democratic and rights-respecting countries, makes good sense because
the state is the primary locus for the establishment of basic justice
and the protection of human rights. 
That said, Rodin, McMahan, and Finlay share two questionable
assumptions. First, that the use of lethal force can be proportional
only if it is used against lethal force (or perhaps against
enslavement as well); and second, that the proportionality assessment
should only encompass harms to those directly affected. Against the
first assumption, Mattias Iser (2017) has argued that respect for
civil and political rights not only serves to protect important
interests but also has the expressive function of publicly recognizing
equal basic moral status. Given the fundamental moral importance of
such recognition, the violation of these rights, at least when it is a
feature of the basic structure of society, can justify violent
revolution (Iser 2017: 208–214). Put differently, those who have
held that proportionality prohibits revolutionary war against
“lesser tyranny” have failed to see that the interest in
being recognized as having equal basic moral status, not just the
interest in physical security or the avoidance of slavery, is of such
moral importance as to justify the use of lethal force as a last
resort.
The second problematic assumption shared by Rodin, McMahan, and Finlay
in their discussions of proportionality is that only harms to the
parties directly affected count. But revolutionary war against
“lesser tyranny” might well be proportional if, instead,
the harm to innocent people the revolution will cause were weighed,
not just against the harm the tyranny is doing to the current
generation of the people, but against that when combined with the harm
to future generations if the tyranny is not overthrown. And, of
course, revolutionaries often try to justify the violence that will
result from their conduct by saying that it will be compensated for by
the benefits gained or the harm averted for many people to come. 
There is yet another way in which the class of harms to be considered
in proportionality assessments might be expanded: the effects of
revolutionary war against “lesser tyranny” on valid
norm compliance might also be included. Suppose the valid norm is
that governments are not to be tyrannical, that they are not only to
refrain from killings, maiming, and enslavement, but are also to
respect civil and political rights, including especially the right to
democratic government, primarily because rights to physical security
are best realized in democracies. Suppose also that because of weak
international institutions, the best prospect for enforcing a norm of
good government is the threat of revolution against governments that
violate the norm. Under these conditions, it would be problematic to
restrict proportionality assessments to immediate, direct harms,
ignoring the effects on the enforcement of important norms of justice.
Most but not all contemporary discussions of proportionality ignore
the possibility of justifying violence for the sake of norm
enforcement, because they elaborate on intuitions stimulated by
one-off consideration of cases viewed in isolation, rather than taking
into account the effect of particular actions on patterns of behavior
persisting over time (Fabre 2012, Rodin 2011). And because they
largely ignore institutions, they do not consider the requirements of
effective international norm enforcement under conditions in which
international institutions for enforcement are weak. 
Those who exclude from assessments of proportionality effects on
future generations and on norm enforcement might reply as follows.
Even if in principle it makes sense to consider such wider effects, in
practice any attempt to do so would require calculations so difficult
and prone to error that, as an action-guiding principle, the
proportionality requirement ought to construe harms more narrowly. As
it stands, this reply is unconvincing, because it assumes, without
argument, that the risks of error or abuse attendant on a wider
construal of harms relevant to proportionality clearly outweigh the
apparent impropriety of ignoring what appear to be whole classes of
morally relevant harms.
There is one more way in which institutional capacity can affect
proportionality. If international or regional institutions provided
for effective intervention in support of just revolutions, then the
risks of failed or corrupted revolutions and of violent anarchy that
lead some theorists to deny that revolution can be justified would be
mitigated, with the result that engaging in revolution could satisfy
the proportionality requirement. Once again, it is clear that the
validity of a theory of just revolutionary war depends upon the
validity of empirical assumptions about institutional capacity.
Unfortunately, many theorists of the morality of armed conflict either
ignore issues of institutional capacity or assume that the current
paucity of institutional resources cannot be remedied.
Thus far the moral complexities of revolutionary jus ad
bellum have been the focus of the discussion, emphasizing in
particular the difficulty of satisfying the requirements of rightful
authority and proportionality. The jus in bello component of
a theory of just revolutionary war is also morally complex. A key
issue that a theory of the morality of revolutionary war ought to
address is whether widely accepted jus in bello norms apply
without exception to war-making by revolutionaries or whether,
instead, revolutionaries are morally permitted to undertake acts of
war that the military personnel of states are usually prohibited from
performing. This is not a merely theoretical issue: revolutionary
warriors have often engaged in various morally problematic forms of
“irregular” warfare. They have assassinated civilian
leaders and other civilians such as government bureaucrats and judges,
attacked regime forces while wearing civilian attire (not wearing
uniforms or insignia as required by the laws of war and not carrying
weapons openly), and engaged in terrorism, deliberately killing
individuals who had no discernible connection with the regime by
detonating bombs in public places.
 [9]
 Furthermore, in order to mobilize people to join the revolution or to
deter them from aiding the regime in suppressing it, they have engaged
in acts of terrorism against the oppressed. 
Contemporary theorists who have addressed the morality of irregular
warfare have generally argued that terrorism, whether its goal is to
persuade the regime to capitulate or to coerce the oppressed into
joining the revolution or not supporting the regime, is morally
impermissible. Most of the controversy concerns whether any or all of
the other forms of irregular warfare are permissible and if so under
what conditions. This author (Buchanan 2013) has argued that even if
terrorism perpetrated against members of the oppressed population is
unjustified, some forms of coercion may be permissible, as when
revolutionary fighters are conscripted through the threat of penalties
such as expropriation of property or even perhaps confinement or
lesser restrictions on liberty. The most plausible justification for
such methods of coerced mobilization would characterize the goals of
the revolution as public goods of extraordinary moral importance and
present coercion as a solution to the collective action problem.
Whether coercive mobilization would be justified would depend on at
least two factors: whether the forms of coercion employed were
necessary, whether they were the least restrictive among the effective
alternatives and whether the burdens of coercion were distributed
fairly (Finlay 2015: 87–124).
Those who argue that it is permissible for revolutionaries to target
civilians tend to argue that only those civilians who contribute in
some significant way to the oppressive activities of the regime lie
beyond the protection of the jus in bello norm of
discrimination. The basic idea here, as Finlay puts it, is to justify
such acts as the targeting of individuals who are morally liable to be
killed because they are not morally innocent, that is, they are active
and significant contributors to the regime’s violent injustices
(Finlay 2015: 55–86, 217–218). But what counts as
significant contribution is both unclear and disputed. For example, a
farmer who supplies food for a tyranny’s secret police or
repairs the vehicles that they use to hunt down dissidents clearly
makes a contribution to their depredations, but it is unclear whether
that sort of contribution makes her liable to lethal attack (Fabre
2009, Frowe 2014).
A second set of issues in revolutionary jus in bello concerns
the permissibility of revolutionary warriors engaging in
“partisan war”--not wearing uniforms or insignia or
carrying arms openly or doing so but then changing into civilian
attire immediately after an attack so as to melt back into the
population. Those who argue that such actions are permissible
typically appeal to fairness. The idea is that, at least in the early
stages of their struggle, revolutionaries are at a great disadvantage
vis à vis government forces, that this disadvantage is
something for which they are not responsible, and that the
revolutionaries should not be expected to let it render unsuccessful
their struggle against a seriously unjust regime. Revolutionaries
typically have inferior arms and logistical capacities, they have no
safe rear areas behind which they can regroup and resupply because
there are no battle lines as in conventional wars, and when they face
a ruthless tyranny it is unlikely that their opponents will observe
jus bello norms. Finlay asserts that if these forms of
“partisan war” are undertaken to defend innocent people
against the regime’s wrongful harm to them, then they should be
seen as justifiable efforts to achieve the protection of morally
innocent individuals that is the rationale for the discrimination norm
(Finlay 2015: 55–86, 217–218). 
The argument against the permissibility of “partisan
warfare” is that the requirement of uniforms and insignia
facilitates better compliance with the discrimination norm, making it
easier for regime forces to refrain from killing noncombatants. That
argument is of limited force if the regime is likely to violate the
discrimination norm anyway. A tyranny that routinely violates basic
human rights in peacetime is unlikely to become scrupulous in use of
force in a revolutionary conflict (Meisels 2008).
The topic of revolution presents a fertile and challenging field for
moral theory and applied or practical ethics—and one in which
the greater part of systematic thinking remains to be done. Violent
revolutions typically present the most serious and difficult moral
issues. Until recently, the excellent work done by contemporary just
war theories has not given the peculiar moral problems of
revolutionary war the attention they deserve, but there is reason to
believe that this deficiency will be remedied. Because the success of
a revolution may depend upon whether there is intervention in support
of it, a comprehensive theory of the morality of revolution should
cohere with a theory of the morality of intervention (Buchanan 2016).
Another topic that a comprehensive theory of just revolutionary war
should address is the moral assessment of the international Law of
Armed Conflict’s asymmetry with regard to the rights of
combatants acting on behalf of states and revolutionary warriors. The
Law of Armed Conflict assigns the latter the same legal duties as the
former, but grants them a much leaner set of legal rights.