In non-technical contexts, the word “risk” refers, often
rather vaguely, to situations in which it is possible but not certain
that some undesirable event will occur. In technical contexts, the
word has several more specialized uses and meanings. Five of these are
particularly important since they are widely used across
disciplines:
An example of this usage is: “Lung cancer is one of the major
risks that affect smokers.” 
An example of this usage is: “Smoking is by far the most
important health risk in industrialized countries.” (The
unwanted event implicitly referred to here is a disease caused by
smoking.) Both (1) and (2) are qualitative senses of risk. The word
also has quantitative senses, of which the following is the oldest
one:
This usage is exemplified by the following statement: “The risk
that a smoker’s life is shortened by a smoking-related disease
is about 50%.” 
The expectation value of a possible negative event is the product of
its probability and some measure of its severity. It is common to use
the number of killed persons as a measure of the severity of an
accident. With this measure of severity, the “risk” (in
sense 4) associated with a potential accident is equal to the
statistically expected number of deaths. Other measures of severity
give rise to other measures of risk.
Although expectation values have been calculated since the
17th century, the use of the term “risk” in
this sense is relatively new. It was introduced into risk analysis in
the influential Reactor Safety Study, WASH-1400 (Rasmussen et al.,
1975, Rechard 1999). Today it is the standard technical meaning of the term
“risk” in many disciplines. It is regarded by some risk
analysts as the only correct usage of the term.
In addition to these five common meanings of “risk”
there are several other more technical meanings, which are
well-established in specialized fields of inquiry. Some of the major
definitions of risk that are used in economic analysis will be
introduced below in section 6.1.
Although most of the above-mentioned meanings of “risk”
have been referred to by philosophers, a large part of the
philosophical literature on risk refers to risk in the more informal
sense that was mentioned at the beginning of this section, namely as a
state of affairs in which an undesirable event may or may not
occur. Several philosophers have criticized the technical definitions
of risk for being too limited and not covering all aspects that should
be included in risk assessments (Buchak 2014, Pritchard 2015,
Shrader-Frechette 1991). Linguistic evidence indicates that technical
definitions of risk have had virtually no impact on the non-technical
usage of the word (Boholm et al. 2016).
Terminological note: Some philosophers distinguish between
“subjective” and “objective”
probabilities. Others reserve the term “probability” for
the subjective notion. Here, the former terminology is used,
i.e. “probability” can refer either to subjective
probability or to objective chances.
When there is a risk, there must be something that is unknown or
has an unknown outcome. Therefore, knowledge about risk is knowledge
about lack of knowledge. This combination of knowledge and lack
thereof contributes to making issues of risk complicated from an
epistemological point of view.
In non-regimented usage, “risk” and
“uncertainty” differ along the subjective—objective
dimension. Whereas “uncertainty” seems to belong to the
subjective realm, “risk” has a strong objective component.
If a person does not know whether or not the grass snake is poisonous,
then she is in a state of uncertainty with respect to its ability to
poison her. However, since this species has no poison there is no risk
to be poisoned by it. The relationship between the two concepts
“risk” and “uncertainty” seems to be in part
analogous to that between “truth” and
“belief”.
Regimented decision-theoretical usage differs from this. In decision
theory, a decision is said to be made “under risk” if the
relevant probabilities are available and “under
uncertainty” if they are unavailable or only partially
available. Partially determined probabilities are sometimes expressed
with probability intervals, e.g., “the probability of rain
tomorrow is between 0.1 and 0.4”.  (The term “decision
under ignorance” is sometimes used about the case when no
probabilistic information at all is available.) 
Although this distinction between risk and uncertainty is
decision-theoretically useful, from an epistemological point of view it
is in need of clarification. Only very rarely are probabilities known
with certainty. Strictly speaking, the only clear-cut cases of
“risk” (known probabilities) seem to be idealized textbook
cases that refer to devices such as dice or coins that are supposed to
be known with certainty to be fair. In real-life situations, even if we
act upon a determinate probability estimate, we are not fully certain
that this estimate is exactly correct, hence there is uncertainty. It
follows that almost all decisions are made “under
uncertainty”. If a decision problem is treated as a decision
“under risk”, then this does not mean that the decision in
question is made under conditions of completely known probabilities.
Rather, it means that a choice has been made to simplify the
description of this decision problem by treating it as a case of known
probabilities. This is often a highly useful idealization in decision
theory. However, in practical applications it is important to
distinguish between those probabilities that can be treated as known
and those that are uncertain and therefore much more in need of
continuous updating. Typical examples of the former are the failure
frequencies of a technical component that are inferred from extensive
and well-documented experience of its use. The latter case is
exemplified by experts’ estimates of the expected failure
frequencies of a new type of component.
A major problem in the epistemology of risk is how to deal with the
severe limitations that characterize our knowledge of the behaviour of
unique complex systems that are essential for estimates of risk, such
as the climate system, ecosystems, the world economy, etc. Each of
these systems contains so many components and potential interactions
that important aspects of it are unpredictable. However, in spite of
this fundamental uncertainty, reasonably reliable statements about
some aspects of these systems can be made. The epistemological status
of such statements, and the nature of the uncertainty involved, are
still in need of further clarification (McKinney 1996,
Shrader-Frechette 1997).
In the risk sciences, it is common to distinguish between
“objective risk” and “subjective risk”. The
former concept is in principle fairly unproblematic since it refers to
a frequentist interpretation of probability. The latter concept is
more ambiguous. In the early psychometric literature on risk (from the
1970s), subjective risk was often conceived as a subjective estimate
of objective risk. In more recent literature, a more complex picture
has emerged. Subjective appraisals of (the severity of) risk depend to
a large extent on factors that are not covered in traditional measures
of objective risk (such as control and tampering with nature).  If the
terms are taken in this sense, subjective risk is influenced by the
subjective estimate of objective risk, but cannot be identified with
it. In the psychological literature, subjective risk is often
conceived as the individual’s overall assessment of the seriousness of
a danger or alleged danger. Such individual assessments are commonly
called “risk perception”, but strictly speaking the term
is misleading. This is not a matter of perception, but rather a matter
of attitudes and expectations. Subjective risk can be studied with
methods of attitude measurement and psychological scaling
(Sjöberg 2004).
The role of values in science has been particularly controversial in
issues of risk. Risk assessments have frequently been criticized for
containing “hidden” values that induce a too high
acceptance of risk (Cranor 2016; 2017; Intemann 2016; Heinzerling
2000). There is also a discussion on the need to strengthen the impact
of certain values in risk assessment, such as considerations of
justice (Shrader-Frechette 2005a), human rights (Shrader-Frechette
2005b), and the rights and welfare of future people (Caney 2009, Ng
2005).

Issues of risk have also given rise to heated debates on what levels of
scientific evidence are needed for policy decisions. The proof
standards of science are apt to cause difficulties whenever science is
applied to practical problems that require standards of proof or
evidence other than those of science. 
A decision to accept or reject a scientific statement (for instance an
hypothesis) is in practice always subject to the possibility of
error. The chance of such an error is often called the inductive risk
(Hempel 1965, 92). There are two major types of errors. The first of
these consists in concluding that there is a phenomenon or an effect
when in fact there is none. This is called an error of type I (false
positive). The second consists in missing an existing phenomenon or
effect. This is called an error of type II (false negative). In the
internal dealings of science, errors of type I are in general regarded
as more problematic than those of type II. The common scientific
standards of statistical significance substantially reduce the risk of
type I errors but do not protect against type II
errors (Shrader-Frechette 2008; John 2017).
Many controversies on risk assessment concern the balance between
risks of type I and type II errors. Whereas science gives higher
priority to avoiding type I errors than to avoiding type II errors,
the balance can shift when errors have practical consequences. This
can be seen from a case in which it is uncertain whether there is a
serious defect in an airplane engine. A type II error, i.e., acting as
if there were no such a defect when there is one, would in this case
be counted as more serious than a type I error, i.e., acting as if
there were such a defect when there is none. (The distinction between
type I and type II errors depends on the delimitation of the effect
under study. In discussions of risk, this delimitation is mostly
uncontroversial; see Lemons et al. 1997, van den Belt and Gremmen
2002.)
In this particular case it is fairly uncontroversial that avoidance of
type II error should be given priority over avoidance of type I
error. In other words, it is better to delay the flight and then find
out that the engine was in good shape than to fly with an engine that
turns out to malfunction. However, in other cases the balance between
the two error types is more controversial. Controversies are common,
for instance, over what degree of evidence should be required for
actions against possible negative effects of chemical substances on
human health and the environment.
Figure 1. The use of scientific data for policy purposes.
Such controversies can be clarified with the help of a simple but
illustrative model of how scientific data influence both scientific
judgments and practical decisions (Hansson 2008). Scientific knowledge begins with
data that originate in experiments and other observations. (See Figure
1.)  Through a process of critical assessment, these data give rise to
the scientific corpus (arrow 1). Roughly speaking, the corpus consists
of those statements that could, for the time being, legitimately be
made without reservation in a (sufficiently detailed) textbook. When
determining whether or not a scientific hypothesis should be accepted,
for the time being, as part of the corpus, the onus of proof falls on
its adherents. Similarly, those who claim the existence of an as yet
unproven phenomenon have the burden of proof. These proof standards
are essential for the integrity of science. 
The most obvious way to use scientific information for policy-making
is to employ information from the corpus (arrow 2). For many purposes,
this is the only sensible thing to do. However, in risk management
decisions exclusive reliance on the corpus may have unwanted
consequences.  Suppose that toxicological investigations are performed
on a substance that has not previously been studied from a
toxicological point of view. These investigations turn out to be
inconclusive.  They give rise to science-based suspicions that the
substance is dangerous to human health, but they do not amount to full
scientific proof in the matter. Since the evidence is not sufficient
to warrant an addition to the scientific corpus, this information
cannot influence policies in the standard way (via arrows 1 and
2). There is a strict requirement to avoid type I errors in the
process represented by arrow 1, and this process filters out
information that might in this case have been practically relevant and
justified certain protective measures.
In cases like this, a direct road from data to policies is often taken
(arrow 3). This means that a balance between type I and type II errors
is determined in the particular case, based on practical
considerations, rather than relying on the standard scientific
procedure with its strong emphasis on the avoidance of type I
errors.
It is essential to distinguish here between two kinds of
risk-related decision processes. One consists in determining which
statements about risks should be included in the scientific corpus. The
other consists in determining how risk-related information should
influence practical measures to protect health and the environment. It
would be a strange coincidence if the criteria of evidence in these two
types of decisions were always the same. Strong reasons can be given
for strict standards of proof in science, i.e. high entry requirements
for the corpus. At the same time, there can be valid policy reasons to
allow risk management decisions to be influenced by sound scientific
indications of danger that are not yet sufficiently well-established to
qualify for inclusion into the scientific corpus. 
Policy issues concerning risk have often been the targets of extensive
disinformation campaigns characterized by science denial and other
forms of pseudoscience (Oreskes 2010). Several philosophers have been
active in the repudiation of invalid claims and the defence of science
in risk-related issues (Cranor 2005, 2016, 2017; Goodwin 2009,
Prothero 2013, Shrader-Frechette 2014, Hansson 2017).
Safety and the avoidance of risk are major concerns in practical
engineering. Safety engineering has also increasingly become the
subject of academic investigations. However, these discussions are
largely fragmented between different areas of technology. The same
basic ideas or “safety philosophies” are discussed under
different names for instance in chemical, nuclear, and electrical
engineering. Nevertheless, much of the basic thinking seems to be the
same in the different areas of safety engineering (Möller and
Hansson 2008). 
Simple safety principles, often expressible as rules of thumbs, have a
central role in safety engineering. Three of the most important of
these are inherent safety, safety factors, and multiple barriers.
Inherent safety, also called primary prevention, consists in the
elimination of a hazard. It is contrasted with secondary prevention
that consists in reducing the risk associated with a hazard. For a
simple example, consider a process in which inflammable materials are
used. Inherent safety would consist in replacing them by
non-inflammable materials. Secondary prevention would consist in
removing or isolating sources of ignition and/or installing
fire-extinguishing equipment. As this example shows, secondary
prevention usually involves added-on safety equipment. The major
reason to prefer inherent safety to secondary prevention is that as
long as the hazard still exists, it can be realized by some
unanticipated triggering event. Even with the best of control
measures, if inflammable materials are present, some unforeseen chain
of events can start a fire. 
Safety factors are numerical factors employed or used as part of the
design process for our houses, bridges, vehicles, tools, etc., in
order to ensure that our constructions are stronger than the bare
minimum expected to be required for their functions.  Elaborate
systems of safety factors have been specified in norms and
standards. A safety factor most commonly refers to the ratio between a
measure of the maximal load not leading to the specified type of
failure and a corresponding measure of the maximal expected load. It
is common to make bridges and other constructions strong enough to
withstand twice or three times the predicted maximal load. This means
that a safety factor of two or three is employed.
Safety barriers are often arranged in chains. Ideally, each barrier is
independent of its predecessors so that if the first fails, then the
second is still intact, etc. For example, in an ancient fortress, if
the enemy managed to pass the first wall, then additional layers would
protect the defending forces. Some engineering safety barriers follow
the same principle of concentric physical barriers. Others are
arranged serially in a temporal or functional rather than a spatial
sense. One of the lessons that engineers learned from
the Titanic disaster is that improved construction of early
barriers is not of much help if it leads to neglect of the later
barriers (in that case lifeboats).
The major problem in the construction of safety barriers is to make
them as independent of each other as possible. If two or more barriers
are sensitive to the same type of impact, then one and the same
destructive force can get rid of all of them in one swoop. For
instance, if three safety valves are installed in one and the same
factory hall, each with the probability 1/1,000 of failure, it does
not follow that the probability of all three failing is
\(1 \times 10^{-9}\). The three valves may all be destroyed in the
same fire, or damaged by the same mistake in maintenance
operations. This is a common situation of many types of
equipment. 
Inherent safety, safety factors, and multiple barriers have an
important common feature: They all aim at protecting us not only
against risks that can be assigned meaningful probability estimates,
but also against dangers that cannot be probabilized, such as the
possibility that some unanticipated type of event gives rise to an
accident. It remains, however, for philosophers of technology to
investigate the principles underlying safety engineering more in
detail and to clarify how they relate to other principles of
engineering design (Doorn and Hansson 2015). 
Many attempts have been made to predict the risks of emerging and
future technologies. The role of philosophers in these endeavours has
often been to point out the difficulties and uncertainties involved in
such predictions (Allhoff 2009; Gordijn 2005). Experience shows that
even after extensive efforts to make a new product safe, there is a
need for post market surveillance (PMS) in order to discover
unexpected problems. For instance, before the massive introduction of
automobile air bags around 1990, safety engineers performed laboratory
tests of different crash scenarios with dummies representing a variety
of body weights and configurations (including infants and pregnant
women). But in spite of the adjustments of the construction that these
tests gave rise to, inflated airbags caused a considerable number of
(mostly minor) injuries. By carefully analyzing experiences from
actual accidents, engineers were able to substantially reduce the
frequency and severity of such injuries (Wetmore 2008). For
pharmaceutical drugs and some medical devices, post market
surveillance is legally required in many jurisdictions.
Until recently, problems of risk have not been treated systematically in moral
philosophy. A possible defence of this limitation is that moral
philosophy can leave it to decision theory to analyse the complexities
that indeterminism and lack of knowledge give rise to in real life.
According to the conventional division of labour between the two
disciplines, moral philosophy provides assessments of human behaviour
in well-determined situations. Decision theory takes assessments of
these cases for given, adds the available probabilistic information,
and derives assessments for rational behaviour in an uncertain and
indeterministic world. On this view, no additional input of moral
values is needed to deal with indeterminism or lack of knowledge,
since decision theory operates exclusively with criteria of
rationality. 
Examples are easily found that exhibit the problematic nature of this
division between the two disciplines. Compare the act of throwing down
a brick on a person from a high building to the act of throwing down a
brick from a high building without first making sure that there is
nobody beneath who can be hit by the brick. The moral difference
between these two acts is not obviously expressible in a probability
calculus. An ethical analysis of the difference will have to refer to
the moral aspects of risk-taking as compared to intentional ill-doing.
More generally speaking, a reasonably complete account of the ethics
of risk must distinguish between intentional and unintentional risk
exposure and between voluntary risk-taking, risks imposed on a person
who accepts them, and risks imposed on a person who does not accept
them. This cannot be done in a framework that treats risks as
probabilistic mixtures of outcomes. In principle, these outcomes can
be so widely defined that they include all relevant moral aspects,
including rights infringements as well as intentionality and other
pertinent mental states. However, this would still not cover the moral
implications of risk taking per se, since these are not
inherent properties of any of the potential outcomes. 
Methods of moral analysis are needed that can guide decisions on
risk-takings and risk-impositions. A first step is to investigate how
standard moral theories can deal with problems of risk that are
presented in the same way as in decision theory, namely as the (moral)
evaluation of probabilistic mixtures of (deterministic) scenarios.
In utilitarian theory, there are two obvious approaches to such
problems. One is the actualist solution. It consists in
assigning to a (probabilistic) mixture of potential outcomes a utility
that is equal to the utility of the outcome that actually
materializes. To exemplify this approach, consider a decision whether
or not to reinforce a bridge before it is used for a single, very
heavy transport. There is a 50% risk that the bridge will fall down if
it is not reinforced. Suppose that a decision is made not to reinforce
the bridge and that everything goes well; the bridge is not
damaged. According to the actualist approach, the decision was
right. This is, of course, contrary to common moral intuitions.
The other established utilitarian approach is the maximization of
expected utility. This means that the utility of a mixture of
potential outcomes is defined as the probability-weighted average of
the utilities of these outcomes.
The expected utility criterion has been criticized along several
lines. One criticism is that it disallows a common form of
cautiousness, namely disproportionate avoidance of large disasters.
For example, provided that human deaths are valued equally and
additively, as most utilitarians are prone to do, this framework does
not allow that one prefers a probability of 1 in 1000 that one person
will die to a probability of 1 in 100000 that fifty persons will
die. The expected utility framework can also be criticized for
disallowing a common expression of strivings for fairness, namely
disproportionate avoidance of high-probability risks for particular
individuals. Hence, in the choice between exposing one person to a
probability of 0.9 to be killed and exposing each of one hundred
persons to a probability of 0.01 of being killed, it requires that the
former alternative be chosen. In summary, expected utility
maximization prohibits what seem to be morally reasonable standpoints
on risk taking and risk imposition.
However, it should be noted that the expected utility criterion does
not necessarily follow from utilitarianism. Utilitarianism in a wide
sense (Scanlon 1982) is compatible with other ways of evaluating
uncertain outcomes (most notably with actual consequence
utilitarianism, but in principle also for instance with a maximin
criterion). Therefore, criticism directed against expected utility
maximization does not necessarily show a defect in utilitarian
thinking.
The problem of dealing with risk in rights-based moral
theories was formulated by Robert Nozick: “Imposing how
slight a probability of a harm that violates someone’s rights also
violates his rights?” (Nozick 1974, 74).
An extension of a rights-based moral theory to indeterministic cases
can be obtained by prescribing that if A has a right that
B does not bring about a certain outcome, then A
also has a right that B does not perform any action that (at
all) increases the probability of that outcome.  Unfortunately, such a
strict extension of rights is untenable in social
practice. Presumably, A has the right not to be killed by
B, but it would not be reasonable to extend this right to all
actions by B that give rise to a very small increase in the
risk that A dies — such as driving a car in the town
where A lives. Such a strict interpretation would make human
society impossible. 
Hence, a right not to be risk-exposed will have to be defeasible so
that it can be overridden in some (but not necessarily all) cases when
the increase in probability is small. However, it remains to find a
credible criterion for when it should be overridden.  As Nozick
observed, a probability limit is not credible in “a tradition
which holds that stealing a penny or a pin or anything from someone
violates his rights. That tradition does
not select a threshold measure of harm as a lower limit, in
the case of harms certain to occur” (Nozick 1974, 75).
The problem of dealing with risks in deontological theories is similar
to the corresponding problem in rights-based theories. The duty not to
harm other people can be extended to a duty not to perform actions
that increase their risk of being harmed. However, society as we know
it is not possible without exceptions to this rule.  The determination
of criteria for such exceptions is problematic in the same way as for
rights-based theories. All reasonable systems of moral obligations
will contain a fairly general prohibition against actions that kill
another person. Such a prohibition can (and should) be extended to
actions that involve a large risk that a person is killed.  However,
it cannot be extended to all actions that lead to a small increase in
the risk that a person is killed, since in that case it could not be
allowed for instance to drive a car. A limit must be drawn between
reasonable and unreasonable impositions of risk. It seems as if such
delimitations will have to appeal to concepts, such as probabilities
and/or the size of the benefits obtained by taking a risk, that are
not part of the internal resources of deontological theories.
Contract theories may appear somewhat more promising than
the theories discussed above. The criterion that they offer for the
deterministic case, namely consent among all those involved, can also
be applied to risky options. It could be claimed that risk impositions
are acceptable if and only if they are supported by a consensus. Such a
consensus, as conceived in contract theories, is either actual or
hypothetical. 
Actual consensus is unrealistic in a complex society in which everyone
performs actions with marginal but additive effects on many people’s
lives. According to the criterion of actual consensus, any local
citizen will have a veto against anyone else who wants to drive a car
in the town where she lives. In this way citizens can block each
other, creating a society of stalemates. 
Hypothetical consensus has been developed as a criterion in contract
theory in order to deal with inter-individual problems. We are invited
to consider a hypothetical initial situation in which the social order
of a future society has not yet been decided. When its future citizens
meet to choose a social order, each of them is ignorant of her or his
position in any of the social arrangements which they can choose
among. According to John Rawls’s theory of justice, they will then all
opt for a maximin solution, i.e. a social order in which the worst
position that anyone can have in that society is as good as
possible. In arguing for that solution, Rawls relied heavily on the
assumption that none of the participants knows anything at all about
the probability that she will end up in one or other of the positions
in a future social order (Rawls 1957, 1971, 1974). John Harsanyi, who
discussed this problem prior to Rawls, assumed that the probability of
finding oneself in a particular social position is equal to the share
of the population that will have the position in question, and that
this is also known by all participants. Hence, if a fifth of the
population in a certain type of society will be migrant workers, then
each participant in Harsanyi’s initial situation will assume that she
has a twenty per cent probability of becoming a migrant worker,
whereas none of the participants in Rawls’s initial situation will
have a clue what that probability can be. In Harsanyi’s initial
situation, the participants will choose the social order with the
highest expected utility (probability-weighted utility), thus taking
all potential future positions into account rather than only the least
favourable one (Harsanyi 1953, 1955, 1975).
However, in discussions about various risks in our existing societies
we do not have much use for the hypothetical initial situations of
contract theory. The risks and uncertainties in real life are of quite
a different nature than the hypothetical uncertainty (or ignorance)
about one’s own social position and conditions which is a crucial
requirement in the initial situation. The thought experiment of an
initial situation does not seem to provide us with any intellectual
tools for the moral appraisal of risks in addition to those to which
we have access even without trying to think away who we are.
In summary, the problem of appraising risks from a moral point of view
does not seem to have any satisfactory solution in the common versions
of the above-mentioned types of moral theories. The following are
three possible elements of a solution:
Additional discussions on the overall issue of risk acceptance can
be found in Macpherson 2008, Hansson 2013, and Oberdick 2014. Justice
in risk impositions is discussed in Ferretti 2010 and Heyward &
Roser 2016. Issues of rights and risks are discused in Thomson 1986
and, with a particular emphasis on responsibilities, in Kermisch 2012
and van de Poel, et al. 2012.
Decision theory is concerned with determining the best way to achieve
as valuable an outcome as possible, given the values that we have. In
decision theory, our values and goals are taken for given, and the
analysis concerns how best to achieve them to an as high degree as
possible. Decision-making under risk and uncertainty is one of the
major topics in decision theory. It is usually assumed that if the
values of a set of potential outcomes are known (for instance from
moral philosophy), then purely instrumental considerations are
sufficient for determining how best to act under risk or uncertainty
in order to achieve the best possible result. (For a critical
discussion of that presumption, see Hansson 2013, pp. 49–51.)
The values taken for given in decision-theoretical analysis can, but
need not, be moral values of the types that are developed and analyzed
in moral philosophy. Decision theory has traditionally had a
predilection for utilitarianism, whose structure is suitable for most
formal models of decision-making. The standard decision-theoretical
approach to risk is maximization of expected utility, which can be
seen as a smooth extension of (act) utilitarianism.
However, expected utility maximization does not rule
unchallenged. Influential proposals have been made for alternative
decision rules. There are two major types of justification for such
endeavours. First, examples have been put forward in which it would
seem implausible to claim that expected utility maximization is the
only normatively reasonable decision rule (Allais 1953, Ellsberg
1961). Secondly, numerous psychological experiments have shown that
human decision-makers tend to deviate substantially from expected
utility maximization. The first type of justification puts the
normative soundness of expected utility in question, where the second
exposes its shortcomings as a descriptive model. 
In an important class of alternative decision rules, the probabilities
used on expected utility calculations are replaced by some other
numbers (“decision weights”). This approach was proposed
already already in 1961 by William Fellner (1961). In most of these
constructions, all probabilities are tranformed by some transformation
function r. Instead maximizing the standard expected utility
\[p(x) \cdot u(x)\] the agent will then maximize \[r(p(x)) \cdot
u(x)\]
Several decision rules with this structure have been proposed. One of
the earliest was Handa (1977). Currently, the best know proposal in
this tradition is prospect theory (Kahneman and Tversky 1979), which
was developed in order to describe observations from psychological
decision experiments more accurately than in expected utility
theory. Prospect theory a is a fairly complex theory also containing
other deviations from expected utility theory. The traditional focus
on outcomes is replaced by a focus on losses and gains, which are
treated asymmetrically. 
A problem with the function r, as defined above, is that the
transformed probabilities which it gives rise to will not add up to 1
except in the trivial case when r is the identity function
(Fishburn 1978). To solve this problem, Quiggin (1982) introduced the
rule of maximizing anticipated utility (also called utility
with rank dependent probabilities). Instead of replacing \(p(x)\) by a
function of the individual probability, \(r(p(x))\), he replaced it by
a function that also depends on the other probabilities and utilities
involved in the problem. The outcomes are first ordered from worst to
best, which results in a vector \(\langle x_1, x_2 ,\ldots ,
x_n\rangle\) of outcomes, such
that \(u(x_1) \leq u(x_2) \leq \ldots \leq u(x_n)\). A
decision weight can then be assigned to each outcome, taking into
account both its probability and its position in the ranked sequence
of outcomes. Since the decision-weight can be different for outcomes
with the same probability, Fishburn’s trivialization result does
not apply here. There is evidence indicating that rank-dependent
utility models may be more empirically adequate than prospect theory
(Harrison and Ross 2017).
Several other a models have been proposed that replace the
probabilities in expected utility maximization by some other type of
decision weight (Gilboa and Schmeidler 1994, Buchak 2014).
Risks have a central role in economic activities. In capitalist market
economies, taking economic risks is an essential part of the role of
the entrepreneur. Decisions on investments and activities on financial
markets can only be understood against the background of the risks
involved. Therefore it is no surprise that modern economic theory,
with its emphasis on mathematical models of economic activities, has
developed several formal models of risk taking.
Portfolio analysis, which was developed in the 1950s by Harry
Markowitz (1952), James Tobin (1958) and others, was an important step
forward in the economic analysis of risk. These authors employed a
simple statistical measure, namely the standard deviation (or
alternatively the variance, that is the square of the standard
deviation) as a measure of riskiness. Hence, in a comparison between
two investment alternatives, the one whose economic outcome is
calculated to have the largest standard deviation is regarded as the
most risky one. In a comparison between different such alternatives,
each of them can be characterized by two numbers, namely its
expectation value and its standard deviation or riskiness. Investors
typically prefer investments with as high expectation values and as
low riskiness as possible. However, investors differ in the relative
weight that they assign to expectations respectively risk
avoidance. Given these decision weights, an individual’s optimal
portfolio can be determined.
Since the late 1960s, alternative measures of risk have been
developed. Perhaps the most influential of these was provided by
Michael Rothschild and Joseph Stiglitz (1970): If we move probability mass
from the centre to the tails of a probability distribution, while
keeping its mean unchanged, then we increase the risk associated with
the distribution. A measure based on this principle (mean preserving
spread) can be constructed that has more attractive mathematical
properties than those of the older standard deviation measure.
We differ in our attitudes to risk. Some of us willingly take risks
which others deem much too large. The notion of certainty-equivalent
outcomes can be used to specify such differences. Consider a risky
outcome X. Another outcome Y is a
certainty-equivalent outcome for X if and only if
(1) Y involves no uncertainty and (2) X
and Y are considered by the agent to be equally good. For
instance, let X be a lottery ticket with a 50 per cent chance
of winning something to which you assign 10 utiles (utility units) and
a 50 per cent chance of winning nothing. The expected utility of this
ticket is 5 utiles. Now suppose that you are indifferent between
receiving 3 utiles for sure and receiving X. Then your
attitude is risk averse. The general criterion for risk aversion (risk
avoidance, cautiousness) is that \(CE(X) < EU(X)\). Similarly, you are
risk neutral concerning X if \(CE(X) = EU(X)\) and you are
risk affine (risk seeking, risk loving) if \(EU(X) < CE(X)\).
In economics, risk aversion is usually related to
money. Let X represent a lottery ticket with a 50 per cent
chance of winning € 100, and suppose that you consider this
ticket to be worth € 30. We then have \(EU(X) = u(100)/2\), and
\(CE(X) = u(30)\). This means that \(u(30) = u(100)/2\). If this is a
consistent pattern, then the utility of money, as illustrated in a
diagram with amounts x of money on the x axis and their
utilities \(u(x)\) on the y axis, will be represented by a concave
(hill-like) curve. Similarly, if a risk affine behaviour will be
represented by a convex (valley-like curve). Provided that the utility
function u is twice continuously differentiable, this can be
expressed more precisely in the form of the Arrow-Pratt measure of
risk aversion/affinity, according to which the agent’s risk
aversion at any point x is equal to \(-u''(x)/u'(x)\).
Hence, a person with the utility function \(u_1\) is more risk averse
at a point x than one with utility function \(u_2\) if and
only if \[-{u_1}''(x)/{u_1}'(x) > -{u_2}''(x)/{u_2}'(x)\] (Arrow 1965,
Pratt 1964). The Arrow-Pratt measure has the advantage of being
invariant under transformations of the utility function that preserve
the preference relation that it represents (i.e. it is invariant under
multiplication of the utility with a positive constant and addition of
an arbitrary constant). On the other hand, it can be questioned on
philosophical grounds whether risk attitudes can be adequately
represented by variations in the utility of money. It can be argued
that cautiousness and the utility of money are two separate issues and
that they should therefore have independent representations.
Studies in experimental economics reveal that actual agents often do
not conform with theoretically derived rationality criteria. One of
the most popular descriptive theories that tries to capture actual
behaviour under risk is prospect theory, which was developed by Daniel
Kahneman and Amos Tversky around 1980 (Tversky & Kahneman
1986). It distinguishes between two stages in a decision process. In
the first phase, the editing phase, gains and losses in the
different options are identified. They are defined relative to some
neutral reference point that is usually the current asset position. In
the second phase, the evaluation phase, the options are
evaluated in a way that resembles expected utility analysis, but both
utilities and probabilities are replaced by other, similar
measures. Utility is replaced by a measure that is asymmetrical
between gains and losses.  Objective probabilities are transformed by
a function that gives more weight to probability differences close to
the ends than to those near the centre of the distribution. Thus it
makes a greater difference to decrease the probability of a negative
outcome from 2 to 1 per cent than to decrease it from 51 to 50
percent. 
Prospect theory can explain some of the ways in which actual behaviour
deviates from theoretical models of rational behaviour under
risk. Hence the overweighting of probability changes close to zero or
unity can be used to explain why people both buy insurance and buy
lottery tickets. However, prospect theory is not plausible as a
normative theory for rational behaviour under risk. Probably,
normative and descriptive theories of risk will have to go in
different directions.
Risk-benefit analysis (RBA), also called cost-benefit analysis (CBA)
is a collection of decision-aiding techniques that weigh advantages
against disadvantages in numerical terms. In a typical risk-benefit
analysis, multi-dimensional problems are reduced to a single
dimension. This is achieved by assigning monetary values to all
potential outcomes. Usually, uncertain outcomes are evaluated
according to the expected utility model. This means that the disvalue
of a risk is obtained by multiplying the probability of the undesired
event by a monetary value representing its severity (Sen 2000;
Sunstein 2005).
Most of the philosophical discussion on risk-benefit analysis has been
focused on the assignment of a monetary value to the loss of a human
life (MacLean 1994, Heinzerling 2000, 2002). It has been claimed that
lives and money are incommensurable, and that the determination and
use of such “live values” express a lack of respect for
human lives. Defenders of risk-benefit analysis have countered that
these values are just technical constructs representing what society
tends to pay (alternative: ought to pay) in order to save a human
life. Risk-benefit analysis can help decision-makers to save as many
lives as possible, given that they have a certain amount of resources
that they can assign to life-saving policies (Sunstein 2005).
Many of the value assignments used in cost-benefit analysis are based
on estimates or measurements of (hypothetical) willingness to
pay. Such estimates will give more influence to affluent people since
they can pay more than others to have it their way. This can be
corrected with income-based adjustments of the reported willingness to
pay. However, there are considerable problems involved in the
performance and interpretation of willingness-to-pay
studies (Grüne-Yanoff 2009).
Risk-benefit analysis gives rise to several other philosophical
problems of considerable philosophical interest (Hansson 2007). Due to
its quantitative nature, it tends to leave out problems that are
difficult to quantify, such as risks of cultural impoverishment,
social isolation, and increased tensions between social
strata. Furthermore, due to its aggregative structure, risk-benefit
analyses often leave out social justice and other distributional
aspects, although these are in fact accessible to quantitative
treatment.