Although Robert Desgabets (1610–1678) is perhaps the most original of
the Cartesian thinkers, even lauded by his most famous student,
Pierre-Sylvain Régis, as “one of the greatest metaphysicians of
our century” (Regis, 1704, p. 328), only one book and two small works
were published during his
 lifetime.[2]
 His correspondence indicates that he was interested in mechanics
before 1644, prior to his acquaintance with the writings of Descartes.  For a
metaphysical thinker like Desgabets, it was Descartes, not Galileo or
Bacon, who offered a new and complete philosophic system. In
Desgabets’s estimation, the only legitimate rival system to
Descartes’s was the one developed by Pierre Gassendi, but in the final
analysis, the “new scientific discoveries” weighed decisively in Descartes’s
favor.
In 1658 Desgabets participated in the Cartesian conferences held at
M. de Montmort’s, where he reportedly participated in discussions with
Rohault, Clerselier, and Cordemoy. Desgabets delivered a lecture which
outlined his invention of an apparatus and procedure for blood
transfusion, but he seems to have abandoned its study shortly
thereafter. In 1667, after a controversy erupted between the English
and the French over who first invented the procedure, a physician by
the name of Jean Denis was spurred to publish the written version of
Desgabets’s lecture. This appeared in 1668, four years after the
physicians Clark and Henshaw of England had attempted the operation on
animals without success (Desgabets, 1668). Prior to this research, in
1656, Christopher Wren successfully injected medications directly into
the veins of animals, after which in 1665, another Englishman and
physician, Richard Lower, a teacher and friend of John Locke, successfully
injected blood into animals using this same method. Genevieve Rodis-Lewis has
sorted out many of the details of this history, and shows that the two
procedures created by Lower and Desgabets are so different as to
confirm the independence of their inventions (Rodis-Lewis, 1974). But
whether and when Desgabets experimented with his procedure has not been
firmly established. What is evident, however, is that Desgabets, like
Wren, was inspired by Harvey’s discovery of the circulation of blood.
Once Harvey had shown how the circulation of blood is best understood
as a mechanism operating according to lawful movements, he opened the
way for blood transfusion to be understood along similar lines, as a
species of the communication of movement. Where evidence of Desgabets’s
actual experimentation with blood transfusion is lacking, his
descriptions of it show that he was aware of the possibility of shock
if the quantities transferred were too great for the subject
(Rodis-Lewis, 1974).
Throughout his lifetime Desgabets engaged in many theological and
philosophical controversies with such distinguished
seventeenth-century thinkers as Mabillon, Rapin, Foucher, Malebranche,
Cordemoy, Arnauld and Poisson. One of his more famous interlocutors
was the Cartesian Gérauld de Cordemoy
(1626–1684). Despite his admiration for Cordemoy, Desgabets was
shocked by the atomism in the Discernement du corps et de
l’âme (1666), a copy of which had been sent to him by
Clerselier. Desgabets subsequently wrote to Clerselier, opposing
Cordemoy’s arguments in favor of the existence of the void and
against the infinite divisibility of extension. According to
Desgabets, the marriage of Cartesian and anti-Cartesian elements in
this work formed an irreconcilable schism in the Cartesian
philosophy. Although Desgabets himself was not one to adopt
Cartesianism in its entirety, in his view his own criticisms perfected
and maintained the integrity of the Cartesian principles, while
Cordemoy’s adoption of atoms and the void was a direct affront
to the Cartesian 
metaphysics.[3]
Another, much more scandalous interchange took place between Desgabets
and Thomas Le Géant between 1671–1672 over
Desgabets’s thoughts on the Eucharist, which he stated in an
anonymous work, the second of his publications,
Considérations sur l’état présent de la
controverse touchant le T. S. Sacrement de l’autel
(1671). Lemaire credited this work with having been the primary cause
of the persecution of Cartesianism in France, since it brought to
light the incompatibility of the Cartesian philosophy with the
official Church doctrine on the mystery of the Eucharist (Lemaire,
1901, p. 124). Desgabets had entered this on-going debate in 1654 at
Clerselier’s request. Desgabets’s intention was to defend
the Cartesian doctrine of material substance against the Peripatetic
doctrine of substantial forms in his explication of
transubstantiation. Clerselier and Rohault had defended
Descartes’s ideas on the subject along similar lines, but no one
had been willing, either privately or publicly, to argue as Desgabets
eventually did, that the body of Christ is really extended in the
host. In addition, Desgabets’s persistence and perhaps even
imprudence, pushed the issue into the open. For, it was shortly after
the publication of the anonymous Considérations in
1671, that Desgabets sent additional writings on the topic to Abbey Le
Roi, who communicated them to Nicole and Arnauld. The latter found
Desgabets’s views dangerous and completely against tradition. It
was through his acquaintance with Nicole and Arnauld, that the
non-Cartesian Le Géant learned of the document and the identity
of its author. Le Géant alerted the Procurer General of the
Congregation of Benedictines, who ordered Desgabets to report to his
superiors concerning the matter. This led to an interrogation and the
subsequent issuance of an order on the 15th of December 1672, which
demanded that Desgabets renounce his views on the Eucharist
(Armogathe, 1977, pp. 104–105; Lemaire, pp. 51,
127–128). Desgabets promised to obey, and retreated to a
monastery at Breuil. Fortunately this did not end his philosophical
work. The controversy attracted the attention of Cardinal de Retz, who
was known for his radical spirit of reform among conservative
ecclesiastics in France. Cardinal de Retz, who was a partisan of the
new Cartesian philosophy, provided protection for Desgabets and
invited him to the Cartesian conferences held at Chateau de
Commercy. It was here that Desgabets criticized and corrected what he
saw as the errors of Descartes, and completed his
“indefectibility thesis,” which he had started in
1653–1654.
Desgabets’s last published work, Critique de la critique de
la Recherche de la vérité (1675), was intended as a
defence of Malebranche against the sceptic Simon Foucher. However,
Malebranche did not share this assessment, writing that although he
was pleased with the person, he was not pleased with the contents of
his book; he further lamented that Desgabets ought to have better
understood his ideas before taking on a defense. Desgabets himself was
never to see Malebranche’s scolding response which was published
in the “Advertissement” of the third edition of the
Search After Truth (Malebranche, 1958–84, v2,
pp. 500–503), since Desgabets died at Breuil on March 13, 1678,
just fourteen days before it appeared.
Desgabets’s most important Cartesian text, Supplément
à la philosophie de M. Descartes (1675), was intended as a
supplement to Descartes’s Meditations. In this work, Desgabets
examines many of Descartes’s important doctrines and arguments.
Desgabets defends the Cartesian doctrines of sensible qualities,
matter, mind-body dualism, mind-body union and interaction in man while
criticizing Descartes’s argument for the cogito as the first
principle of knowledge, the claim that there is such a process as pure
intellection, that there are innate ideas, and that ideas have
objective reality (pure possibility). What is particularly interesting
is the central importance that Desgabets gives to the role of sensation
in knowledge, and his development of Descartes’s treatment of truth as
both eternal and immutable but in some sense (one much contested in the
literature) contingent. Desgabets more than once remarks in this work
that “M. Descartes is not always a good Cartesian,” which typifies his
conviction that Cartesianism is more than the sum of the particulars
set down by Descartes himself.
 Viewing Desgabets’s work as a whole, there is no doubt that
what he viewed as a revision or perfection of the Cartesian philosophy
others have viewed as a fundamental departure. In his favor, he never
strayed from the Cartesian metaphysics, i.e., its substance dualism of
mind and matter, substance-mode ontology, mind-body union and
interaction, and the view that extension is the essence of matter and
thought the essence of mind; and he remained loyal to the Cartesian
physics against the atomists. However, heretically to some, he
strongly rejected the rationalist epistemology which often dominates
in Descartes, and argued that Descartes’s own principles favor a
sensory foundation for knowledge.
Despite the originality of many of Desgabets’s ideas, he was orthodox
in his Cartesianism (Watson, 1966; 1987). Desgabets adhered strictly to
Descartes’s doctrine of matter as body extended in three dimensions.
Physics, as Desgabets conceived it, was both mathematically and
metaphysically grounded in the solid of the geometer. He also
maintained the substance dualism of mind and matter while retaining
their causal interaction. And he, like Descartes, insisted upon the
substantial unity of man and the specificity of his nature and defended
the Cartesian interpretation of ideas against such non-orthodox
Cartesians as Malebranche. Although he claimed that the nature of the
mind-body union is “the most impenetrable thing in the world,” he had
much to say about its sensory basis and its operations. 
 Desgabets subscribed completely to the Cartesian doctrine of
matter as a substance extended in length, width, and breadth. It was
posited against the prevailing Peripatetic view that posits prime
matter and substantial forms in order to explain the permanence
underlying the continuous change that matter undergoes. On
Descartes’s view, the essence of matter is its extension in
three dimensions, and all of its changing attributes, properties and
modes, such as movement, rest, figure, situation and composition of
parts, are completely dependent upon and follow from this unified
extension (OPD 2: 27). Matter, or corporeal substance, is clearly
known when it is viewed as the geometrical object of mathematicians,
as a magnitude extended in length, width and breadth.  Likewise,
corporeal bodies are best viewed as the movements, rest, figures,
arrangements and sizes of which corporeal substance is capable, and
which, in its various diversifications and assemblages,
“… now pass for the form of all particular bodies of
which the world is composed” (OPD 1: 3). And, in all of this,
“… there is nothing which is not governed by the laws of
mechanics” (OPD 2: 4).
Furthermore, Desgabets viewed bodies as portions of matter, which in
the case of animals are highly delicate and organized machines composed
of an infinite number of parts capable of an infinite diversity of
movements. He held this view against that of the Peripatetics who
believed that there must be an internal principle of thought in beasts
because of the intricacy and apparent human-like intelligence of their
movements. According to Desgabets, the kind of thinking that attributes
such an internal principle to beasts is the same kind of thinking that
results in the attribution of intelligence to clocks, “However, the
same affront to reason and philosophy is committed by the Americans and
the Barbarians of the Orient who not being able to understand the
mechanical reasons for the movement of clocks, or the true causes of
natural effects, attribute souls and intelligence to machines, and
likewise to fire, lakes etc., and in doing so expose themselves to the
mockery of Europeans” (OPD 4: 132–133). In other words, no appeal to
internal principles, or final causes is required to explain the
movements of beasts, any more than it is needed to explain the
movements of clocks. The complexity of movements, whether involved in
the operations of clocks or those of animate bodies, is explicable in
purely mechanistic terms.
Likewise, all motions communicated within or between material bodies
are effected by physical contact and proceed according to the laws of
local motion. Desgabets was careful to stress that the ultimate source
of movement is not matter but God, who imparted motion to the universe in
its creation. For Desgabets, it is this fact that grounds the laws of
nature: “It is the constant and uniform manner of the action of God
which founds these laws, by means of which He forms and maintains this
beautiful harmony in the world which is one of the greatest objects of
our sciences” (OPD 1: 13). As Desgabets saw it, the operation of these
laws of nature and the rules of the communication of movement were the
true and unique foundations of the new physics.
 Desgabets also subscribed to the Cartesian conception of mind as
an immaterial substance whose essence is thought. The distinction
between mind and matter is thus a real and substantial one, impossible
not to perceive: “Never has an infant asked for lies or truths
for breakfast, nor has he imagined that the stones encountered along
his path were the gross thoughts of some countryman” (OPD 5:
197). Minds, or immaterial substances, are of three kinds: uncreated,
which is God; mind detached from body, which is an angel; and mind
united with organized body, which is a reasonable soul. The second of
these, angels, are the only pure minds in the created universe and
they have no corporeal extension, no local presence or correspondence
to time—they are simple and indivisible minds. Such minds or
spirits cannot be perfected by any substantial union since their
specific spiritual being does not require anything corporeal to carry
out its functions.  However, they are capable of participating in the
movements of the visible world, though in doing so, they must undergo
a kind of degradation and punishment in order to receive pain. The
third of these spiritual beings is man, who consists of a cross
between purely intellectual and purely corporeal things. In this
Desgabets appears to have strayed slightly from the official Cartesian
doctrine of dual substances, since he claimed that outside of God
there are three sorts of simple created substances, matter or body,
angel, and one which is composed of body and soul, which is
man. However, this tripartite division of substances is supported by a
more fundamental bipartite division of material and spiritual
substances, so that man is best understood as a state of being which
emerges out of the conjunction of two substances, rather than as a
substance in the primary sense. This is not unlike Descartes’s
account of man as a “composite entity” possessing two
principle attributes, namely extension and thought, a being which
itself is not a simple substance. Nonetheless, in Desgabets as in
Descartes, how to interpret the human soul as as substance (Miller,
2008), or as a modal being (Lennon, 1994), is contentious.
It was an important point for Desgabets that man, unlike angels, is a
being composed of body and soul, who continually experiences
the union of the two substances by the endless impressions he finds in
himself. The relation of mind and body in man is an essential one
which must not be regarded as a penal state of the soul, but as the
accomplishment of its natural perfection. Human thought has
duration, succession, a beginning and an end—qualities that
depend on the movements of the corporeal organs and which follow the
rules of local movement. Although Descartes and Malebranche after him
claimed that the human mind is capable of detachment from the body,
Desgabets rejected this, since the human mind is not like an
angel’s but requires continual commerce with the body and its
senses for all its operations.
One further issue concerning Descartes’s general account of the
nature of the mind-body union, which Desgabets raised in order to
dispel, concerns the common complaint that the Cartesian view fails to
account for the interaction of material and immaterial substances.
Desgabets did not regard this as a true problem because he thought
that the question demanded the impossible—an explanation of how
the organized body and reasonable soul, which are in fact made for
each other, can exercise a mutual commerce. He likened this
to asking an artisan to explain how the convex surface of a peg
can possibly fill that of a concave hole. It is akin to
asking why extension is the essence of body, or why thought is the
essence of mind. It’s just the way God made the world.
What could be explained, according to Desgabets, is the way in which
the mind and body are united and dependent upon one another. He found
an analogue in the nature of the body-body relation: two bodies are
united when their superficies touch and their movements take on a
mutual dependence. Similarly, two minds are united when their thoughts
and wills agree and depend on one another. The union of mind and body
is not by touch, nor by agreement of thoughts, but by the dependence
that exists between certain thoughts and certain movements such that
one in fact follows from the other. The union of the mind and
body in man is so strict that it founds a species of communication for
their commerce, in virtue of which our thoughts are said to have
duration, succession, etc., without themselves being corporeal. The
union and its interaction cannot be further reduced in explanation. In
short, the essence of man, who is composed of mind and body,
is the union of mind and body, and the only legitimate
questions which concern this union relate to how, given the
union, the mind determines the body and the body determines the mind,
which is an empirical question, known through experience not
reason.
Desgabets’s thesis concerning the indefectibility of created
substances, which underlies his metaphysics, is perhaps his most
original if not radical philosophical contribution (Schmaltz, 2002;
Easton, 2005; Gatto, 2017). Gatto argues that this thesis is the key to
understanding Desgabets’s peculiar development of
Descartes’s philosophy (Gatto, 2017). In a letter from Desgabets
to Malebranche, we learn that he had begun the Treatise on the
Indefectibility of Substances, as early as 1649 (Letter from
Desgabets, Sept. 1674, Malebranche, 1958–84, vol. II: 85). It was
Desgabets’s view that substances, in their essence and
existence, are eternal, indivisible, immutable, and indestructible,
which is to say, indefectible. While the modes of substance can
undergo change, the essence of substance and its existence
cannot. According to Desgabets, the indestructibility, eternality, and
indivisibility of substances follow from the fact that God created
substances by a free and indifferent will. Once the world was created,
it could not be uncreated. Thus, the key to understanding
Desgabets’s indefectibility thesis lies not only in his analysis
of the Cartesian doctrine of substance, but in his interpretation of
Descartes’s notoriously opaque doctrine of the free creation of
the eternal truths, discussed in a later section, under “Truth.” 
 We can see Desgabets adoption of the new Cartesian philosophy in
his adherence to the core Cartesian metaphysics of dualism, mechanism,
and union, and his critique of the Scholastic doctrines. However, his
development of the doctrine of matter in the Eucharist controversy,
his development of the interaction of mind and body as essential for
all operations of the human mind, his development of the doctrine of
indefectibility especially with respect to matter, and his defense of
the “Creation Doctrine” led to many controversies in his day. Each of
these, particularly the metaphysics of the human being as a
substantial union of mind and matter whose interaction underlies all
our thoughts has some interesting epistemological consequences. It is
not surprising that Desgabets was known for his spirit of reform and
earned Regis’s title as “one of the greatest metaphysicians of
our century.” 
In Desgabets’s estimation, Descartes’s truly great
discovery was his identification of the true nature of sensible
qualities (OPD 5: 164).  As Desgabets understood it, sensible
qualities “… are nothing else in objects but the local
dispositions of the small parts from which result the sensations that
we call heat, sound, light, etc.” (OPD 2: 17).  Moreover,
sensible qualities qua modes of the mind have no resemblance
or similarity to the modes or accidents of matter. Sensible qualities
are states or modes of the human mind having only a causal relation to
the specific local movements of our sensory organs, which in turn, are
the effects of the local movements produced by the arrangements and
local dispositions of parts of matter. Unfortunately, the ontological
status of these qualities becomes less clear when they are considered
as qualities in objects. In this context, for both Descartes and
Desgabets, sensible qualities are “various dispositions”
in objects. Since Descartes clearly held that sensible qualties are
not the forms of material things but rather modes of the mind, the
only sense in which sensible qualites could be “in” the
various dispositions of objects is in the causal sense, that is, as
their effects. While the status and nature of these dispositions in
Descartes’s account has been a subject of much debate, it is
clear that he distinguished between such qualities as light, colour,
smell, taste, sound and touch, which are sensed or perceived
qualities, and other qualities, such as size, shape and motion, which
are found in all bodies. Descartes wrote that the former qualities are
dispositions which depend on size, shape and motion. So, it would seem
that for Descartes, secondary qualities are sensible qualities bearing
no resemblance to qualities of matter, while primary qualities are
qualities belonging to physical objects. 
The importance of this discovery and its interpretation in Desgabets’s
thought is paramount, since he believed that because of it, the way
had been opened at last to lay the foundations of a true
philosophy. Based on Descartes’s conception of matter, and his
consequent discovery of the true nature of sensible qualities,
Desgabets concluded that our perception of sensible qualities and
sensible objects does not constitute knowledge of the true
state of exterior things. In fact, sensible qualities and objects
considered in relation to their being as modes of the mind are not the
true objects of knowledge or of science, since they are only modal
beings subject to change. In this, Descartes would concur. But
Desgabets went on to argue that all (true) knowledge depends on the
senses, and hence on our perception of these sensible qualities and
objects; this is a point of great contention in Descartes scholarship,
and one of much significance and growing contention in understanding
Desgabets’s marriage of Cartesianism and empiricism. The story is a
somewhat complicated and intricate, and scholars disagree about the
nature of the empiricism. There is a long tradition of interpreting
Desgabets as an empiricist from Victor Cousin (1852), and Francisque
Bouillier (1868), to Genevieve Rodis-Lewis (1981, 1993), Patricia
Easton and Thomas Lennon (1992), Tad Schmaltz (2002a; 2002b) and Sean
Allen-Hermenson (2008). Monte Cook (2008) has raised an important
challenge to the empiricist reading, questioning whether the senses
provide any real content to our ideas. Despite the ongoing
disagreements, there is consensus that Desgabets held that the eternal
truths are contingent not necessary, rejected hyperbolic doubt and
pure intellection, and insisted on the necessary role of sensible
signs in the formation of all ideas. Each of these positions leans
away from Descartes in varying degrees and while perhaps not a
Lockean-type empiricism can be seen as an attempt to develop a
position somewhere in between, a kind of Cartesian empiricism. 
Desgabets claimed that the corporeal form of all particular bodies
results from an assemblage of the local dispositions
of matter, and that these dispositions of matter in turn come from
extended matter. Thus, in the same way that sensible qualities are
nothing outside us but the local dispositions of matter, sensible
objects are nothing outside us but assemblages of local
dispositions of matter. If sensible qualities such as heat, colour and
light are really modes of the mind which have no resemblance to the
modes or accidents of matter that cause them then, for the same reason,
sensible bodies such as earth, water and animals must also be modes of
the mind that have no resemblance to the assemblages of local
dispositions of matter that cause them. This is a simple but
perspicuous consequence of the Cartesian doctrine of sensible qualities
and its conception of matter. It treats particular bodies as
assemblages of local dispositions of matter, and it treats sensible
bodies as our grasp of those assemblages. Hence, sensible bodies are
beings of the mind which are merely caused by assemblages of local
dispositions of matter. The analogy between sensible qualities such as
heat, light etc., and sensible bodies such as earth, water, animals
etc., is meant to be an exact one. Just as sensible qualities are the
immediate effects of local dispositions of matter acting upon the
senses, sensible bodies are the immediate effects of assemblages of
local dispositions of matter acting upon the senses.
Another important consequence of the true nature of sensible
qualities is that the senses are not the source of error. This is a
theme found in Descartes that depends on an important distinction
between the scope of the two basic operations of the mind—that of
the intellect and that of the will. The functions of assenting and
dissenting are performed only by the will, while those of perception
and conception are performed by the senses and intellect. For
Desgabets, as for Descartes, simple conception is always true and
conforms to its object, while error is a product of precipitous
judgement. But unlike Descartes, Desgabets concluded that
everything that is conceived of is a simple conception, not
just God, soul and body. For Desgabets, a thing truly conceived,
actually exists. Errors and so-called beings of reason which are said
not to exist outside our conceptions, are not really conceptions, and
are “… nothing but a false judgement which extends itself beyond
perception. Likewise the failure that is often attributed to the senses
is equally nothing but a precipitous judgement by which one says that
the senses do not know” (OPD 6: 227). According to Desgabets, after
having distinguished simple ideas from judgement in the Third
Meditation, Descartes erred gravely in placing chimeras and other
such beings of reason among the number of objects of simple conception.
It was this that led to Descartes’s fundamental error—the
reversal of the basic truth that the first operation of the mind has
only real things for its object. By including chimerical
beings among the objects of conception Descartes opened the door to the
possibility of thoughts without true objects. But, judgement or the
extension of the will beyond the domain of what is conceived is the
true source of chimeras and error (OPD 4: 103).
All conceptions conform to their object, and error consists in the
will forming a judgement beyond conception. On this point, Desgabets’s
account of error looks very much like that found in Descartes. However,
in Desgabets, the domain of simple conception is less restricted, as is
the proper function of the senses. The senses not only serve to
determine what is good or harmful in life, but they also serve in
knowing the nature of things. However, we often form false judgements
of the true nature of the movements experienced by the senses because
of their role in preserving life (OPD 6: 228). On Desgabets’s account,
it is because the senses serve to promote the preservation of our life
by telling us immediately which particular bodies are harmful or
profitable that they can not also provide immediate knowledge
of the true nature of these movements that impinge upon us. If the
senses were such that they gave us immediate knowledge of the true
nature of the movements impinging upon them, then they could not tell
us at the same time what particular bodies are good or harmful
to us. Thoughts are successive, and so the senses, in order to preserve
life by warding off immediate and unexpected dangers, must be able to
respond first and foremost to the preservation value of a particular
object.
This does not mean that the senses cannot access the true nature
of things as well. In fact, for Desgabets, since all knowledge comes
from the senses, the function of knowing the essences of things is a
necessary role served by the senses. Recall that the true nature of
particular objects consists in the local dispositions of parts of
matter which produce the course of the movements we experience. These
movements are the first and sole contact we have with the material
world, and so the senses present, in some form, not only the existence
of a given object, but first and foremost, the value of that object in
relation to our survival. We only reach knowledge of the true nature of
material objects by considering their being in relation to their
substance. In order to achieve this, we must abstract from all
relations of time, and only then see it as it is in itself. What the
senses offer us is knowledge of matter in its various divisions,
shapes, sizes, etc., that is, as matter exists at a certain time and
place. Thus, what Desgabets seemed to have assumed was that the reason
we so often err with regard to the true nature of these movements is
that we judge precipitously, or too quickly, before the mind has had a
chance to conceive of material substance as it is in itself,
independent of any temporal or spatial ties. Worth noting is that
Desgabets’s explanation for the mind’s natural tendency to judge
precipitously derives from the other function of the senses, namely, to
immediately grasp the preservation value of a given object.
But what on Desgabets’s account is the difference between a simple
conception and a precipitous judgement? What is the criterion for
distinguishing one from the other? In his Supplément,
he offers the example of imaginary space. When we speak of imaginary
space, many are persuaded that it does not include any judgement on
their part, but if one looks closely, one sees that the simple object
of conception here is space and extension with its perceived dimensions
from which we form a judgement concerning its imaginary
nature. Similarly, when someone approaches fire and has the sensation
of heat, pain or pleasure, he may be persuaded that the heat he feels
is in the fire just as he perceives it, since this sensation is known
to him clearly. But, he has erred because of a tacit judgement. His
conception of the fire and of the heat, as well as of his intervening
judgement are all the immediate and true objects of his thought. These
all qualify as simple conceptions in so far as they relate to their
true object. But, that the heat is in the fire by which it is claimed
that the heat in us resembles that of the fire, is a tacit judgement
which is false. In this sense, the illusions that are attributed to the
senses always involve false judgement. It is a genuine question to ask
about a baton partially submerged in water whether it is straight or
curved, but whether the baton, straightness, curvature etc., are real
things, is not. Simple conceptions are the mind’s grasp of things as
they are in themselves, which is to say, in relation to their essence
as extended substances, or as thinking minds. Space, as an attribute of
matter, is extended in three dimensions, and sensations, as attributes
of the mind, are perceptions not qualities of material objects.
This explains what Desgabets meant by his claim that all simple
conceptions always have an existent object outside the understanding,
since simple conceptions are, in virtue of their relation to
substances, of things which actually exist. It is only when
one judges of things outside one’s conception that one is erroneously
said to conceive something which does not exist. The task in the search
after truth, then, is to separate precipitous judgements from
judgements based only on what is simply, and hence, actually
conceived.
Desgabets drew yet another, final consequence from Descartes’s
discovery of the true nature of sensible qualities (and bodies). This
consquence bears directly on our ability to see the right path to a
true physics which was hitherto impossible. The true physics is one
that recognizes that “everything that happens in matter by the
different movements and modes of its parts, belongs to mathematics and
mechanics, which have all of this for their object” (OPD 5:
166). The object of the true physics is not the substantial forms of
the Scholastics, but matter whose essence is extension, and its modes
which are nothing else but various divisions and groupings of its
parts.  Thus, the natural object of the physcists is the same as the
solid of the mathematician. The solid of the mathematicians, according
to Desgabets, consists in a magnitude that has three dimensions, i.e.,
length, width, and thickness while the natural body of the physicist
consists in a solid substance extended in three dimensions. This is
the crowning statement of Desgabets’s metaphysical view that the
physical world is really a single object or substance whose
parts, under various divisions, shapes and arrangements, form all the
appearances in the “grand theatre of nature” (OPD
5: 166).
This, of course, does not make the world, or its particular
inhabitants any less real (or any more phenomenal) in Desgabets’s view.
Quite to the contrary, Desgabets thought that the foundation he had
laid out supports the natural realist in each of us. The individuation
of matter into sensible objects is a mode of thought in so far as the
mind gives particular objects (local assemblages of dispositions of
matter) their extrinsic form, but that such conceived or known objects
actually exist outside the understanding by an intrinsic form, as modes
or states of matter.
In Part 1, chapter three of the Supplément, Desgabets
explicitly examines Descartes’s rejection of the empiricist
motto, that all knowledge comes from the senses. While Desgabets
rejects the Scholastic rendering of the motto, he is equally critical
of Descartes’s precipitous rejection of it. According to
Desgabets, the proper sense of the empiricist motto is that all
thoughts originate by the senses [a sensu] rather
than in the senses [in sensu], and what reaches the intellect
is not what is found in the senses. As Lennon nicely puts it, “For him
things are directly perceived and an idea is the means by which, and
not in which, a thing is perceived” (Lennon, 1998, p. 353). The soul
must always be in commerce with the senses, and although our thoughts
depend on the corporeal traces in the brain for their source or
origin, it does not follow that our ideas must be corporeal, or even
similar to corporeal things. The very fact that all of our thoughts
have a beginning, duration, cessation, and sucession proves that they
depend on motion, and motion is only communicated through the
senses. This is why he modifies the empiricist motto from: nihil
est in intellectu quin prius fuerit in sensu, to a
sensu.
It is not surprising then, that Desgabets argued against
Descartes’s “pretention” that he could detach
himself from all commerce with the senses, which sets the rationalist
tone of the Meditations. Of course, Descartes saw this
detachment as desirable because he thought it was in virtue of it that
he could defend the certainty of human knowledge. He thought that the
soul is known more clearly than the body because we, as thinking
things, are intimately tied to the immaterial, thinking substance,
which is our soul. The body, on the other hand, is part of material
not immaterial substance, and so is not known immediately. It is
because of this that Descartes erroneously took the cogito to
be the foundation of certainty in human knowledge, and our knowledge
of body to be less clear and less immediate. However, according to
Desgabets, this is where Descartes goes terribly astray. Had Descartes
reflected more deeply on the nature of the mind-body union, he would
have seen that our ideas of body and mind are equally clear, and
equally evident. For, the soul of man is not an immaterial substance,
but a result of the union of mind and body, and all our ideas, even of
the soul, equally depend upon the operation of the senses. From here,
the new foundation of certainty can be seen to be the principle of
intentionality, that to think is to think of something.
Clarity and distinctness, according to Desgabets, tells us when we
have grasped something truthfully, but the intentionality of thought
grounds clarity and distinctness. 
 According to Desgabets, it is undeniable that man is a being who
reasons, draws consequences, does not see things indivisibly, who has
thoughts in succession which begin, continue, and finish, and who
often experiences doubt and conjecture. Such doubting, discursive
reasoning and succession of thought prove that all thought is tied to
the body since duration and successive extension are nothing but the
local movements of the body (OPD 7: 299). A pure thought, the kind
that Descartes (and Malebranche after him) envisioned for metaphysical
reasoning, would have no beginning, duration, end, or succession. In
short, such a thought would be indivisible, and hence unthinkable by
the human mind. Both Descartes and Malebranche rejected the empiricist
thesis because they erroneously thought that it would commit them to
the materialist thesis that thoughts and the soul are material.  This
led them to adopt the intellectualist thesis regarding the
mind’s perception of metaphysical essences. However, Desgabets
saw a third option, one which is founded on the mind-body union and
the sensory basis of all knowledge, and one which founds the proper
sense of the empiricist motto, that all ideas originate by the
senses.
Desgabets, having declared that all thoughts depend on movement, was
especially concerned to defend his empiricist thesis against charges of
materialism. Since movement is a mode belonging to body, many
tended to conclude that if minds depend on movement, then minds must
have something corporeal in them. How could it be that our thoughts,
which have something corporeal in them, namely, movement, are not
themselves corporeal? And yet, this is exactly what Desgabets argued.
He believed that thoughts have something corporeal in their being
without themselves being corporeal—in the same way that every
object in our thought has a beginning, continuation, and end without
these objects having duration in themselves. While things really have
duration, it is only extrinsically and by thought, “the same
way a pole is divided into ten feet when one imagines the ten feet”
(OPD 7: 299).
At first glance, Desgabets’s analogy between attributing a
corporeal nature to thoughts and attributing a duration or division to
things serves more to confuse than clarify. But if we draw on his
earlier point about the true nature of individual bodies, we can make
some sense of it. Recall that individual bodies are real in that they
result from the division of matter by motion into assemblages of local
dispositions of parts of matter. Bodies then act upon our sensory
organs which in turn are received as ideas in the mind. But the
individuation of perception into sensible ideas of
bodies is essentially an operation performed by the mind, even though
it has its foundation in the local dispositions of matter itself. For
example, our perception of a ten foot pole is the effect of a specific
assemblage of local dispositions of matter acting upon our sensory
organs at a certain time and the mind’s division of
that sensible body into ten feet. The local disposition itself is not
intrinsically a pole, or ten feet long, but it is so extrinsically,
that is, by thought. Similarly, thoughts themselves are not
intrinsically extended or subject to movement, but they are so
extrinsically, that is, as an effect of the operations of the sensory
organs of the body. In other words, just as the local movements of
matter individuate thought extrinsically giving the mind individual
thoughts, the thought of immaterial substance individuates matter
extrinsically thereby giving it perceptions of individual bodies. The
mind-body union, and the essential intentionality which results from
it, create the mutual dependence of the operations of mind and matter
without requiring that mind be material or matter be immaterial.
This is at the heart of Desgabets’s “fundamental
truth,” that for the proper use of reason we must recognize that
all our ideas or simple conceptions have a real object outside of it,
which is in itself what is represented by thought, and which actually
contains the degree of being that one sees there. If individual bodies
and sensible objects are modal beings in the sense claimed by
Desgabets then there is no cleavage between object and object known
because they are one and the same thing. What is represented to our
thought is the real object of knowledge, namely, material and
spiritual substance, but what we sense are these substances as they
exist in time, or in other words, as they exist at a given time by
thought in virtue of the particular local dispositions of
matter. 
 According to Desgabets, Descartes’s fine doctrine concerning
the creation of the eternal truths, is the foundation of the true
(Cartesian) philosophy. He claimed that had Descartes attended
consistently to this doctrine, he would have avoided all error. Due to
its importance and opaqueness in Desgabets’s writings, the
“Creation Doctrine” has generated a great deal of examination and
debate, most recently stimulated by Beaude’s and
Rodis-Lewis’s publication of Desgabets’s philosophical
writings (Desgabets, 1981). Rodis Lewis (1981) and Lennon (1998) set
the stage for the dialectic of the debates in the period. Schmaltz
(2002), Cook (2005), Faye (2005), and Easton (2009) variously argue
for the importance of the doctrine in Desgabets’s development of
the Cartesian philosophy, and its philosophical significance. Gatto
(2017) presents a nice synthesis of the literature, and sorts out the
complicated reception and role of Descartes’s doctrine,
particularly for Desgabets. Despite the controversies surrounding the
interpretation and significance of this doctrine, there are some
points of agreement. As Desgabets understood it, it requires that God
be equally the author of all created things, in their being and their
essence. It requires that there be no essence without existence, which
is to say, that there can be no purely possible beings either in the
human mind as Descartes allowed, or in God’s mind, as
Malebranche argued. The notion that such truths are in some way prior
to God’s creation of the world, existing as purely possible
essences separate from actual existence, involves a separation of
essence from existence, and supposes that essence is something
actually separable and conceivable without existence. 
 Truth, which exists only by the relation of conformity of thought
to its object, is contingent in that it depends on God’s will in
his free creation of the universe. Truth is eternal in its
independence from time or temporal variations, and it is immutable in
that once God wills the world, things never change in respect to their
substance but only in respect to their modes of being. Although we
must wait to know what things God actually created, we are guaranteed
of the truth of our ideas since it is the object itself that
determines what we perceive.  Truth is necessary in that God gives all
objects He creates an irrevocable being, but it is contingent in
relation to His absolute and unlimited power. God is the equal author
of the essence and the existence of things He created, He
“… gave them their essence and their existence which are
equally contingent, and which once received, are nevertheless
possessed by them irrevocably” (OPD 6: 249). Desgabets’s
voluntarism, then, is a qualified one, for though the eternal truths
depend upon God for their existence as their primary cause, they are
no less indefectible, that is, they are unchangeable in their
substantial being.
The tenets that Desgabets drew from the Creation Doctrine show us
where Desgabets parts ways with Descartes on many points. For example,
Descartes erroneously concludes in Meditation V that essences, such as
the true and immutable nature of a triangle, can exist separately from
material existence as a purely possible being. According to
Desgabets’s strict adherence to the Creation Doctrine,
“… objects precede truth in the order of nature,”
such that, “… it is impossible that there be a triangle
separate from its existence, or that the whole be greater than its
part if there is no whole or parts, which is to say in a word, that
our principle is found yet more true, and it is impossible to think of
nothing” (OPD 6: 232). The Creation Doctrine also grounds
Desgabets’s treatment of the senses as the foundation of all
knowledge, and his view that the substances are indefectible. Although
at times elusive, the unity of Desgabets’s thought can be seen
in his defense of the Creation Doctrine.
 To conclude, when we view Desgabets’s work as a whole, there
is no doubt that what he viewed as a revision or perfection of the
Cartesian philosophy others have argued are a fundamental
departure. In his favor, he never strayed from the Cartesian
metaphysics of substance dualism, substance-mode ontology, mind-body
union and interaction, and the view that extension is the essence of
matter and thought the essence of mind. He remained loyal to the
Cartesian physics against the atomists. Moreover, and perhaps
heretically to some, he strongly rejected the rationalist epistemology
which often dominates in Descartes, and argued that Descartes’s
own principles favor a sensory foundation for knowledge.