On 2 February 1257, Br. Bonaventure was appointed Minister General
in charge of the Franciscan
 Order.[1]
 This act of ecclesiastical preferment effectively split his life into
two halves, the burdens of the ecclesiastical administrator replacing
the leisure of the scholar. He is thought to have been forty years old
at the time—the minimum age for a Minister General—giving
him a birth date of 1217.
Bonaventure was born Giovanni di Fidanza in Bagnoregio in Tuscany.  He
himself attests that he was healed miraculously as a child by the
intervention of Francis of Assisi, shortly after the saint’s death on
3 October
 1226[2]:
 “when I was a boy, as I still vividly remember, I was snatched
from the jaws of death by his invocation and merits.” He did not
rush to join the Franciscans, but matriculated as a layman in the Arts
faculty at the University of Paris in 1235 and proceeded all the way
to the Master of Arts, around 1243.  The Arts curriculum at Paris then
consisted of the seven liberal arts, supplemented by some works of
Aristotle. Heavily weighted in favor of the trivium—the
linguistic arts of grammar, rhetoric, and logic—teaching in the
quadrivium—the four mathematical and scientific
disciplines—was somewhat limited, partially due to the
prohibition of Aristotle’s works in natural philosophy at Paris in
1210. Though some Masters of Arts, such as Roger Bacon and Richard
Rufus, were teaching the Aristotelian natural philosophy, the
requirements for becoming a Master of Arts as late as 1252 listed only
the old logic, new logic, and the On the Soul (De
anima) among Aristotle’s works; the earliest record of
Aristotle’s entire natural philosophy and metaphysics as required for
graduation only appears in
 1255,[3]
 two years before Bonaventure left the University. His writing
reflects this education; a master of logic and rhetoric, he was less
deeply read in the Aristotelian and Islamic philosophical texts than
his Dominican contemporaries, Albert and Thomas.
About the time young Giovanni began to study Arts, Alexander of Hales,
Master of Theology and initiator of the practice of commenting on the
Sentences of Peter Lombard, took the Franciscan habit. His conversion
gave the Franciscans a Chair in Theology, the Dominicans having
acquired two Chairs during the university strike of 1229–30.  Hales
held him in the highest regard and said that “in him Adam seemed
not to have sinned” (Salimbene 1905–1912, 664).  Giovanni took
the Franciscan habit in 1243/4, using the name
“Bonaventure” to celebrate his “good-fortune”
under Francis and Hales.
Bonaventure attended lectures and disputations in theology from 1243
to 1248. Writing about 1280, the Franciscan chronicler Salimbene said:
“Br. John of Parma [Franciscan Minister General] gave the
license to Br. Bonaventure of Bagnoregio to read at Paris, which he
had never yet done because he was not yet installed in a Chair. He
then read the whole Gospel of St. Luke, a commentary that is very
beautiful and complete. This was in
 1248.”[4]
 This entry refers to Bonaventure’s cursorie lectures as
“Bachelor of the Bible,” 1248–1250. From 1250–2 he
commented on the Sentences (Sententiae in IV Libris
Distinctae). Once Master, he revised the Commentary
(Commentaria in Quatuor Libros Sententiarum), his major
philosophical and theological work. In 1252–3 he was a “formed
Bachelor” of Theology, performing the three duties of a Master:
lecturing on the Bible, engaging in disputations, and preaching. In
1253 the Masters and students of the University of Paris went on
strike, all but the friars.  The two Dominicans and William of
Meliton, O.F.M., continued to teach and refused to take an oath of
loyalty to the University corporation, for which they were expelled
from the “university of masters,” an action defended by
the University in a letter of 4
 February.[5]
 Bonaventure received the licentia docendi by Easter 1254, in
the midst of this conflict. He assumed the Franciscan Chair in
theology immediately, but taught only at the Franciscan convent,
unrecognized by the University.
Bonaventure performed all three tasks of a Master of Theology from
1254–57. He revised his commentary on Luke and composed commentaries
on John and Ecclesiastes. He also held three sets of disputed
questions. The questions On the Knowledge of Christ (De
scientia Christi), which develop his illumination theory of
knowledge, probably came out of his inception as Master in 1254. The
questions On the Mystery of the Trinity (De mysterio
Trinitatis), which elaborated his view of God, were likely the
last ones he wrote (Hayes 1992, 40–44; 1979, 24–29).  Both were
composed in a lofty style that gives no evidence of the conflict
embroiling Paris at the time. The third set of disputed questions,
however, were On Evangelical Perfection (De perfectione
evangelica) and consisted in a defense of the friars’ way of
life, under attack by non-mendicant Masters led by William of
St. Amour. In October 1256, Pope Alexander IV ordered the secular
Masters at Paris to accept Bonaventure and the Dominican Thomas of
Aquino in their rightful places as Masters of Theology, but it was not
until 12 August 1257 that they did so. But six months earlier
Bonaventure had been appointed Minister
 General.[6]
 In addition to the normal magisterial writings, Bonaventure also
wrote On Retracing the Arts to Theology (Opusculum de
reductione artium ad theologiam) while Master; and probably in
1257, while leaving the University, he managed to compose his
Breviloquium, a “short reading” that contains in
outline the main theses of a theological summa that would never be
composed. 
From this point on, Bonaventure’s writing reflected the needs of the
Order, but he did not cast aside his philosophical mind.  Bonaventure
quickly set a firm direction for the Order in an “encyclical
letter” to all the friars on 23 April 1257, which admonished
them to recover the “somewhat tarnished” luster of the
Order. The Minister General followed with three tracts written in
1259–60 for the spiritual edification of the friars: A Soliloquy
about Four Mental Exercises (Soliloquium de quatuor
mentalibus exercitiis), The Tree of Life (Lignum
vitae), and The Triple Way (De Triplici
via).
Bonaventure’s most influential work over the centuries was composed at
this time. For Francis’s feast day in October, 1259, Bonaventure
visited Mt. Alverna, the very place where Francis himself had received
a mystical vision of Christ “under the appearance” of
“a Seraph having six wings” and had had “imprinted
in his flesh” the stigmata or wounds of
 Christ[7]
 Here Bonaventure conceived the idea for his Journey of the Mind
to God (Itinerarium mentis in Deum), a mental and
spiritual journey to God whose basic outline—though not its
details—could be understood by even the simplest friar. The
journey follows the route first charted by St.  Augustine—from
the exterior world to the interior mind, and from the interior but
inferior human mind to the superior mind, namely, to God. Bonaventure
allegorically understood the six wings of the angelic Seraph Francis
saw to stand for six ways God can be approached and therefore arranged
his Journey into seven chapters. The two lower wings of the
Seraph symbolize seeing God through “footprints
(vestigia),” signs in the sub-human world that point to
God, including signs in the physical universe itself (c. 1) and signs
found in the sensory life humans have in common with other animals
(c. 2). The two middle wings of the Seraph symbolize seeing God in his
“image,” namely, in humans understood as bearing within
their intellectual nature special signs pointing to God.  Here
Bonaventure distinguished signs of God found in the
“natural” exercise of the mind in theoretical knowledge
(c.  3) from those found in its exercise in the practical sphere
“reformed by grace” (c. 4). The two highest wings of the
Seraph symbolize seeing God in himself, first in the way reason sees
God as having one divine nature (c. 5) and then as faith sees God in
the Trinity of persons (c. 6). These three sets of twin
“steps” culminate in the “mental and mystical
transport” found in mystical experience (c. 7), the end of the
Journey. For each step, Bonaventure used material from
earlier writings; but the Journey, like all his later works,
is only a sketch the Minister General knew he would never have the
leisure to complete. The result is his writing achieves a combination
of scriptural imagery, philosophic depth, mystical yearning, and
density more meditative than demonstrative. But the Journey
does provide an appropriate outline for looking at Bonaventure’s
philosophy. After considering his views on the relation of philosophy,
faith, and theology (Section 2), we shall look respectively at
Bonaventure’s views on physical creation (Section 3), human nature and
cognition (Section 4), and on God (Section 5).
The General Chapter of 1260 held in Narbonne, France, the first where
Bonaventure presided, ratified his codification of the legal statutes
under which Franciscans lived, known as the “Constitutions of
Narbonne” and also asked him to write a definitive Life of
St. Francis, which he did in 1261. These two works set the Order
on a moderate course that lasted for centuries and led Franciscans to
call Bonaventure their “second founder.”
For most of the period from 1257 through 1266 Bonaventure trekked
through France and Italy by foot, as did all friars when they
traveled.  In 1266 he returned to Paris, where his friars were under
attack both from conservatives in the Theology faculty and from
radicals in Arts.  Bonaventure began a series of writings devoted
primarily to moral matters: Collations on the Ten
Commandments (Collationes de decem praeceptis), Lent of
1267; Collations on the Seven Gifts of the Holy Spirit
(Collationes de septem donis Spiritus sancti), Lent of 1268;
a defense of the friars bearing the Socratic title Apologia
pauperum (Defense of the Mendicants), 1269. On 10
December 1270, Etienne Tempier, bishop of Paris, condemned certain
erroneous Aristotelian propositions. During Easter-tide of 1273
Bonaventure delivered his magisterial Collations on the
Hexameron (Collationes in Hexaemeron).
The last period of Bonaventure’s life saw him rise to become one of
the most prominent men in Christendom. During the three year Papal
vacancy, from 29 November 1268 to 1 September 1271, Bonaventure
preached an important sermon in Viterbo and was probably instrumental
in the invention of conclave. He is said to have been offered the
papacy by the electors and to have suggested Teobaldi Visconti
instead.  After Teobaldi’s election as Pope Gregory X, he appointed
Bonaventure cardinal on 28 May
 1273,[8]
 where he preached on reunification of eastern and western Churches, a
major goal of the council which seemed to have been achieved when he
suddenly fell ill on 15 July 1274 and “at the hour of Matins
died Br. Bonaventure of happy memory, Bishop of Albano, who was a man
eminent for his knowledge and eloquence (homo eminentis scientie
et eloquentie), a man outstanding for his sanctity and
acknowledged for the excellence of his life, both religious and
moral…Br. Peter of Tarantasia [also a Cardinal] celebrated the
funeral mass and preached on the theme ‘I am saddened over you,
my brother Jonathan.’ There were many tears and much weeping,
for the Lord had given him such grace that the hearts of all who saw
him were seized with a desire for his
 love.”[9]
Without exception, every word of philosophy Bonaventure ever wrote is
contained in works explicitly religious—in sermons, works of
spiritual direction, and theology. He never wrote the kind of
introductions to the principles of metaphysics and natural philosophy
that Thomas Aquinas composed in his On Being and Essence
(De ente et essentia) and On the Principles of
Nature (De principiis naturae), nor did he comment on
Aristotle’s works. Commentators writing during the twentieth century
neo-thomistic revival compared Bonaventure with three other thinkers:
Aristotle, Augustine, and Aquinas. P. Mandonnet thought he had no
philosophy of his own, but was an Augustinian theologian, pure and
simple, all of whose conclusions depend on faith. E. Gilson thought
Bonaventure developed an Augustinian philosophy within his theology:
“with St. Bonaventure the mystical synthesis of mediaeval
Augustinianism was fully formed, just as that of Christian
Aristotelianism was fully formed with St. Thomas.” F. Van
Steenberghen thought his philosophy a failed Aristotelianism separate
from but at the service of his Augustinian
 theology.[10]
 None of these interpretations quite captures Bonaventure’s relation
to these three philosophers or his own approach to the relations among
reason, faith, and theology, because they implicitly employed a
Thomistic model for being an Aristotelian, with the result that
Bonaventure’s failures derive from his not being the kind of
Aristotelian Thomas Aquinas was.
Bonaventure’s approach to Aristotle was quite different from Albert
and Thomas. He felt no need for detailed knowledge of the text of
Aristotle. As a student in Arts he had learned from his Masters, not
from detailed study of Aristotle’s text, broadly Aristotelian
philosophical principles—the categories and transcendentals, the
causes and predicables, and fundamental notions like potency and act,
possible and necessary—sufficient to do his own work. As a
philosopher and theologian, he was perfectly capable of using such
borrowed principles to draw his own conclusions, ones which he himself
said depended more on Alexander of Hales than on any philosopher:
“For I do not intend to advocate new opinions, but to reweave
the common and approved ones.” Consequently, Bonaventure was not
a failed Aristotelian for the simple reason that he never tried to be
an Aristotelian in the Dominican way at all. On the other hand, while
Augustine was clearly Bonaventure’s favorite theological authority, he
was not, properly speaking, an Augustinian. Even when he draws
Augustinian conclusions, Bonaventure does not employ Augustinian
arguments. In truth, Bonaventure was, broadly speaking, an
Aristotelian in his philosophical principles, but not in his
conclusions. A better way to describe his philosophical conclusions
and his way of drawing them is that his thought was
Franciscan in inspiration and Bonaventurean in
execution.
The pressing issue concerning philosophy, faith, and theology in the
1250s was how to set up theology as an Aristotelian demonstrative
science. Albert had done so in his commentary on the
Sentences (1243–9), which Bonaventure had on hand when
writing his own commentary. Demonstration is causal knowledge, and a
science in Aristotle’s sense is systematic knowledge of one limited
subject developed through demonstrating necessary conclusions by
making use of certain fundamental causal principles relevant to the
subject at hand.  The task theology had set itself, then, was to
discover and present systematically the truths set out in that most
unsystematic of books—the Bible.
Since a “science” is causal knowledge, Bonaventure devoted
the four questions of the prologue to his commentary on Book 1 of the
Sentences, which serves as his introduction the whole
“science” of theology, to its four causes—efficient,
final, formal, and material. These causes in turn clarify the
relations between philosophy, faith, and theology.
Since science exists as an intellectual habit in the mind of the
knower, the efficient cause of any book of theology is the
author who wrote it, Peter Lombard in the case of his
Sentences, Bonaventure himself in the case of his commentary.
Lombard was no mere scribe, compiler, or commentator; he was an
“author,” and the same is true of Bonaventure
himself. This simple point distinguishes faith, whose sole efficient
cause is God working through grace, from both philosophy and theology,
whose efficient cause is the human mind, though even here God has a
role to play.
When he came to clarify the end of theology, Bonaventure
understood that Aristotle had sharply distinguished practical
science—whose end is deeds—from theoretical
science—whose end is knowledge. So he asks whether theology is
“for the sake of contemplation or for the sake of our becoming
good.” The answer is that theology is more perfect than any
philosophical science because it breaks through the bounds of this
Aristotelian dichotomy. Neither theoretical knowledge nor practical
deeds get to the center of the moral life, which is love—both
the “affection” of love and the theological virtue of
charity.  The kind of intellectual virtue that prepares the mind for
charity is a “wisdom” that “involves knowledge and
affection together.” The “knowledge that Christ died for
us,” for example, is far different from the knowledge of the
geometer or the knowledge of the general. Consequently, theological
wisdom is both “for the sake of contemplation and also for our
becoming good, but principally for the sake of our becoming
good” through enlivening our knowledge and deeds with Christian
“affection”.
The form that produces “science” is its
“method of proceeding.” Now “the end imposes
necessity on the means, since ‘teeth are sharp in order to
cut,’ as Aristotle says.” Since theology is
“designed to promote the faith,” it employs “the
method of argumentation or inquiry” first developed by
Aristotle. By adapting the philosophical method to the data of faith,
theology attempts to “confound the adversaries of the
faith,” “strengthen those weak in their faith,” and
“delight those whose faith is complete.” Bonaventure
situated theology within the hierarchy of the sciences by adverting to
Aristotle’s notion of “subalternated sciences.” The
Philosopher had recognized that optics—which studies visible
lines—is a science “subalternated” to
geometry—which studies lines as such. Theology depends upon
Scripture in a similar way, for scripture offers certain truths to be
believed, but theology looks at the same truths “as made
intelligible.” In this way, theology is different from the faith
it tries to understand and from the Scripture that offers faith to
 us.[11]
To understand theology as a “science” making faith
intelligible, Bonaventure must clarify its material cause.
Determining that material cause of theology is the same as
settling on its subject. On this point, there had been
considerable dispute among the Masters. Aristotle’s
“sciences” were all limited to a particular genus, such as
“animal” or “soul” or “memory” or
“ethics.” Even his universal science of metaphysics was
limited to studying substances; it eschewed the other categories.
Theology, by contrast, cuts across all genera and includes God, who is
not confined within any genus. Bonaventure was familiar with many
accounts of the subject of theology: “things and signs,”
the work of “reparation for sin,” “Christ—head
and members,” “God,” and “the object of
belief” (credibile). To throw light on these conflicting
answers, Bonaventure turned to his study of the Arts. Priscian had
noted three different senses of the subject of grammar. Its subject in
the sense of its “root principle” is the
“letter” that makes up words; its subject conceived as an
“integral whole” is “a fitting and complete
oration;” and its subject conceived as “universal
whole” is “meaningful sound, articulated and
ordered.” There are three correlative senses of the subject of
theology: “God” is the “principle” of the
subject and “Christ—head and members” is the
“integral whole,” the entirety of what theology
studies. But the most important sense of “subject” is the
“universal whole.” Therefore, “the subject of this
book, properly speaking,” is the “object of belief,”
a subject that lets theology range over all realities and all thoughts
about which one can have religious faith.
Bonaventure does not explicitly address the principles of theology.
But he further clarifies its “subject” in a way that
points to those principles. To faith, Scripture adds the notion of
“authority,” and to the faith and authority of Scriptural
revelation, theology adds “proof.” Theology presupposes
faith but adds to it rational demonstrations about matters of faith.
Consequently, Bonaventure adds a telling qualification to his
description of the subject of theology. Theology’s subject is the
object of belief “in so far as the believable is transformed
into the notion of the intelligible, and this happens by the addition
of
 reasoning.”[12]
 With this concise formula, Bonaventure includes within theology both
religious belief transformed by arguments from natural reason and
natural reason transformed by arguments based on religious
revelation. If so, then theology must have the kinds of principles
that make possible both kinds of arguments: the fundamental truths of
faith drawn from the Bible and tradition, but also fundamental truths
of reason. What makes all such basic truths theological is their
argumentative function. Theological arguments may draw from revelation
by using revealed truths as premises and they may draw from reason by
using rational truths as premises. Both kinds of arguments are
theological because of the use to which they are put. In this way,
philosophical reasoning has an integral place within the
domain of Bonaventurean theology.
Bonaventure showed how philosophical reasoning works in theology in
the very structure of his disputed question On the Mystery of the
Trinity. Each question is divided into two articles, the first
proven using rational premises and the second proven using premises
drawn from faith. In Question 1, for example, God is rationally proven
to exist in Art. 1, then shown to be a trinity of persons using
arguments based on faith and reason in Art. 2. Theology, then,
consists most fundamentally in the understanding that results from
joining rational arguments and faith-based arguments
 together.[13]
 The same mode of reasoning is found in On Reducing the Arts to
Theology. Here “reduction” consists in developing
analogies that move the mind from the liberal arts to theology and
back again. Bonaventure argues for each point by combining one claim
based on reason with another based on revelation, as though they were
wall and buttress of the cathedral of theology. Philosophical
reasoning, then, is an absolutely integral part of Bonaventure’s
faith-based theology.
In the first step of the Journey Bonaventure focuses upon the
sensible objects of the physical world around us, both taken in
themselves and in reference to our sense awareness of them. Like all
creatures, sensible things are understood to be signs that ultimately
can direct humans to the divine art or wisdom through which all things
have been made. Bonaventure’s semiotics distinguishes four sorts of
signs. All creatures can be seen as “shadows”
(umbra) and “vestiges” (lit. footprints,
vestigia): “For a creature is called a shadow based on
its properties which point to God in some type of causality in an
indeterminate way. But a creature is called a vestige based on
properties which point to God as triple cause–efficient, formal,
and final cause; for example, the properties: one, true, and
 good.”[14] 
 In addition, Bonaventure posits two higher types of semiosis
pertinent solely to rational creatures, which are “images”
(imago) pointing to the First Principle through its properly
rational powers which have their source and highest object in God and
“likenesses” (similitudo) of God to the extent
that they are recipients of divine grace and conform themselves to the
divine will. All creatures, from rocks to angels, are signs in the
sense of shadows and traces of God, for they all bear a relation of
causal dependency upon God as their source; but only rational
creatures can have the divine as an object of their activities and,
for that reason, can conform themselves to the divine will and become
likenesses of God.
Bonaventure’s understanding of the physical world is heavily indebted
to two fundamental sources: the Biblical account of creation, mediated
by Patristic commentaries, and the Aristotelian view of nature, taken
chiefly from Aristotle’s writings on natural philosophy, such as the
Physics (Physica) and On the Heavens
(De caelo), but combined with the commentaries of Averroes,
the tracts of Avicenna, and the Timaeus of Plato in the Latin
translation of Chalcidius. Bonaventure constructs a view of the
physical world that is indebted to both of his fundamental sources,
but ultimately gives the Scriptural text and the related Patristic
tradition precedence whenever his sources come into conflict. His
manner of synthesizing those sources into a coherent and impressive
whole is what gives his views on nature their distinctive
character.
The tension between the newly translated Aristotelian corpus and the
traditional theological teaching of the Church regarding the doctrine
of creation was well understood by Bonaventure’s time. Indeed, the
prohibitions of 1215 and 1231 regarding the teaching of the
Aristotelian writings on natural philosophy had given way to the
direct teaching of Aristotle in the Faculty of Arts by the time
Bonaventure took his master of arts degree at the University of Paris,
and by the time he left the University, the Aristotelian corpus in its
entirety was a subject of examination for candidates for degrees in
the Faculty of Arts. Yet the Aristotelian doctrine of the eternity of
the world was given various interpretations. Some favored a benign
interpretation, claiming that all Aristotle meant in Physics
VIII was that the world and its motion did not arise from some earlier
motion, but rather time, moveable things, and motion were all coeval
and
 concomitant.[15]
 Others, however, chief among them Robert Grosseteste, argued that the
views of Aristotle should be taken at face value and what the
Stagirite intended was the eternity of the past; the Greek Fathers and
Aristotle’s own commentators both were in accord that the Aristotelian
outlook involved the beginninglessness of the past and unoriginated
 matter.[16]
Bonaventure’s own position takes its origins from a combination of
elements coming from Alexander of Hales and Grosseteste.  Following
the lead of the latter, Bonaventure rejects, albeit with some
hesitation, the benign reading of the Stagirite; in all likelihood,
Aristotle did intend to teach that the world was beginningless:
Yet the most striking feature of Bonaventure’s account of the
philosophers is the manner in which he juxtaposes the doctrine of
creation, as he understands it, with the philosophical theory of
origins. According to Bonaventure, only two theories regarding the
origin of the cosmos are really tenable: first, the theory of the
pagan philosophers according to which the world is eternal and the
matter of the universe is without ultimate causal origin; second, the
Christian doctrine of creation according to which the universe depends
entirely for its being on God, is produced “from nothing (ex
nihilo),” and is temporally finite in the past. The third
possibility, namely that the world is both produced from nothing and
eternal, Bonaventure vehemently rejects on the grounds that such a
position is inherently contradictory:
Returning to the last argument, we find the reasoning to which
Bonaventure refers. The argument is an elegant synthesis and
restatement of the position of Parisian theologians since the time of
William of Auxerre, but is especially indebted to the
Quaestiones of Alexander of Hales. Everything that depends
entirely for its being on something else is produced by that thing
from nothing. The world depends entirely for its being on God. Hence,
the world must be produced from nothing. If the world is produced from
nothing, it must either arise out of the “nothing” as out
of matter or out of the “nothing” as out of a point of
origin. The world cannot arise out of nothing as out of matter. Thus
the world must arise out of nothing as out of a point of origin. If,
however, the world arises out of nothing as out of a point of origin,
then the world has being after non-being. Nothing having being after
non-being can be eternal. The world, as a created thing, has being
after non-being. Therefore, the world, precisely as created “out
of nothing,” cannot be
 eternal.[19]
 The philosophical force of the expression that there be a logical
moment at which we could say that the world is not and with reference
to which the world begins to be. The ontological reference of such a
logical moment is the divine eternity with respect to which
(‘after’ which) the world begins.
To Bonaventure’s mind, the creationist view of the universe alone
accounts for the total being of the universe in the sense of
explaining both its structure and the fact that it exists; the view of
the ancients only explains the order and the pattern of the universe
without reaching the depths of accounting for why the universe exists
at all. A sign of this shortcoming is to be seen in the shared
presupposition of Plato and Aristotle that matter is unoriginated.
Furthermore, to the extent that the ancient pagan views of the
universe involve the infinity of past time, with all the philosophical
difficulties that the eternity of past time entails, natural reason
would seem capable of arriving, in principle, at the conclusion that
the world was created, even though, historically speaking, the
greatest of the ancient philosophers failed to do so.
The conflict between Scriptural sources and the Aristotelian writings
on the issue of the primordial state of matter is not so severe,
because in the Aristotelian corpus there is no description of the
primordial state of matter, and the other sources available to
Bonaventure are themselves in disagreement. Augustine, for example,
had suggested in his literal commentary on Genesis that the matter of
the world could have been made all at once, whereas in his
Confessions (Confessiones) he had suggested that
there might be an indeterminate and inchoate initial state of
matter. This possibiliity was further corroborated by such pagan
authors as Plato and Ovid, who had posited a primordial chaotic state
of matter out of which the present cosmic order gradually emerged
(Plato, Timaeus 52D-53C, 54–55; Ovid, Metamorphoses,
43:5–45:7).
Bonaventure begins by distinguishing the consideration of matter from
the actual existence of matter in the order of natural
 history.[20]
 We may consider matter simply as a constitutive principle of things
and as such it is pure potency; this is the way that the concept of
matter functions in Aristotle’s Physics and, to Bonaventure’s
mind, how Augustine spoke of matter in the Confessions. But
we may also think of matter as it actually exists in time. In this
respect, matter never exists and cannot exist as lacking all
form. Such a claim, however, does not require that material creation
was brought forth as fully formed, even if such a position might be
more philosophically defensible than its
 opposite.[21]
 Instead, Bonaventure suggests that physical matter was created in a
state wherein it had a tendency and capacity to admit many different
forms, though it had none of them in its own right. Rather, its
potentiality to develop distinct forms required further external,
divine agency in order for the distinct things having diverse forms to
fully
 emerge.[22]
 Physical matter’s properties in its incomplete state included
extension and visibility (properties arising from the form common to
all physical things, namely, light). These features are still shared
by all the items in the physical world, even though Bonaventure
admits, in accord with the Aristotelian teaching on the heavens, that
heavenly bodies, such as the stars, have matter that differs in kind
from that of terrestrial things. Accordingly, after things were fully
produced matter was twofold, terrestrial and celestial, but in its
primordial state physical matter enjoyed a corresponding unity that
was one of contiguity, i.e., it was one
 mass.[23]
 This primordial unity of physical matter continues to have some
scientific bearing for Bonaventure since it grounds the consideration
of the general physicist who may prescind from the process of
generation and corruption and consider bodies simply in terms of their
mobility in place and
 extension.[24]
Bonaventure’s treatment of light is mainly found in the discussion of
light in his commentary on Lombard’s Sentences, Bk. 2, d.
13. In this theological context, light mainly bears upon the work of
the six days of creation, and Bonventure must take a position on the
Genesis account of the creation of light. Though he acknowledges
Augustine’s spiritualizing interpretation of light, an interpretation
that identifies the light spoken of in Genesis with the creation and
activities of the angels, Bonaventure inclines to a more literal
 interpretation.[25]
 This means that Bonaventure had to take a position on the
contemporary debates on light and its nature.
The two positions that Bonaventure discusses are what we may call a
broadly Aristotelian position, one eventually adopted by Thomas
Aquinas, and a broadly Augustinian position advocated by Robert
Grosseteste in his On light (De luce). According to
the first, light is simply an accidental form, one found in degrees in
different bodies, but according to the second, light is perhaps a
substance or at least a substantial form communicating extension and
visibility to physical things.
Bonaventure discounts the possibility that light is a substance,
because it is purely active and if it were a substance in its own
right it would be God and not a creature. He does allow, however, that
light is a substantial form and is the substantial form that is
concomitant with the mass of matter in its primordial
 state.[26]
 In this originating condition, light gave the mass of matter its
extension and visibility and the hierarchy of heavenly bodies
corresponds to the hierarchy of things capable of partaking either
more or less in the light that renders bodies active and extended. For
Bonaventure, then, light is a substantial form, but only the partial
perfection of any given physical substance, whether celestial or
terrestrial. Since Bonaventure endorses, usually without any elaborate
argumentation, the general claim that there is a plurality of
substantial forms within any composite thing, his doctrine of light
really means that light is the first form, endowing each thing with
extension, and preparing the way for further perfections such as the
forms of the elements or the forms of mixtures or compounds.
The transition in the order of natural history from bodies that are
simply such, extended and endowed with the ability to act and be acted
upon, to the bodies of plants and animals is explained in part through
the motions of the celestial bodies and their causal influences on
matter. In part, however, matter itself has latent structures that
simply await the correct circumstances and conditions to cause the
emergence of a higher type of body. These latent structures,
originally sown into matter at its creation, Bonaventure calls,
following the terminology of St. Augustine, rationes
seminales or seminal reasons, a term hearkening back to the
cosmology of the ancient Stoics.  Seminal reasons amount to a
lingering impact of the creator on the matter of the physical world
since their presence in matter originates with creation. In physical
science, Bonaventure believes seminal reasons help to explain the
successive emergence of the different kinds of bodies suitable for
higher and higher types of life. But this process of gradual emergence
does not apply to the creation of human life, since human souls for
Bonaventure are incorruptible and can only arise through the direct
action of the creator.
Though from our post-Darwinian perspective we may be tempted to see in
the doctrine of seminal reasons, whether in Augustine or Bonaventure,
a curious, yet awkward anticipation of the doctrine of evolution,
similarities between the doctrine of seminal reasons and certain
elements in evolutionary theory are more apparent than real.  First,
though seminal reasons do provide directionality and progression for
the succession of physical types in natural history, they are
themselves latent forms within matter and not reducible to more
fundamental mechanical or chemical processes; rather, they underlie
such processes. Second, seminal reasons are never appealed to in order
to explain the demise of one living species and the emergence of
another species to replace the former, a key feature of Darwinian
explanations. Third, seminal reasons are not, as we have just seen,
universal in their application to the living things that occur within
the order of natural history; human beings, at least in terms of their
souls, fall outside the range of influence of seminal reasons.
Bonaventure’s doctrines regarding living things are mainly inspired by
an Aristotelian biology. Living things are such thanks to the kind of
forms they have, namely, soul, which is defined as the first actuality
of a body having life potentially. Soul is understood as the form that
makes a thing alive and able to enjoy the type of life that it
does. Consequently, souls are termed either vegetative, sensitive, or
rational, according to the functions that the living things themselves
exercise.
The world as it is revealed to us through the senses provides the
means for our re-entering ourselves and ascending to higher things.
Furthermore, the senses themselves are equally signs of higher
things.
Physical things considered in their own right evidence “weight,
number, and measure” (Psalm 83:8), thereby causing us to
contemplate their own measure, beauty, and order. These features are
grounded in the activities and natural powers of sensible
substances. The nature of sensible substances accordingly expresses in
their actions and interactions the measure, beauty, and order of their
origin and thereby attest to the power, wisdom, and goodness of the
Source from which they
 spring.[27]
 Likewise, the origin, size, number, beauty, fullness, function, and
origin of physical things point to the Divine Source and its essential
properties of power, wisdom, and
 goodness.[28]
The pointing of physical things towards their Source finds its
parallel in sense cognition itself, which also points towards that
same Source. Drawing his point of departure from the Neoplatonic theme
of macrocosm and microcosm, Bonaventure discovers an analogy between
Aristotelian cosmology and the process of sensation. Each sensible
object generates a likeness of itself in the medium through which it
is perceived, and that likeness in turn generates another likeness
successively in the sense organ, causing the sense power to apprehend
the sensible object. The process so described reflects the process of
the emanation of forms from the heavenly bodies and also the manner in
which creatures, going forth from their Principle, return to their
Source through the exercise of their natural activities. A similar
pattern emerges within the different acts exercised by each sense
power: the sense apprehends (apprehensio) the object,
delights (delectatio) in its object, provided that the object
does not exceed the natural limits of the organ, and judges
(diiudicatio) or discriminates the quality of its
object. This last act, found in both the external senses and the
internal senses, takes on a special role for Bonaventure. Such a sense
judgement, through comparative awareness, detaches the object from a
given place and time, thereby preparing the way within the realm of
sense cognition for intellectual
 cognition.[29]
When we arrive at the threshold of intellectual cognition, we are
entering the next step along the Bonaventurian journey. This level of
creaturely being points to the Divine Source, but in ways that are
more direct than those in which sensible creatures do. In exercising
their powers of intellect and will, intellectual creatures discover
the highest and most perfect object of their powers in the Divine
Source of their being, since God is the First or Highest Truth and the
First or Chief Good. Accordingly, intellectual creatures have God as
their ultimate object, whereas all creatures have God as their Cause.
Consequently, intellectual creatures show themselves to be
“images” and “likenesses” of God, while they
show that all creatures are “shadows” and
“vestiges” of God.
Bonaventure traces out how intellectual creatures and intelligible
objects reflect the divine Source. If we begin with something as
immediate and basic as simple apprehension on the part of the human
intellect, we find that an object of simple apprehension (such as the
natural kind “dog”) is susceptible of definition. Yet
every definition requires a genus and a differentia. Through the
generic term we are led to a further object of simple apprehension,
usually itself susceptible of definition. If the genus is definable,
we may state its definition, but we shall eventually find ourselves
through continuing the process of definition arriving similarly at one
of the supreme general or Aristotelian categories; if the genus is not
definable, then we have arrived at one of the Aristotelian
categories. Once we arrive at a category, we confront an item not
susceptible of further definition, though it admits of description. If
the categorical item is an accident, it satisfies the description of
an accident as ‘being through another;’ if we are dealing
with substance, then the item we are considering satisfies the
description of substance as ‘being in itself’.
The resolution of all our items of simple apprehension into the
concept of being is metaphysically and epistemologically crucial:
metaphysically, it opens up a route of argumentation that leads to the
existence of God; epistemologically, such a resolution means that
behind all, even the most determinate and specific, conceptions of
things lies a transcendental awareness of being that informs all of
our knowledge. If we take the concept of substance as being in itself,
we cannot come to know a particular substance’s definition without the
concept of being presupposed in the background, and in addition we are
concomitantly aware of the transcendental properties of being (unity,
truth, and goodness) in any such notion. Such co-extensive
transcendental properties, however, are only one of the two types of
properties that belong to being; the other transcendental properties
(later called disjunctive properties) prove extremely useful for
increasing our metaphysical knowledge. Being may be conceived of as
either actual or potential, absolute or dependent, prior or posterior,
immutable or mutable. Yet to conceive of being as potential,
dependent, posterior, or mutable requires that we already be
acquainted with being as actual, independent, prior and immutable. In
other words, the more perfect of the two disjuncts in any of the
disjunctive transcendentals must be an item we acknowledge in our
awareness of being:
At one level, this line of argumentation is part of an argument for
the existence of God. But, at another level, it is an effort to
demarcate the proper object of the human mind as being and to point
out that, if we reflect upon the notion of being (ens) in
terms of its actuality (esse) we are inexorably led to the
conclusion that there is a Perfect
 Being.[31]
 We reach the same kind of conclusion if we reflect, not upon the
primary object of the mind, but upon its operations. The certainty of
judgment requires that we be aware of the impossibility of our being
mistaken combined with our awareness that the truth that we know
cannot be otherwise; indeed, the most fundamental truths we know are
all immutable. But, following Augustine, Bonaventure claims that there
is no source for immutable truth other than God, since God is the only
immutable and unchanging
 Being.[32]
What we find when we look within ourselves is that we are pointed
above to God, who is the light of the mind, guaranteeing the certainty
of our judgments. This thesis, usually called by scholars divine
illumination, was quite ancient by Bonaventure’s time; it was part of
the philosophical teaching of Augustine. What makes Bonaventure’s
version so philosophically distinctive is that he proposes to
synthesize the epistemology of divine illumination with the
Aristotelian account of abstraction. Bonaventure is thoroughly
committed to the integral role played by the agent and possible
intellects in human intellectual cognition. The agent and possible
intellects are not separated substances, in the way envisaged by
Averroes, but properly human faculties essential to the constitution
of the human soul.
 [33]
 Hence, unlike his contemporaries, who often thought of the human
possible intellect as being illumined by God functioning as an agent
intellect, Bonaventure assigns each human being an agent
intellect. Differing from other of his contemporaries, Bonaventure
also insists that the possible intellect always remains the recipient
of the intelligible species abstracted by the agent intellect and the
faculty of apprehension; accordingly, the possible intellect continues
to be part of the human soul even when the soul is separated by death
from the
 body.[34]
 Abstraction is, for Bonaventure, the source of our concepts of
things. How then does illumination work and why is it necessary? The
divine light works together with the human intellectual faculties as a
“regulative and moving cause,” ensuring that the human
mind grasps the immutable truth of the creature; it does not and
cannot replace the human intellectual faculties in their proper
 roles.[35]
 The appeal to divine illumination is justified, primarily if not
exclusively, for the reason that there is an incommensurability
between our intellectual faculties and the ordinary objects we know as
created and mutable, on the one hand, and the immutable truths we come
to know. Inasmuch as things cannot give what they do not have, the
only source of eternal and immutable truth is God’s Light.
In general, the activities proper to intellectual creatures point much
more directly than merely sensible or sentient creatures to the divine
Source. Both the objects of the understanding and the will are
ultimately rooted in God as Being and Goodness. This more direct
pointing to God on the part of the intellectual creature is also seen
in the intellectual creature’s constitution, both psychological and
ontological. The image of God is found in the fundamental
interrelatedness of the memory, understanding, and will. Each act of
memory calls to mind the past, is aware of the present and anticipates
the future; each act of understanding presupposes the memory of first
principles; and each act of will presupposes the act of understanding
and moves the mind to further acts of memory. This triadic structure
of the human mind reflects its Source: the Perfect Being that is
simultaneously, Highest Unity, Supreme Truth, and Ultimate
 Good.[36]
 Likewise, the ontological constitution of intellectual creatures,
humans and angels, moves us along the road to the consideration of
God. Each intellectual creature is composed of act and potency,
metaphysical principles that Bonaventure understands to be
co-extensive with matter and
 form.[37]
 Accordingly, even intellectual creatures are composed of form and
 matter.[38]
 For Bonaventure, it is the conjunction of form and matter that
explains the individuality of each
 thing.[39]
 But that even the highest creatures are composed of potency and act
in this fashion entails that they are derived from a Source that is
not so composed, but is, instead, pure act and hence pure form.
In his Collations on the Hexameron Bonaventure read
Genesis spiritually, distinguishing seven levels of
“vision” corresponding to the seven days of creation. The
first level is “understanding naturally given” or
philosophy, which he divided following the Stoics into logic, ethics,
and physics, the last further subdivided following Aristotle into
natural philosophy, mathematics, and metaphysics. The focus of
metaphysics is on causal relations between God and creatures. Here
“the philosophers—the finest and the ancient
philosophers—came to this conclusion: there is a beginning, and
an end, and an exemplar cause” of the
 universe,[40]
 that is, God is the efficient, final, and formal cause of the
world. Since efficient causality connects metaphysics to physics and
final causality connects it with ethics, the “true
metaphysician” focuses on exemplar
 causality,[41]
 a kind of formal causality which is the grand theme of Bonaventurean
metaphysics.
To pursue this theme, Bonaventure made use of materials drawn from
earlier philosophers about three important points: the
transcendentals, the three Neoplatonic routes to God, and the
difference between scientific principles and conclusions. About the
transcendentals, Aristotle made metaphysics the science of
substance. Centuries later, Avicenna transformed it into a science
truly universal in scope by insisting that it study the nine
accidents, as well as substance, and also the attributes that
transcend the categories (Avicenna, Metaphysica, 1.5, 8).
Philip the Chancellor codified this doctrine into four
transcendentals—being, one, true, and good (Aertsen 1996,
25–70).  Bonaventure opens consideration of God in his Commentary
on the Sentences by noting that the categorical attributes of
being are “its special properties which characterize its
imperfection,” but the transcendentals are “its
general conditions which characterize its
 perfection.”[42]
 The transcendentals therefore set the terms for treating God.
When he read “the books of the Platonists,” Augustine
opened up three routes to proving the existence of God, though he
himself explored only one. Arguments like Aristotle’s that begin in
the world must proceed from effect to cause and have been called
cosmological arguments, though
aitiological—meaning simply an argument uncovering
causes—seems a better description. When Augustine
turned within his mind he opened up two other routes to God. The
second route also proceeds from effect to cause, but starts within the
mind and searches out God as the ultimate cause of the mind’s
knowledge.  This is the illumination argument for
God. Augustine’s turn inward also opened up a third route, later given
by Kant the unhappy name of ontological argument. The fullest
development of this neoplatonic approach to God stood ready to be
realized, when all three routes, the aitiological, illuminationist,
and ontological, would be scouted out by one and the same
philosophical mind. That mind was not Augustine’s or Anselm’s but
Bonaventure’s.
If the transcendentals came primarily from Muslim Aristotelians,
especially Avicenna, and the three routes to God were opened by
Augustine, the last set of materials Bonaventure used to construct his
arguments for the existence of God came from Aristotle himself.
“Science” consists in knowledge of a limited subject
achieved through demonstrating conclusions about it based on
un-demonstrated principles. Bonaventure was one of a group of Parisian
theologians, including the Dominicans Albert and Thomas, who attempted
to set up Christian theology as an Aristotelian science. He therefore
approached the issue of the existence of God with a sharp distinction
between principles and conclusions in mind. The question he asks is
not “Does God exist?” but “Is the divine being so
true that it cannot be thought not to be?” This Anselmian
formulation offers two options: God’s existence is either a principle
or a demonstrated conclusion. Philosophers are inclined to pick one
route to God and reject all others, but Bonaventure had learned from
Francis, the poor man of Assisi, that the world is filled with signs
of God that even the simplest peasant can grasp. Bonaventure’s
response to the problem of the existence of God was therefore most
unusual. He pursued all three routes to God; and he even ranked them:
Illumination arguments make us “certain” of God’s
existence; aitiological arguments give us “more certain”
knowledge of God’s existence; while ontological arguments show that
God’s existence is “a truth that is most certain in itself, in
as far as it is the first and most immediate
 truth.”[43]
Let us look at each of them in turn.
The transcendental that initially opens up arguments for the existence
of God is “truth.” Bonaventure bases his illumination
argument on the epistemological sense of truth, inspired by
Augustine’s memorable description of his own inward route to God:
In his Commentary on the Sentences, Bonaventure extracted
from Augustine’s stirring rhetoric the logical core of the
illumination argument, reducing it to plain and dispassionate
syllogisms, as he had learned from his teachers in Arts at Paris:
Bonaventure understood that the step from a true proposition to divine
truth is a large one, so he advocates a moderate illuminationist
position, one that depends on both divine and created causes.
Bonaventure’s Augustinian illumination theory avoids the problems of
Platonism, which turns knowing the world into knowing God, and the
problems of Muslim illuminationism, which thought a creature could do
what it takes the infinite mind of God to
 accomplish.[45]
 “For certain knowledge, eternal reason is
necessarily involved as a regulative and motive cause, however, not as
the sole cause or in its full clarity, but along with a created
cause and as contuited by us ‘in part’ in accord with
our present state of
 life.”[46]
To explain the contribution of the “created” causes of
knowledge, Bonaventure noted that the content of human
knowledge comes from four kinds of “created” causes: the
passive intellect within the individual soul as material
cause, for it receives knowledge; the individual agent intellect as
efficient cause, for it abstracts the content of knowledge
from sensation; the essence of an individual creature known as
formal cause, for the creature is “what” we know;
and epistemological truth as end. These “proper
principles” of knowledge do not involve
 God.[47]
Above and beyond these “created” causes, knowledge also
requires an “eternal” cause. In the mental acts of
abstracting universals and arguing inductively, the human mind
generalizes well beyond the data of our experience. It is one thing to
be able to generalize so, quite another to be sure one has succeeded.
Intuition into the essence of a creature involves truths that are not
only universal, but also necessary and certain. God is acquainted with
the full extension of any universal, since the divine idea of any
truth consists in knowledge of that truth in absolutely all its
actual and possible instantiations. The infinite extension of
God’s knowledge is what makes divine understanding certain, and this
certainty in the divine mind is on loan, so to speak, to the human
mind. “If full knowledge requires recourse to a truth
which is fully immutable and stable, and to a light which is
completely infallible, it is necessary for this sort of knowledge to
have recourse to the heavenly art as to light and truth: a light,
I say, which gives infallibility to the [created] knower, and
a truth which gives immutability to the [created] object of
 knowledge.”[48]
 Here Bonaventure makes more precise Augustine’s “light”
and “truth.” They are the two sides of certitude, so it is
the certainty, and only the certainty, found in human knowledge that
requires divine illumination; all other features of human
knowledge–abstraction, universality, correspondence–come
from created causes.
The aitiological argument is “more certain,” because it
begins with a real effect outside the mind and therefore better fits
Aristotle’s model of demonstration. But Bonaventure does not follow
Aristotle’s argument from motion, because motion falls under the
categories. More promising were neoplatonic aitiological arguments
(Boethius Consolatio philosophiae III 10; Anselm,
Monologion 1–3), which combine an empirical premise with a
participation premise. This is how Bonaventure packed his aitiological
argument into a single syllogism: “Every truth and every created
nature proves and leads to the existence of the divine truth. For if
there is being by participation and from another, there must exist a
being due to its own essence and not from
 another.”[49]
For his empirical premise Bonaventure turns again to truth,
but ontological truth. All creatures are true to the extent that they
actualize the potential perfections of their natures, and they are
false to the extent that they fail to do so, because ontological truth
is “the indivision of act and potency.” So “in a
creature there is indivision combined with difference between
act and potency.” All creatures are partial
actualizations of truth. Ontological truth takes us to the heart of
Bonaventurean metaphysics. Aristotle’s definition of prime matter as
pure potency means that everything that contains potency of any sort,
even an angel, must contain matter. This universal hylomorphism leads
in turn to Bonaventure’s doctrine of being: “Matter gives
independent existence (existere) to form, while form gives
the act of being (essendi actum) to
 matter.”[50]
 Every created being (ens) is an ontological composite of
independent existence (existere) and being (esse),
where esse signifies the nature or essence of the thing. From
rocks to angels, all creatures are true to the extent that the
potencies of their “existence” given by matter are
realized through the perfection of their “being” through
form.
The participation premise moves from effect to cause within
the line of formal causality. A necessary condition for the existence
of any attribute by participation is that the same attribute
is present in its exemplar essentially, that is,
intrinsically. Participation does not immediately take us to God, but
initially describes relations between creatures. A statue or computer
can have certain human attributes–shape, color, size,
computational skill–but only because these features are caused
by the artisan who made it. This is how participation works within
the created order. It is transcendenal “truth” that
moves the argument beyond creatures to God. If incomplete realization
of an intrinsically imperfect categorical attribute–like white
or horse or dirt–implies that those attributes must also exist
in some other creature “essentially,” then transcendental
attributes should behave the same way. But no creature could be such
an exemplar. The exemplar for ontological truth must therefore be God,
who perfectly realizes his own essence, which is to say that God is
true “essentially.” In On the Mystery of the
Trinity, Bonaventure expands this line of argument further in the
direction of the transcendentals. There he identifies nine more
disjunctive transcendentals, in addition to the pair “by
participation” and “essentially,” where the lesser
implies the existence of the
 greater.[51]
Just as his illumination argument uncovered God as a kind of formal
and efficient cause of certitude, so Bonaventure’s aitiological
argument uncovers God as formal cause of truth in creatures. But in
addition it ends just where his ontological argument begins. For what
does an ontological argument do but peer into the inner logic of such
an exemplar essence and try to capture the logical consequence that it
must exist?
Bonaventure was the first thirteenth-century thinker to pay serious
attention to the ontological argument. He read the Proslogion
of Anselm through Aristotelian lenses. Now Aristotle had recognized
three different kinds of scientific principles: common axioms
governing all thought, so well known that no one can deny them, and
proper principles limited in range to a given science–its
definitions and postulates. Anselm seemed to mean that God’s existence
is an axiom of thought known by all humans, and Bonaventure agrees:
“since our intellect is never deficient in knowing about God
if it is, so it cannot be ignorant of God’s existence,
absolutely speaking, nor even think God does not
 exist.”[52]
While Anselm thought this conclusion rules out even the possibility of
atheism, Bonaventure more realistically shows how atheism is
possible. The problem is with our defective knowledge of God’s
nature. Error there can lead by logical inference to the
conclusion that God does not exist in the first place. We are
spontaneously theists, but can convince ourselves to become atheists.
Inadequate definition of God points to a second problem. Knowing God
exists is similar to knowing axioms because both are recognized by
all.  The difference is that we are quite certain “the whole is
greater than the part,” because the terms involved in this axiom
are so familiar to us; but about God’s existence we have more an
opinion than certain knowledge, because we lack an adequate definition
of God’s nature.
There are two remedies for the defects in our knowledge of
“what” God is, one taken from faith, the other from
reason.  Both make knowledge of God’s existence more like a postulate
known with certitude by the “wise” than like an axiom
recognized by “all” humans (Boethius, De
hebdomadibus, 40).  For Christian belief and for theology, God’s
existence is an article of faith. The other remedy is Bonaventure’s
adaptation of Anselm’s argument conceived as a philosophical argument
on behalf of a metaphysical postulate.
Bonaventure’s ontological argument contains two moments, so to speak,
one negative, the other positive. Negatively, Bonaventure’s
ontological argument proceeds as a reduction to absurdity of the
atheistic proposition. Anselm had taken a peculiar description of God,
“something than which a greater cannot be thought,” which
Augustine had used to argue through a reductio ad absurdum to
the conclusion that God must be incorruptible, and Boethius used to
argue that God must be good, and he had used it to argue by
reductio that God must exist in the first place. Bonaventure
recognized the affinity with arguing by reductio in support
of the principle of non-contradiction:
But his study of Aristotelian philosophy made Bonaventure more
sensitive than Anselm to the limitations of reductio
arguments. Positive insight into principles is more than negative
reductio leading up to principles, so snaring the atheist in
a contradiction is still one step away from affirming that God
exists. To make this step intelligible he emended the ontological
argument in a positive direction.
Bonaventure therefore explains what makes a proposition
“self-evident,” which in turn opens the way for deducing
God’s existence out of God’s essence.
Principles are “self-evident” (cf. Aristotle,
Topics, 100a31–b21).  In the second of Aristotle’s
modes of per se (Aristotle, Posterior Analytics
73a34–b3), the essence of the subject causes the
predicate. This provided Bonaventure with an ingenious explanation of
why principles are self-evident: “We know principles to the
extent that we understand the terms which make them up, because the
cause of the predicate is included in the subject.” If
the essence of the subject term is what connects it to the predicate
term in a self-evident proposition, then the essence of God must be
what makes “God exists” self-evident. The positive
ontological argument contains an inference to the existence of God
that runs through the divine essence.
Most descriptions of the divine essence are inappropriate for the
ontological argument, but the transcendentals are the right terms
because they do not imply imperfection, can be predicated
non-metaphorically of God, and are primordial, the “first
notions falling into the
 mind.”[54]
All more specific concepts presuppose transcendental
notions, and Anselm’s own formula was no exception to this rule. In
his Commentary on the Sentences Bonaventure used the
transcendental “true” as the middle term of his positive
ontological argument; in the disputed question On the Mystery of
the Trinity he used “good,” and in the Journey of
the Mind to God he used “being.”
In the Commentary, Bonaventure introduces his arguments for
God’s existence with an elaborate treatment of truth. As a relation,
truth always involves a comparison. Epistemological truth is an
“indivision” between the human mind and the thing known.
Ontological truth is an “indivision” between potency and
act within a creature; the more it fulfills its nature, the truer it
is. These two senses of truth open up a comparison of creature as
participant to God as exemplar. All three, epistemological,
ontological, participationist truths, are imperfect, combinations of
truth and falsity. They point to their exemplar, the one
“pure” truth, present only in God, where there is
“pure indivision mixed with no
 diversity.”[55]
 This last sense of truth Bonaventure uses in his ontological
argument:
Bonaventure includes the negative reasoning so prominent in Anselm’s
version, but to Anselm’s formula he adds “being itself”
and “the highest truth.” While each of these three
descriptions casts a different light on why the inference to God’s
existence is valid, Bonaventure here seems to prefer “the
highest truth” because the definition of truth as
“indivision” is the basis for re-conceiving the
ontological argument as establishing an “indivision”
between the middle term and the predicate “exists.” If the
“highest truth” is “pure indivision,” then the
highest truth cannot be divided off from existence.
In On the Mystery of the Trinity, Bonaventure changes the
focus of the ontological argument to goodness, with a memorable
result.  The basic notion of goodness is not by itself sufficient to
mount an ontological argument, but analysis of goodness uncovers the
relevant terms:
The logic of “the best” (optimum) is different
from the logic of “the good.” Since goodness completes or
perfects something, “the best” must be “a being
which is fully complete (ens completissimum).” Now what
is absolutely complete must possess all possible perfections. But
existence is not just a perfection, one component among many
making up such ontological completeness, it is the most
fundamental feature of such completeness. Consequently, such an
absolutely perfect being must exist. Bonaventure’s argument runs from
the subject “God,” through the middle terms “the
best” and “absolutely complete being,” to the
predicate “exists.” In the shorter and even more memorable
formulation, “If God is God, God is,” the premise If
God is God is not an empty tautology (Seifert 1992, 216–217).  It
means ‘if the entity to which the term God refers truly
possesses the divine essence.’ And the conclusion means that
such an entity must exist.
Bonaventure was well aware of criticisms of the ontological argument,
beginning with Gaunilo’s retort that the greatest of all possible
islands should also really exist. His reply is more effective than
Anselm’s because it uses the transcendentals. An island is an
inherently imperfect being (ens defectivum) because
categorical; but ens completissimum is not because a
 transcendental.[58]
In The Journey of the Mind to God, c. 5, Bonaventure focuses
the ontological argument on “being” and develops it far
beyond anything he had previously done. He qualifies esse in
two different ways, creating two different middle terms: “divine
being” (esse divinum) and “completely pure being
(esse purissimum).” First he uses “completely
pure being” to deduce the predicate “exists,” then
uses “divine being” to ensure that it is God who
is so proven to exist. In this way the basic steps of this argument
closely parallel those of the argument based on goodness: ‘God
(Deus) who is divine being (esse divinum) is also
seen to be completely pure being (esse purissimum) and
therefore must exist (est).’
Bonaventure
 begins[59]
 by repeating the essentials of the earlier versions of the argument,
but then moves well beyond them:
If “being itself” (ipsum esse) distinguishes the
being (esse) of a creature from its independent existence
(existere), adding the superlative completely pure
to being itself (esse purissimum) refers to the
notion of an essence that does not involve non-being in
any way: a completely pure or perfect essence. The notion of
esse purissimum does not presuppose the real existence of
God; rather, it implies that real existence. But at this point this
inference may not yet be clear, so Bonaventure devotes the rest of
this short text to showing why the notion of completely pure being
itself actually entails the real existence of God.
In contrast with creatures, which are mid-level on the scale of being
because they are open to existence and non-existence, the notions of
complete nothingness (omnino nihil) and completely pure being
(esse purissimum) have absolutely opposed implications for
existence. “Complete nothing-ness” is logically
inconsistent with real existence, so there is a perfectly valid
inference from the notion of nothing to non-being
(non-esse). Nothing cannot exist. If the nature of nothing
entails its non-existence, the nature of its opposite, completely
pure being, entails its real existence. Making use of the
categories of his own metaphysics in this way shows more effectively
than merely backing the mind into a contradiction why the ontological
inference is valid.
The basis for the argument thus far is a notion, not of God but of an
essence, completely pure, of non-being. One might ask where
Bonaventure acquires this notion, seemingly drawn from thin air. His
reply is that conceptual analysis of the first of all notions,
transcendental being (ens), reveals this purely metaphysical
notion.
Here Bonaventure peers into the notion of “a being”
(ens) and finds it has two component principles: independent
existence (existere), which gives the being the potential to
have a certain essence; and being (esse), the actuality of
such an essence. It is esse rather than existere
which “denominates the pure actuality of a being.” Here
“actuality” (actus) means ‘that which makes
the being actually intelligible, by giving it the actual essence it
has.’ This movement of conceptual analysis opens the
mind to see that we can understand a creature as “a being”
(ens) only by referring to the notion of an act of being
which is pure from non-being (esse purum), indeed, which is
pure from any non-being (esse purissimum). Implicit
within the very notion of transcendental “being”
and a presupposition of our understanding the notion of
transcendental being, is the notion of being with no hint of
non-being (esse purissimum). Even if only implicit, this
notion must be present in the mind of anyone who understands being
(ens), that is, everyone who understands anything at all.
Once it has been shown that esse purissimum is a notion which
implies real existence and that we all possess this notion as a
component of the fundamental notion of a being (ens), it
remains only to identify esse purissimum with God.
If esse purissimum really exists, as has been proven, it must
exist in one of three modes. But since particular and intentional
being cannot be completely perfect, esse purissimum must be
identical with the divine being.
The real but initially hidden starting point for Bonaventure’s
ontological argument in the Journey is the notion of
esse purissimum, taken not subjectively as existing as a
concept in a human mind, but in its objective
 meaning,[63]
 that is, as signifying a certain kind of quiddity or essence. The
achievement of the ontological argument, as Bonaventure saw it, is
twofold: it shows that this essence must really exist, and it shows
that this essence is none other than God.
Bonaventure locates knowledge of God’s existence within all three
parts of an Aristotelian science–as demonstrated conclusion, as
common axiom, and as proper postulate. It can be proven through two
kinds of demonstrations of the fact, by an illumination argument
starting inside the mind and an aitiological argument starting
outside. Such proofs proceed from created truth as a vestige
to the one God as its cause. But “God exists” is
also a principle recognized by virtually all humans, a kind of axiom
built upon creatures conceived as shadows of the one
divinity for whom explicit arguments specifying God’s causality are no
more needed than for other axioms. Finally, there are two ways God’s
existence is known as a postulate: first, through the ontological
argument, where the transcendental attributes found in creatures
function as vestiges providing the mind the notions it uses
in the argument for the one God’s existence; and second, as
an article of faith. Here faith is postulated on the authority of
revelation and is certain, but its certainty comes from God, not human
reason. And here, too, features of intellectual creatures, especially
humans, function as images and likenesses of the
Trinitarian God. Knowledge of God’s existence, in sum, is
ubiquitous. Thus spoke the follower of Francis.