Thomas was born in 1225 at Roccasecca, a hilltop castle from which 
the great Benedictine abbey of Montecassino is not quite visible, 
midway between Rome and Naples. At the age of five, he was entered at
Montecassino where his studies began. When the monastery became a 
battle site—not for the last time—Thomas was transferred 
by his family to the University of Naples. It was here that he came 
into contact with the “new” Aristotle and with the Order 
of Preachers or Dominicans, a recently founded mendicant order. He 
became a Dominican over the protests of his family and eventually 
went north to study, perhaps first briefly at Paris, then at Cologne 
with Albert the Great, whose interest in Aristotle strengthened 
Thomas's own predilections. Returned to Paris, he completed his 
studies, became a Master and for three years occupied one of the 
Dominican chairs in the Faculty of Theology. The next ten years were 
spent in various places in Italy, with the mobile papal court, at 
various Dominican houses, and eventually in Rome. From there he was 
called back to Paris to confront the controversy variously called 
Latin Averroism and Heterodox Aristotelianism. After this second 
three year stint, he was assigned to Naples. In 1274, on his way to 
the Council of Lyon, he fell ill and died on March 7 in the 
Cistercian abbey at Fossanova, which is perhaps twenty kilometers 
from Roccasecca. 
Little is known of Thomas's studies at Montecassino, but much is 
known of the shape that the monastic schools had taken. They were one
of the principal conduits of the liberal arts tradition which 
stretches back to Cassiodorus Senator in the 6th century. 
The arts of the trivium (grammar, rhetoric, logic) and those of the 
quadrivium (arithmetic, geometry, music and astronomy) were fragments
preserved against the ruinous loss of classical knowledge. They 
constituted the secular education that complemented sacred doctrine 
as learned from the Bible. When Thomas transferred to Naples, his 
education in the arts continued. Here it would have been impressed 
upon him that the liberal arts were no longer adequate categories of 
secular learning: the new translations of Aristotle spelled the end 
of the liberal arts tradition, although the universities effected a 
transition rather than a breach. 
Taking Thomas's alma mater Paris as reference point, the Faculty of 
Arts provided the point of entry to teen-aged boys. With the 
attainment of the Master of Arts at about the age of 20, one could go
on to study in a higher faculty, law, medicine or theology. The 
theological program Thomas entered in Paris was a grueling one, with 
the master's typically attained in the early thirties. Extensive and 
progressively more intensive study of the scriptures, Old and New 
Testament, and of the summary of Christian doctrine called the 
Sentences which was compiled by the twelfth century Bishop 
of Paris, Peter Lombard. These close textual studies were 
complemented by public disputations and the even more unruly 
quodlibetal questions. With the faculty modeled more or less on the 
guilds, the student served a long apprenticeship, established his 
competence in stages, and eventually after a public examination was 
named a master and then gave his inaugural lecture.
Thomas's writings by and large show their provenance in his teaching
duties. His commentary on the Sentences put the seal on his
student days and many of his very early commentaries on Scripture have
come down to us. But from the very beginning Thomas produces writings
which would not have emerged from the usual tasks of the theological
master. On Being and Essence and The Principles of
Nature (the latter a very useful summary for students of the
principles that Aristotle develops in his Physics) date from
his first stay at Paris, and unlike his commentaries on
Boethius' On the Trinity and
De hebdomadibus, are quite obviously philosophical works. 
Some of his disputed questions date from his first stint as regius 
master at Paris. When he returned to Italy his productivity 
increased. He finished the Summa contra gentiles, wrote 
various disputed questions and began the Summa theologiae. 
In 1268, at Rome, he began the work of commenting on Aristotle with 
On the Soul, and during the next five or six years commented
on eleven more Aristotelian works (not all of these are
complete). During this time he was caught up in magisterial duties of
unusual scope and was writing such polemical works as On the
Eternity of the World and
On There Being Only One Intellect. 
At Naples, he was given the task of elevating the status of the
Dominican House of Studies. His writing continued until he had a
mystical experience which made him think of all he had done as
“mere straw.” At the time of his death in 1274 he was
under a cloud in Paris.  219 propositions were condemned in 1277 by a
commission appointed by the Bishop of Paris, among them some tenets of
Thomas. This was soon lifted, he was canonized and eventually was
given the title of Common Doctor of the Church. But the subtle and
delicate assimilation of Aristotle that characterized his work in both
philosophy and theology did not survive his death, except in the
Dominican Order, and has experienced ups and downs ever since.
Many contemporary philosophers are unsure how to read Thomas. He was 
in his primary and official profession a theologian. Nonetheless, we 
find among his writings works anyone would recognize as philosophical
and the dozen commentaries on Aristotle increasingly enjoy the 
respect and interest of Aristotelian scholars. Even within 
theological works as such there are extended discussions that are 
easily read as possessing a philosophical character. So his best 
known work, the Summa theologiae, is often cited by 
philosophers when Thomas's position on this or that issue is sought. 
How can a theological work provide grist for philosophical mills? How
did Thomas distinguish between philosophy and theology? 
Sometimes Thomas puts the difference this way: “… the 
believer and the philosopher consider creatures differently. The 
philosopher considers what belongs to their proper natures, while the
believer considers only what is true of creatures insofar as they are
related to God, for example, that they are created by God and are 
subject to him, and the like.” (Summa contra gentiles,
bk II, chap. 4) Since the philosopher too, according to Thomas, 
considers things as they relate to God, this statement does not put 
the difference in a formal light.
The first and major formal difference between philosophy and theology
is found in their principles, that is, starting points. The
presuppositions of the philosopher, that to which his discussions and
arguments are ultimately driven back, are in the public domain, as it
were. They are things that everyone in principle can know upon
reflection; they are where disagreement between us must come to an
end. These principles are not themselves the products of deductive
proof—which does not of course mean that they are immune to
rational analysis and inquiry—and thus they are said to be known
by themselves (per se, as opposed to per alia). This
is proportionately true of each of the sciences, where the most common
principles just alluded to are in the background and the proper
principles or starting points of the particular science function
regionally as the common principles do across the whole terrain of
thought and being.  The fact that they are known per se does
not imply that they are easily known to just anyone who considers
them.  A good deal of experience of the world and inquiry, not to
mention native intelligence, and the ability to avoid intellectual
distraction, may be required for anyone in particular to actually
apprehend their truth.
By contrast, the discourse of the theologian is ultimately driven 
back to starting points or principles that are held to be true on the
basis of faith, that is, the truths that are authoritatively conveyed
by Revelation as revealed by God. Some believers reflect on these 
truths and see other truths implied by them, spell out their 
interrelations and defend them against the accusation of being 
nonsense. Theological discourse and inquiry look like any other and 
is, needless to say, governed by the common principles of thought and
being; but it is characterized formally by the fact that its 
arguments and analyses are taken to be truth-bearing only for one who
accepts Scriptural revelation as true.
This provides a formal test for deciding whether a piece of discourse
is philosophical or theological. If it relies only on truths anyone 
can be expected upon sufficient reflection to know about the world, and if it 
offers to lead to new truths on the basis of such truths, and only on
that basis, then it is philosophical discourse. On the other hand, 
discourse whose cogency—not formal, but 
substantive—depends upon our accepting as true such claims as 
that there are three persons in one divine nature, that our salvation
was effected by the sacrifice of Jesus, that Jesus is one person but 
two natures, one human, one divine, and the like, is theological 
discourse. Any appeal to an authoritative scriptural source as the 
necessary nexus in an argument is thereby other than philosophical 
discourse.
More will be said of this contrast later, but this is the essential 
difference Thomas recognizes between philosophy and theology. To 
conclude, consider a passage in which Thomas summarizes his
position. He is confronting an objection to there being any need for 
theological discourse. Whatever can be the object of inquiry will 
qualify as a being of one sort or another; but the philosophical 
disciplines seem to cover every kind of being, indeed there is even a
part of it which Aristotle calls theology. So what need is there for 
discourse beyond philosophical discourse?
For Thomas theological discourse begins with what God has revealed 
about Himself and His action in creating and redeeming the world.
The world is understood in that light. Philosophical discourse begins
with knowledge of the world.  If it speaks of God what it says is
conditioned by what is known of the world. But even given the 
distinction between the two, Aquinas suggests here that there are in 
fact elements of what God has revealed that are formally speaking 
philosophical and subject to philosophical discussion—though 
revealed they can be known and investigated without the precondition 
of faith. In other words, even something that is as a matter of fact revealed
is subject to philosophical analysis, if religious faith is not 
necessary to know it and accept it as true. So it may happen that 
concerning certain subjects, as for example the nature of God, the 
nature of the human person, what is necessary for a human being to be
good and to fulfill his or her destiny, and so on, there can be both 
a theological and a philosophical discussion of those subjects, 
providing for a fruitful engagement between the theological and the 
philosophical. For this reason, Thomas' theological works are 
very often paradigms of that engagement between theological and 
philosophical reflection, and provide some of his very best 
philosophical reflection.
It will be observed that the formal distinction between philosophical
and theological discourse leaves untouched what has often been the 
mark of one who is at once a believer and a philosopher. It is not 
simply that he might on one occasion produce an argument that is 
philosophical and at another time one that is theological; his 
religious beliefs are clearly not put in escrow but are very much in 
evidence when he functions as a philosopher. Many of the questions 
that can be raised philosophically are such that the believer already
holds a position on the answers to them from his religious faith. How then can he be 
thought to be ready to follow the argument whither it listeth, as an 
objector might put it? Furthermore, the inquiries in which the 
believer who philosophizes engages will often indicate his religious 
interests. 
When such observations turn into objections, perhaps into the 
accusation that a believer cannot be a proper philosopher, there is 
often an unexamined notion of what a proper philosopher looks like. 
The proper philosopher may be thought to be someone—perhaps 
merely some mind—without antecedents or history who first comes
to consciousness posing a philosophical question the answer to which 
is pursued without prejudice. But of course no human being and thus 
no philosopher is pure reason, mind alone, without previous history 
as he embarks on the task of philosophizing. One has necessarily 
knocked about in the world for a long time before he signs up for 
Philosophy 101. He has at hand or rattling around in his mind all 
kinds of ready responses to situations and questions. He very likely 
engaged in some kind of inquiry about whether or not to begin the 
formal study of philosophy in the first place. This may be 
acknowledged, but with the proviso that step one in the pursuit of 
philosophy is to rid the mind of all such antecedents. They must be 
put in the dock, put in brackets, placed in doubt, regarded with 
suspicion. Only after appropriate epistemological cleansing is the 
mind equipped to make its first warranted knowledge claim. Knowledge 
thus becomes a deliverance of philosophy, a product of 
philosophizing. Outside of philosophy there is no knowledge.
The preceding paragraph has been meant to capture the salient note of
much modern philosophy since Descartes. Philosophy is first of all a 
search for defensible knowledge claims, and for the method according 
to which it will be found. As opposed to what?
As opposed to the view of philosophy described in paragraph 2, Thomas
understands philosophizing to depend upon antecedent knowledge, to 
proceed from it, and to be unintelligible unless, in its 
sophisticated modes, it can be traced back to the common truths known
to all. But this tracing back will pass through very different 
terrains, depending on the upbringing, culture and other vagaries and
accidents of a given person's experience. The 
pre-philosophical—I refer to the formal study of 
philosophy—outlook of the believer will be characterizable in a
given way, a way suggested above. It is more difficult to 
characterize the pre-philosophical attitudes and beliefs out of which
the non-believer philosophizes. Let us imagine that he holds in a 
more or less unexamined way that all events, including thinking, are 
physical events. If as a philosopher he should happen take up the question
of the immortality of the soul, he is going to regard with suspicion 
those classical proofs which rely on an analysis of thinking as a 
non-physical process. The Christian, on the other hand, will be 
well-disposed towards efforts to prove the immortality of the human 
soul and will accordingly approach descriptions of thinking as 
non-physical sympathetically. He is unlikely to view with equanimity 
any claim that for human beings death is the utter end.
The importance of this is that a believer runs the risk of accepting
bad proofs of the non-physical character of thinking and thus of the
human soul. On the other hand, a committed physicalist may be too
quick to accept a bad proof that thinking is just a physical process.
He may be just as likely to run the risk of accepting bad proofs of
the entirely physical character of thought as is the believer of the
opposed claim. Such antecedent stances are often the reason why
philosophical agreement is so hard to reach. Does it make it
impossible? Do such considerations destroy any hope of philosophical
objectivity on either side? Surely not in principle. Believers and
non-believers should be able to agree on what counts as a good proof
in a given area even if they expect different results from such a
proof.  Thinking either is or is not merely a physical process and
antecedent expectations do not settle the question, however much they
influence the pursuit of that objective resolution. But the important
point is that antecedent dispositions and expectations are the common
condition of philosophers, believers and unbelievers alike. Of course
believers hold that they have an advantage here, since the antecedents
that influence them are revealed truths, not just hearsay, received
opinion, the zeitgeist, or prejudice.  In addition they may
be much more likely to be aware of and acknowledge those antecedents,
insofar as they are explicitly held and inquired into.
Given the distinction between philosophy and theology, one can then
distinguish between philosophical and theological sources and
influences in Aquinas' work. As a philosopher Thomas is emphatically
Aristotelian. His interest in and perceptive understanding of the
Stagyrite is present from his earliest years and did not await the
period toward the end of his life when he wrote his close textual
commentaries on Aristotle. When Thomas referred to Aristotle as the
Philosopher, he was not merely adopting a façon de
parler of the time. He adopted Aristotle's analysis of physical
objects, his view of place, time and motion, his proof of the prime
mover, his cosmology. He made his own Aristotle's account of sense
perception and intellectual knowledge. His moral philosophy is closely
based on what he learned from Aristotle and in his commentary on
the Metaphysics he provides a cogent and coherent account of
what is going on in those difficult pages.  Quite often deep insight
into Thomas' philosophical thought can be gained from a close
attention to the ways in which he comments upon and interpretively
clarifies difficult passages in Aristotle that can be otherwise very
obscure. 
But to acknowledge the primary role of Aristotle in Thomas's philosophy is 
not to deny other philosophical influences. Augustine is a massively 
important presence. Boethius, Pseudo-Dionysius, and Proclus were 
conduits through which he learned Neo-platonism. There is nothing 
more obviously Aristotelian about Thomas than his assumption that 
there is something to be learned from any author and not only mistakes to
be avoided. He definitely adopted many features from non-Aristotelian 
sources. 
This has led some to suggest that what is called Thomistic philosophy
is an eclectic hodgepodge, not a set of coherent disciplines. Others,
struck by the prominence in Thomas of such Platonic notions as 
participation, have argued that his thought is fundamentally 
Platonic, not Aristotelian. Still others argue that that there is a 
radically original Thomistic philosophy which cannot be characterized
by anything it shares with earlier thinkers, particularly Aristotle.
The recognition that Thomas is fundamentally an Aristotelian is not 
equivalent to the claim that Aristotle is the only influence on him. 
It is the claim that whatever Thomas takes on from other sources is 
held to be compatible with what he already holds in common with 
Aristotle. And, of course, to draw attention to the sources of 
Thomas's philosophy is not to say that everything he holds 
philosophically can be parsed back into historical antecedents, or 
that he never disagrees with his sources, Aristotle in particular.
Thomas takes “philosophy” to be an umbrella term which 
covers an ordered set of sciences. Philosophical thinking is 
characterized by its argumentative structure and a science is taken 
to be principally the discovery of the properties of kinds of things.
But thinking is sometimes theoretical and sometimes practical. The 
practical use of the mind has as its object the guidance of some 
activity other than thinking—choosing in the case of moral 
action, some product in the case of art. The theoretical use of the 
mind has truth as its object.  It seeks not to change the world but to
understand it. Like Aristotle, Thomas holds that there is a plurality
of both theoretical and practical sciences. Ethics, economics and 
politics are the practical sciences, while physics, mathematics and 
metaphysics are the theoretical sciences. 
That is one way to lay out the various philosophical disciplines. But
there is another that has to do with the appropriate order in which 
they should be studied. That order of learning is as follows: logic, 
mathematics, natural philosophy, moral philosophy, metaphysics. The 
primacy of logic in this order stems from the fact that we have to know what 
knowledge is so we will recognize that we have met its demands in a 
particular case. The study of mathematics comes early because little 
experience of the world is required to master it. But when we turn to
knowledge of the physical world, there is an ever increasing 
dependence upon a wide and deep experience of things. Moral 
philosophy requires not only experience, but good upbringing and the 
ordering of the passions. Metaphysics or speculative wisdom is the culminating 
and defining goal of philosophical inquiry: it is such knowledge as 
we can achieve of the divine, the first cause of all else.
Thomas commented on two logical works of Aristotle: On
Interpretation (incomplete) and Posterior Analytics. On
mathematics, there are only glancing allusions in Thomas's writings.
Thomas describes logic as dealing with “second
intentions,” that is, with formal relations that attach to
concepts expressive of the natures of existent things, first
intentions.  The concepts come to be in us as a result of our
engagement with the sensible world.  So it is important to stress that
logic concerns formal relations between concepts.  It is not concerned
with the sort of developmental and causal relations studied within the
the discipline of psychology. Thomas does not advocate a kind of
proto-psychological account of logic as one might see in various 19th
century accounts.
This means that logic rides piggy-back on direct 
knowledge of the world and thus incorporates the view that what is 
primary in our knowledge is the things of which we first form 
concepts. Mathematical entities are idealizations made by way of 
abstraction from our knowledge of sensible things. It is knowledge of
sensible things which is primary and thus prior to the “order 
of learning” the philosophical sciences.
This epistemological primacy of knowledge of what we grasp by our 
senses is the basis for the primacy of the sensible in our language. 
Language is expressive of knowledge, and thus what is first and most 
easily knowable by us will be what our language first expresses. That
is the rule. It is interesting to see its application in the 
development of the philosophy of nature.
The concern of natural science is of course natural things, physical 
objects, which may be described as “what come to be as the 
result of a change and undergo change.” The first task of 
natural philosophy, accordingly, is to define and analyze physical 
objects. 
The first thing to notice about this is the assumption that we begin 
our study of the natural world not with the presumed ultimate 
alphabet with which macrocosmic things are spelled, but with a vague 
and comprehensive concept which encompasses whatever has come to be 
as the result of a change and undergoes change. The reader of Aquinas
becomes familiar with this assumption. Thomas learned it from the 
beginning of Aristotle's Physics.
Now what is to us plain and clear at first is rather confused masses,
the elements and principles of which become known to us later by
analysis. Thus we must advance from universals to particulars; it is a
whole that is more knowable to sense-perception, and a universal is a
kind of whole, comprehending many things within it, like parts.  Much
the same thing happens in the relation of the name to the formula. A
name, e.g. ‘Circle’, means vaguely a sort of whole: its
definition analyses this into particulars. Similarly a child begins by
calling all men father and all women mother, but later on
distinguishes each of them. (Physics, 1, 1.)
So, for example, in giving the 1st way of proving the existence of a
god in the Summa Theologiae, Thomas will explicitly abide by
this order when he says that we should begin with what is most
manifest to us, namely, motion.
Thomas calls the movement from the more to the less general in a
science the “order of determination” or specification of
the subject matter. The first purchase on natural things is via
“physical object” or “natural thing.” The
“order of demonstration” involves finding the properties
of things as known through this general concept. Then, specifying the
subject further, one seeks properties of things known through the less
common concepts. For example, in plane geometry, one would begin with
plane figure and discover what belongs to it as such. Then one would
turn to, say, triangle and seek its properties, after which one would
go on to scalene and isosceles. So one will, having determined what is
true of things insofar as they are physical objects, go on to seek the
properties of things which are physical objects of this kind or that,
for example, living and non-living bodies.
Thomas emphasizes those passages in the Aristotelian natural writings
which speak of the order of determination, that is, of what 
considerations come first and are presupposed to those that come 
later. In several places, Thomas takes great pains to array the 
Aristotelian natural writings according to this Aristotelian 
principle, most notably perhaps at the outset of his commentary on 
Sense and sensibilia. The Physics is the first step
in the study of the natural world and exhibits the rule that what is 
first and most easily known by us are generalities. The language used
to express knowledge of such generalities will have, as we shall 
emphasize, a long career in subsequent inquiries, both in natural 
philosophy and beyond. What is sometimes thought of as a technical 
vocabulary, perhaps even as Aristotelian jargon, is seen by Thomas 
Aquinas as exemplifying the rule that we name things as we know them 
and that we come to know more difficult things after the easier 
things and extend the language used to speak of the easier, adjusting
it to an ever expanding set of referents.
Thomas points out that the characteristic features of how we
know some subject should not in general be attributed to that subject
as if elements of what we know of it.  So, although natural
things are first thought of and analyzed in the most general of terms,
there are not any general physical objects, only particular
ones. Thus, in seeking to discern what is true of anything that has
come to be as a result of a change and is subject to change until it
ceases to be, Aristotle had to begin with a particular example of
change, one so obvious that we would not be distracted by any
difficulties in accepting it as such. “A man becomes
musical.” Someone acquires a skill he did not previously
have. Thomas pores over the analysis Aristotle provides of this
instance of change and its product. 
The change may be expressed in three ways:
These are three different expressions of the same change and they all
exhibit the form A becomes B. But change can also be expressed as From
A, B comes to be. Could 1, 2 and 3 be restated in that second form? To
say “From the not-musical the musical comes to be” and
“From a not-musical man the musical comes to be” seem
acceptable alternatives, but “From a man musical comes to
be” would give us pause. Why? Unlike “A becomes B”
the form “From A, B comes to be” suggests that in order
for B to emerge, A must cease to be. This grounds the distinction
between the grammatical subject of the sentence expressing a change
and the subject of the change. The definition of the subject of the
change is “that to which the change is attributed and which
survives the change.” The grammatical subjects of 2 and 3 do not
express the subject of the change.  Only in 1 is the grammatical
subject expressive of the subject of the change.
This makes clear that the different expressions of the change involve
two things other than the subject of the change, namely, the characteristics 
of the subject before (not-musical) and after (musical) the change. 
These elements of the change get the names that stick from another 
example, whittling wood. The term for wood in Greek is hyle 
and the term for shape, the external contours of a thing, is 
morphe. In English, form, a synonym of shape, is used to 
express the characteristic that the subject acquires as the result of
the change, e.g. musical. The characterization of the subject prior 
to the change as not having the form is called privation. Using this 
language as canonical, Aristotle speaks of the subject of the change 
as its hyle or matter, the character it gains as its 
morphe or form, and its prior lack of the form as its 
privation. Any change will involve these three elements: matter, form
and privation. The product of a change involves two things: matter 
and form.
Change takes place in the various categories of quality, quantity,
place, and so on.  In all cases the terminology of matter, form, and
privation comes to be used. So the terms applied in these different
categories will be used analogously. The terms bind together similar
but different kinds of change—a subject changing temperature is
like a subject changing place or size.
The analysis of change and the product of change begins with surface 
changes. Some enduring thing changes place or quality or quantity. 
But enduring things like men and trees and horses and the like have 
also come into being and are destined some day to cease to be. Such 
things are called substances. It is a given that there are substances
and that they come to be and pass away. The question is: Can the 
analysis of surface change be adjusted and applied to substantial 
change? What would its subject be? The subject of substantial change 
is known on an analogy with the subject of incidental or surface 
change. That is, if substances come to be as the result of a change, 
and if our analysis of change can apply, there must be a subject of 
the change. The subject of a surface or incidental change is a 
substance. The subject of a substantial change cannot be a substance;
if it were, the result would be a modification of that substance, 
that is, an incidental change. But we are trying to understand how a 
substance itself comes into being as the result of a change. There 
must be a matter or subject but it cannot be matter in the sense of a
substance. In order to signal this, we can call the matter prime 
matter, first matter. But it is important to recognize that this
prime matter is not a substance, and does not exist apart from any 
particular substance. It is always the matter of some substance that 
exists. 
When the discussion moves on from what may be said of all physical
objects as such to an inquiry into living physical things, the
analyses build upon those already completed. Thus, “soul”
will be defined as the form of living bodies. The peculiar activities
of living things will be grouped under headings like nutrition,
growth, sense perception, knowing, and willing.  Since a living thing
sometimes manifests an instance of such activities and sometimes does
not, they relate to it in the manner of the incidental forms of any
physical object. But they are not incidental in the way that we might
think of the shade of color of one's skin at any particular time, or
the particular height or weight of an individual, since as activities
the ability or power to engage in them proceeds from what the
substance in question is. Thomas at times will call the powers through
which they are achieved necessary accidents, using accident in a sense
different from more recent philosophy. While the abilities need not be
exercised at any particular time or may be impeded from exercise by
some condition, the substance nonetheless possesses them in principle
as long as it exists.
The form such a subject takes on as the result of the change cannot 
be an incidental form like size or location or temperature. 
Substances do not become or cease to be substances as a result of 
changes in these incidental features. As the analysis of incidental 
change makes clear, the substance previously existed without the form
it acquires in the change and it could lose it and still be itself. 
In a substantial change, the substance itself simply comes to be, or 
ceases to be. The form in a substantial change must be that which 
makes the substance to be what it is. Call it substantial 
form. 
Here we see the semantic plasticity of the term 'matter'.  Initially
in the analysis of change, 'matter' refers to the substance that takes
on or loses some incidental categorical modification of that
substance.  Then the term is extended by analogy to cover whatever is
the subject of a change of substance.  Recognizing the analogical
extension, Thomas avoids “reifying” what he identifies
as principles of change and nature.  Although form and matter
will be “reduced” in a substantial change to the category
of substance as principles of substance, they should not be thought of
as substances or quasi-substances in their own right.  Socrates or
Bucephalus is a substance strictly speaking.  The forms and matter of
Socrates and Bucephalus are not.  They are substantial principles
without being substances or quasi-substances in their own right.
So the point to notice about this analysis is that substantial change is
spoken of on an analogy with incidental change. The analysis of 
incidental change is presupposed and regulative. Moreover, the 
language used to speak of the elements of incidental change are 
extended to substantial change and altered in meaning so as to avoid 
equivocation. The philosophical vocabulary arises out of analysis of 
what is most obvious to us and is then progressively extended to more
and more things insofar as the later is made known by appeal to the 
prior. We see that matter and form apply in an analogous way
to the various kinds of incidental change and then to substantial 
change. The analysis of form and matter provides a rule for knowing 
and naming that will characterize Thomas's use of Latin in philosophy
and in theology as well.
Focusing specifically upon perception—seeing, feeling,
hearing, and the like—how can we best analyze it? In continuity
with what has gone before, the questions are put in this form: How 
best to analyze coming to see, coming to feel, coming to hear, and 
the like? Seeing these on the analogy of change as already analyzed, 
we look for a subject, a privation, and a form. The sensing subject 
is the animal, but the proximate subjects to which they are 
attributed are the powers of sight, touch, hearing, and the like. An 
instance of seeing is describable as the power's moving from not 
seeing to seeing. Since the object of seeing is color, the change 
from not seeing to seeing issues in the power having the form of 
color.
Consider an ordinary physical change, a substance acquiring a color.
Coming to see a color is not the same kind of physical change as a
substance acquiring a color. To be sure, while there are physical
changes involved in sensation—the organs are altered in the way
physical bodies are—that is not the change involved in
perception as such. Consider again that in feeling a warm or cold body
the hand's own temperature is altered by the contact. But feeling
cannot be just that, since any two physical bodies that come into
contact undergo a similar alteration of temperature. But not all
physical bodies feel the temperature. Feeling the temperature,
becoming aware of it, is another sort of change, however much it
involves a contemporaneous change in the organs of sense similar to
ordinary physical change. Having the color or temperature in this
further sense is thus made known and named by reference to physical
change.  The fundamental difference between the two ways of acquiring
a form is this: in a physical change of color, the change produces a
new numerical instance of the color. In grasping or sensing a color, a
numerically new instance of color does not result.  And yet what was
potentially visible becomes actually visible.  There is actuality in
the world where before there was only potentiality--an actuality of
the seen color, and an actuality of color not in the mode of existence
that color has in physical things.
We have here the basis for talk of immateriality in perception. If 
the acquiring of a form by matter in physical change results in a new
instance of the form and this is not the case with perception, we can
make the point that acquiring the form in sensation is not identical 
to the acquiring of the form by matter in the primary sense.
Thus, we both want to speak of the subject of sensation on an analogy
with physical change and to distinguish the former from the 
latter. This is done by speaking of the immaterial reception of a 
form. Nonetheless, the sense power is implemented in a physical 
organ, and thus matter for the change of form in sensation in an 
analogous sense. Because in sensation the sense organ is physically 
altered and the matter of sensation in this analogous sense, we can 
say that actual sensation is in some respects physical, and in 
another not.
It is important to pay attention again to the order of learning and
naming, and what we are justified in saying at this point about the
use of the words involved in describing this change.  Specifically,
the use of ‘immaterial’ is introduced simply to mark the
inadequacy of any analysis of sensation confined solely to the
physical terms that are fully adequate for analyzing ordinary physical
change that does not involve sensation. ‘Immaterial’ means
‘not-material’. But the mere applicability of such a
negative term (what Aristotle calls a “negative infinite”
term) does not justify us in thinking we have discovered a new
property that would be referred to by the term
‘immateriality’—it does not pick out and name a
particular kind of property—any more than the mere applicability
of ‘not-human’ justifies us in thinking we have discovered
a new particular kind of substance.
Now, in his interpretation of Aristotle's De anima Thomas 
defends a view that was as contested in his own time as it is almost 
an orphan in our own. Among the tenets of so-called Latin Averroism 
was the view, first held by Averroes, that the move from perceptive 
acts to intellection is not one from a lower to a higher set of 
capacities or faculties of the human soul. Aristotle contrasts 
intellection with perception, and argues that the former does not 
employ a sense organ because it displays none of the characteristics 
of perception which does employ an organ. Thus insofar as sensation 
can be said to be in some respects material and in others immaterial,
intellection is said to be completely immaterial. But on the 
Latin-Averroistic view, Aristotle is not thus referring to another 
capacity of the human soul, the intellect, but, rather, referring to 
a separate entity thanks to whose action human beings engage in what 
we call thinking. But the cause of this, the agent intellect, is not 
a faculty of the soul. (Aristotle had distinguished at least two intellects, a 
possible and an agent.) The proof for incorruptibility which results from 
an activity that does not employ a corporeal organ is therefore a statement about the 
incorruptibility of this separate entity, not a basis for arguing 
that each human soul is incorruptible because it has the capacity to 
perform incorporeal activities. The Latin-Averroists consequently 
denied that Aristotle taught personal immortality.
Given this consequence, Thomas's adoption of the opposite
interpretation—viz. that the agent intellect is, like the
possible intellect, a faculty of the human soul—may seem merely
an interested desire to enlist Aristotle's support for a position in
harmony with Christian belief. Thomas is frequently said to have
baptized Aristotle, which seems to mean that he fitted him to the
Procrustean bed of Christian doctrine. Of course, the full Christian
view is not simply that the soul survives death but that it will be
reunited with body, and Thomas nowhere suggests that there is any
intimation of this in Aristotle. Oddly enough, it is often friends of
Thomas who suggest that he merely used Aristotle and was not
chiefly concerned with what Aristotle might actually have
intended.
However, this is an extraordinary approach to reading Thomas. It would
be less of an accusation to say that he got a passage wrong than that
he pretended it meant something he knew it did not. However, the
important point is whether Thomas's reading is or is not supported by
the text. When he commented on the De anima, he seems not to
be concerned with the flare up in Paris over Latin Averroism. This is
the basis for dating the commentary in 1268, before Thomas returned to
Paris. The commentary, accordingly, cannot be read as though it were
prompted by the controversy. Of course, some might still say that
Thomas had long term interests in taming Aristotle to behave in a
Christian way. On the contrary, as it happens, during the second
Parisian period in the thick of the Latin-Averroist controversy,
Thomas wrote an opusculum dedicated to the question: what did
Aristotle actually teach? The work is called in the Latin, De
unitate intellectus contra averroistas, On there being only
one intellect contra the Averroists. This little work is
absolutely essential for assessing the nature of Thomas's
Aristotelianism. He provides us with an extended textual analysis to
show that the rival interpretation cannot be sustained by the text and
that the only coherent reading of the De anima must view the
agent and possible intellects as faculties of the human soul. His
interpretation may be right or wrong, but the matter must be decided
on the basis of textual interpretation, not vague remarks about
Thomas's intentions.
Philosophers nowadays will want to know how this account of substance
places Aquinas on the question of the relation of body and soul with
respect to Dualism and Physicalism. Not easily. Aquinas maintains that
the soul is capable of existing apart from the living body after the
death of the body, because the soul is incorruptible. This might
suggest that he is a kind of Substance Dualist, the soul being one
substance and the body another, with the soul
“interacting” as it were with the other substance, the
body. However this picture fails to recognize the Aristotelian terms
of the account that Aquinas provides of soul and body.  Thomas knows
and accepts Aristotle's assertion in De anima II.1 that it is
as pointless to ask whether soul and body are one as it is to ask
whether the seal and the wax are one--they are.
The soul is indeed capable of existence apart from the body at death.
This incorruptibility results from the actualities of understanding
and willing that are not the actualities of any bodily organ, but of
the human animal as such distinguished by the rational form. However,
Thomas merely concludes from this fact that the soul is a
“particular thing” and thus a subsistent after the death
of the body. He argues that what belongs to the notion of “this
particular thing” is only that it be a subsistent, and not that
it be a substance complete in a nature.  A subsistent is something
with an operation of its own, existing either on its own or in another
as an integral part, but not in the way either accidental or material
forms exist in another.  Existing on its own is not
distinctive of substances alone. A chair is a particular thing, and
thus a subsistent.  But on Aquinas' account it is not a substance; it
is rather an accidental unity of other subsistents which may or may
not be substances. A hand has an operation distinctive of it as an
integral part of a living body, an operation different from the
operation of the stomach; it is a particular thing and also a
subsistent. (Summa Theologiae Ia.75.2 ad1;
also Quaestiones Disputate de Anima 2.)  And yet being an
integral and functional part of a substance, it does not have the
complete nature of a substance.
A substance, on the other hand, is something that is both subsistent
and complete in a nature—a nature being an intrinsic principle
of movement and change in the subject.  A human soul is a constitutive
element of the nature of a human substance. It is the formal principle
of a human substance. It is what is specified when we say what the
substance is. But it is incomplete. What it is for a soul to be is to
be the form of some substance. In that sense it is a principle of a
substance, ‘principle’ being a technical term that refers
back to the first entry, arche, in Aristotle's philosophical
lexicon in the Metaphysics, as well as Thomas' commentary on
it, and Thomas' On the Principles of Nature. As the principle
of a nature, its nature is to be the formal element of a complete
substance. Consequently, it doesn't have its own nature and is not a
substance in its own right, even if it is capable of subsisting apart
from the living body. It is because it is naturally incomplete as
subsisting apart from the body that Thomas sees this state as
unnatural for it, and an intimation of, but not an argument for, the
resurrection of the body. 
Question Ia.75 of the Summa Theologiae is the best place to
look for Thomas' discussion of the subsistent reality of the human
soul, although the Quaestiones Disputatae De Anima and the
commentary on Aristotle's De anima provide important
supplementary material to that discussion.  Thomas begins 75 by
pointing out that his concern is the concern of a theologian, and that
the theologian is concerned with human nature primarily in relation to
the soul. He is concerned with the body only in its relation to the
soul.  The body of the question is filled with philosophical argument,
and yet its order and point is theological.  That theological order
and point, however, can lead to certain philosophical distortions
concerning the soul if one isn't careful.  So Thomas is very
careful.
Considered as a substantial form of a material body, the soul exists
in a living being as the substantial form of an animal.  Here it is
important to clarify.  'Immaterial' can be said in two ways of forms.
In the first way, any form as such is immaterial because it
is not a material principle.  It is distinguished as a principle of
actuality in a being from the material principle which is a principle
of potentiality and change in corporeal beings.  In that sense, any
substantial form whatsoever will be immaterial, including the
substantial form of an oak tree or the substantial form of a dog.  And
so also is the substantial form of the human immaterial in
that sense.  Aquinas is explicit about this when he proves that the
human soul is immaterial in Summa Theologiae Ia.75.5.  It is
immaterial in just the way in which any form whatsoever is immaterial.
But in the second way, 'immaterial' is said of subsistent
forms—forms that subsist without matter like angels or spiritual
substances in general. 
In 75.1 Thomas had argued against the ancient materialists, that the
soul is not a body; it is incorporeal.  In 75.2 he proved that the
human soul is a subsistent because it has an activity that pertains to
it without the use of a corporeal organ, namely, the activity of
understanding in intellect.  But then immediately in 75.3 he proved
that the souls of other animals are not subsistent, because they do
not have an operation that does not employ a corporeal organ.  The
souls of other animals are incorporeal in the sense of 75.1, but they
are not subsistent as in 75.2 In 75.4, Thomas proves that the soul is
not the man.  Socrates, the man, has vital activities that are the
activities of a living animal, like sensation, nutrition,
reproduction, and so on, activities that are not distinctive
activities of the soul itself as intellect is in the human case.
Since these are activities of Socrates and not activities of the soul,
Socrates and the soul are not identical.  And so Socrates, if
anything, is a living animal just like the other animals.  Tacitly
this leaves open the possibility that there might be an animal soul
for Socrates that is not identical to the intellectual soul, and as
shown in 75.3 that this animal soul of Socrates would not be
subsistent.  This possibility of two souls in Socrates, an animal soul
and an intellectual soul will only be excluded later in question 76.
In 75.5 Thomas proves that the human intellectual soul is immaterial
just like the souls of other animals.  But in conjunction with the
result of 75.2, now we have a soul that is an immaterial subsistent,
where in conjunction with 75.3 the souls of other animals are not
immaterial subsistents.
In 75.6, relying upon all that has gone before, Thomas argues that the
human soul is a subsistent that is incorporeal, and thus does not
cease to exist as a result of the death of the body.  This result
shows the soul to be a subsistent form that can exist without out
matter.  And so it is now seen to be an immaterial subsistent in the
second sense described above, not just the first sense.  Now
'immaterial' characterizes its mode of existence, not just the
negative fact that it is immaterial like all other forms are
immaterial.
So the difference between the human intellectual soul and the souls of
other animals is that while both are immaterial in the first sense,
the sense of not being material principles, the intellectual soul is
an immaterial subsistent in the second sense while the souls of other
animals are not immaterial subsistents.  And it is the second sense of
'immaterial' that gives us a key for understanding what Thomas means
by a “material form,” particularly a material substantial
form.  A material form is a form that is not an immaterial subsistent;
it exists either as an accident in a corporeal subject or as a
substantial form in a corporeal subject, and does not subsist.  So the
substantial forms of bodies, particularly the souls of living bodies,
are in general material forms with the exception of the intellectual
soul.  The souls of other animals are immaterial in the first sense
and material with regard to the second sense, while the human soul is
both immaterial in the first sense and immaterial in the second
sense.
Confirmation of this distinction of senses of 'immaterial' comes when
in the very last article of the question, 75.7, Thomas asked whether
the human intellectual soul is an angel.  In 75.6 Thomas used the
result of 75.5 and 75.2 to prove that the human soul is incorruptible,
where something is corruptible if it can cease to exist through
corruption, that is, by the separation of form from matter as we see
it in the death of living things.  The souls of other animals are
not directly generated and do not directly corrupt.
It is the living animal that corrupts.  But their souls can be said to
corrupt with the animal. (Quaestiones Disputatae De
Anima 2) However, the human soul, because it is a subsistent
immaterial form, does not corrupt with the death of the human
being.  So when all these results are put together the intellectual
soul is an incorporeal, immaterial, incorruptible subsistent, an
immaterial form in the second sense, which looks an awful lot like an
angel, since angels are also incorporeal, immaterial, incorruptible
subsistents, and immaterial forms in the second sense.  This is the
potentially distorting view of the theologian--to see the human
intellectual soul as something like an angel, and we are reminded of
Shakespeare, “how like an angel.” Notice, however, that
the potential distortion is premised on the soundness of the
philosophical arguments that have been employed throughout the
question by the theologian, driven by his primary interest in the
soul.  
In 75.7, Thomas argues that the intelletual soul is not of the same
species as an angel, because it is a substantial form of an animal.
Angels are complete in their natures as incorporeal, immaterial,
incorruptible subsistent forms—they are thus substances properly
speaking.  But Thomas had insisted all along that the soul is
incomplete in its nature, even as it is an incorporeal, immaterial,
incorruptible subsistent form—it is not a substance properly
speaking.  Still, the soul can be called substance by
analogy, insofar as it is the formal principle of a substance. In
English it might be better to call it “substantial” rather
than “substance.” And in that regard, it cannot be
considered as forming the basis for a kind of substance dualism in
Thomas.
The argument of 75.7 leads naturally to the subject of the next major
question, Ia.76, on the union of soul and body.  We've already seen
that Thomas, following Aristotle, thinks asking questions about the
union of soul and body makes little sense for the philosopher.  But
because of the potentially distorting view of the theologian, the
latter in a sense is forced to do so; the theologian has to ask
philosophical questions the philosopher need not ask, in order to
avoid a distorted view of the soul.  So in question 76 Thomas argues
for the complete unity of soul with body against various alternative
positions to be found among his contemporary theological
interlocutors.  Thus question 75, proceeding as it does from the
theological perspective, gives rise to philosophical aporiae
to be solved in question 76.  And just as it was the theologian's use
of philosophical arguments in 75 that threatened a distorted view, it
is the theologian's use of philosophical arguments in 76 that solves
the aporiae, and avoids the distortion.  Apart from anything
else Thomas does in the two questions, taken together they provide an
exemplar of the use of philosophy within theology, not just to advance
certain theological positions but to assist the theologian in avoiding
error given the exclusivity of his theological perspective.  Thomas
fulfills what he himself had said is one of the roles of philosophy
within theology in the first question of the Summa. 
There are at least three important results of Ia.75-76 for thinking
about human nature.  In the first place, in 76.3-4 Thomas argues
against the pluralist position on the Plurality of Substantial Forms.
It might be tempting to think of the human substantial form as a kind
of layering of quasi substantial forms or as composed out of them.
One substantial form for the corporeality of the body, perhaps one to
account for the vegetative activities of the human being, yet another
for the animal activities, and then a final one for the intellectual
activities of the human being.  Recall that 75.4, in arguing that
Socrates is not identical to the intellectual soul, tacitly leaves
open the possibility that Socrates might have a soul as principle for
these vital animal activities in addition to the intellectual soul
with which he is not identical.  However, Thomas decisively rejects
this plurality on the basis of the manifest unity of the human being
in his acts.  If there were multiple substantial forms there would be
no unity to being human—multiple substantial forms implies
multiple substances and multiple beings.  And yet the human being is
one, a single substantial unity manifested in his or her acts. Here
Thomas is relying upon the substantial unity that is obvious to the
philosopher to reject a kind of substance plurality, not just
soul-body dualism.
In particular he relies upon the fact that it is Socrates himself who
engages in intellectual activity.  Again, in 75.4 he had rejected the
view that Socrates is identical with his soul because Socrates engages
in vital animal activities that do not belong to the soul as such.
However, what he did not claim in 75.4 is that the activity of
intellect that characterizes the soul is not one of Socrates
activities.  In fact, now in 76 he claims it is Socrates' activity.
Socrates has vital activities that do not belong to the soul alone,
and yet the activity that belongs to the soul alone, understanding, is
one of Socrates' activities.  But the soul is the principle of
activity in living things.  Thus the animal soul (and for similar
reasons the vegetative soul) is identical in Socrates with the
rational soul.  There is no plurality of substantial forms because of
the unity of Socrates' activities, including both animal activities
and reason.  Neither is the human soul composed of any
quasi-substantial forms. 
This is the second striking result of 76.  Socrates and his soul,
while not being identical, are subjects of the same activity—not
subjects of the same type of activity, but subjects of the
same token instance of an activity.  In 75, the soul as a
subsistent with its own operation of understanding was said to be the
subject of existence (esse) per se.  In the case of
other animals it is the animal itself, the living substance, that is
the subject of the act of existence, and both soul and body have
existence through the substance.  Here in the human case, the soul is
said to be the subject of the act of existence because it has its own
operation.  Of course, Socrates is a substance with operations that
pertain to him, animal activities, but also the operation of
intellect; it is Socrates who thinks in virtue of his intellect.  So
he too is the subject of the act of existence.  And yet the operation
in virtue of which the soul is the subject of the act of existence,
intellectual activity, is the operation in virtue of which Socrates is
the subject of the act of existence, again, not the same type of
operation but the same token of operation.  So Socrates and his soul
have the same act of existence.  The principle for drawing this latter
conclusion is that the operation of a subject follows from the act of
existing of that subject, as the actuality of a power follows from the
actuality of the being.  (Quaestiones Disputatae De Anima
2) 
So Socrates, as a living animal substance, is not identical to his
soul.  Anima mea non est ego Thomas asserts in his Commentary
on St. Paul's First Letter to the Corinthians.  “I am not my
soul.” And yet Socrates and his soul share as subjects the very
same act of existence.  It is because Socrates' soul's act of
existence is Socrates' act of existence that the soul's intellectual
operation is Socrates' intellectual operation.  It is also because of
this sharing in the act of existence, that the soul can be the
substantial form of the living human animal.  Because the soul is a
substantial form, it is not complete in its nature, and cannot be a
spiritual substance like an angel, properly speaking.  Thus the soul
receives its act of existence as the soul of a human being,
and cannot pre-exist the human being whose soul it is.  And yet, as
Thomas argued in 75.6, the soul is not subject to the corruptibility
of the human being who is subject to death, and can thus survive the
death of the human being.
The third significant result is that the soul is not composed from its
powers as if a unified collection of them.  Thomas will often speak of
the “parts of the soul,” the appetitive part or the
rational part, for example.  However, this way of speaking is for the
purposes of classifying the powers.  It does not signal actual
ontological parts of the soul.  As the first act of a body, the soul
is, like all act, ontologically simple, undivided, and un-composed.
The powers “flow” from the essence of the soul as
necessary accidents of the substance.  And Thomas tells us they are
formally related to the soul as their principle in what Aristotle
calls in the Posterior Analytics the second mode of per
se predication—that mode in which the subject of a
predication enters into the definition of the predicate, were one to
define the predicate.  From this it follows that if the human soul is
incorruptible, the powers of Socrates that are powers of corporeal
organs cease to exist with the death of Socrates.  And yet the power
of intellect as a power of the soul without a corporeal organ remains
incorruptible with the human soul.  However, Thomas is clear in
denying that only the intellect survives the death of the human; one
cannot have a free floating incorruptible power in existence without
the subject of the power in existence.  The soul is other than the
powers, and thus the intellectual power is incorruptible as a power of
an incorruptible soul as its subject, and even the other powers remain
“in” the soul as “in their principle.”
All of this emphasis upon the unity of the human being comes out
clearly in Aquinas' understanding of the mode of human activity as
acting knowingly and willingly. Such acting knowingly and willingly is
expressed as the rational activity of an animal, that is, as animal
activity distinguished formally as rational. Rationality is the
distinctive form that intelligence takes in human beings as
animals. Rationality involves the back and forth of argument moving
from one thing known to another, and advancing in knowledge by such
movement. Thus, for Thomas, while angels and God can be said to be
intelligent, they are not rational.  
This movement in understanding is necessary for human beings because
as animals they only ever have a partial grasp of the natures of
things, insofar as their knowledge depends upon always incomplete and
partial sensible experience of the world. But it is sense experience,
as well as the self movement that springs from it, that places human
beings within the genus animal. So human understanding and willing is
intrinsically bound up with the sensate activity of an animal; as a
result, rational is the form that it takes in that animal.
Reason does not cause eating as something separate from it, and as an
efficient cause; on the contrary, human eating is not adequately
described formally unless it is described as rational eating. To fail
to eat rationally is not a failure in its cause, but in the eating
itself. And the human animal is not adequately described except as a
rational animal, rational providing not another substance or
expression of a fissure between soul or mind and body, but the fully
adequate description of the human substance. Reason does not
distinguish us from animals; it distinguishes us as animals.  So
according to Aquinas, while it is true that the activities of
intellect and will are not the actualities of any physical organs,
they are nonetheless the activities of the living human animal. It is
Socrates the animal who knows and wills, not his mind interacting with
his body.
Another consequence of this insistence on Aquinas' part is that it is
inadequate and inaccurate to speak of activities we share in common
with other kinds of creatures. To be sure, there are descriptions that
apply equally to what we do and what other animals do, for example the
description “eating” or the description
“reproducing.” But these are generic descriptions that do
not adequately capture the human act as opposed to the act of a horse
or dog, until the human acts are specified formally as rational. So
the goods that are the objects of human powers are not specified
adequately by such generic descriptions as pursuing eating,
reproducing, friendship, etc., as if human beings and other animals
pursue the same goods, only humans bring reason to bear upon those
identical type goods.
All of this might lead one to think then that, not being a dualist,
Aquinas must be a physicalist, there being only two broad possible
positions. Now, the difficulties of providing an adequate account of
just what Physicalism is are well known. But suppose we take a minimal
characterization of Physicalism as involving the claim that there is
some privileged physical science or set of physical sciences, using
the term ‘physical’ merely nominally and sociologically as
we use it of certain sciences today, that ideally will provide a fully
adequate account of all that exists and the fundamental
characteristics of reality. Then Aquinas cannot be understood to be a
physicalist, since the result of his analysis of perception and
thought was to say that these activities are “immaterial,”
which was to say, not adequately captured by the kinds of physical
descriptions that do adequately account for much of the being and
change we observe in the world. There are actually many variations on
Dualism and Physicalism in play in recent philosophy. However, the
difficulty of placing Aquinas in the broad outlines of that setting
ought now to be clear.  And without an actual demonstration that
Aquinas' view is incoherent, one lasting contribution of his thought
is to show that the supposed exclusive disjunction between Physicalism
and Dualism is inadequate.  He poses to us a challenge to think more
broadly and deeply about human existence than such an easy dichotomy
allows.
To be immortal is not to be subject to death.  Living corporeal
substances are subject to death through the corruption of their
substantial unity—not so much the separation of soul from body,
but the dissolution of the soul as the substantial form of the body.
This dissolution of the soul is brought about by destructive natural
causes acting upon the living body.  Living things themselves have
various capacities to preserve themselves in existence against the
ravages of the natural world around them; that is, in part, what it is
for them to live—to sustain their existence in and through their
own natural activities.  And yet nature teaches us that corruptible
things inevitably corrupt.
What of Socrates?  Socrates is an animal.  Thomas is unambiguous about
this fact in 75.4 when he argues that Socrates is not identical to his
soul because of his animal acts.  But, if Socrates is an animal he
should be as subject to corruption as is any corporeal substance, and
as subject to death as any animal.  Here it is important to make an
initial distinction.  As we've seen, living things act to preserve
their existence through their vital activities, and succeed in doing
so for a time, even if they eventually succumb to the reaper.  So we
may say they are naturally subject to death because of their composed
corporeal natures.  And yet, it does not follow that they must corrupt
and die; by and large their lives consist in preventing the corruption
to which they are subject.  This fact alone shows that there are
causes with the power to fend off death, even if not to fend it off
permanently.  However, it is then at least possible that some other
cause, a cause with much greater power than the natural causes of
living things possess, could fend off death for them without end and
preserve them alive without end.  The obvious candidate for this cause
is God by miraculous intervention; if living things have limited power
to fend off their own deaths, presumably God has unlimited power to do
so for them.  So what is corruptible by nature may not in fact
corrupt.  While animals are naturally subject to death, they could be
supernaturally immortal.  
So also even if human beings are naturally subject to death, it may
well be within the power of God to keep them from dying by a
preternatural gift.  This condition of having been given a
preternatural gift preserving them from death would be the condition
of the first human beings in the biblical account of Eden, the
preternatural gift lost by Original Sin through which death entered
into the world, however else one understands those data of revelation.
But philosophically we can say no more of them than that human beings
are naturally subject to death but need not die.
However, the world we live in is not an Edenic paradise into which
death has not entered.  Living things die.  Human beings die.
Socrates died.  On the other hand, according to Thomas, Socrates' soul
is incorruptible where the souls of other animals are not.  It is not
even naturally subject to death by corruption.  Is there a possibility
for immortality, particularly personal immortality, here in the
incorruptibility of Socrates' soul?
One might be tempted to say yes.  One might say that in the first
place the incorruptible soul of Socrates looks like a person in the
current sense of that term.  It is a thinking or conscious thing,
since it is clearly a thing at least in the sense of a subsistent, and
it has the power of intellect, even if it has no other conscious
cognitive powers of the animal for which it formally was a soul.  What
“we” mean by person is a “thinking or conscious
thing.” So Socrates' soul is a person.  What person?  Well
Socrates was a person in that very sense as well, although he had more
conscious cognitive capacities than does his soul after death.  It
seems incongruous to suggest that we have two persons—Socrates
and Socrates' soul.  After all that would seem to strike against the
unity Thomas was at pains to maintain.  While Socrates was alive, were
these two persons present?  No.  There is but one person, and it is
Socrates.  But then upon the death of Socrates, what happens?  Does
the person who is Socrates cease to exist, and a new person that is
Socrates' soul come to exist? But, it seems much easier and simpler to
say that upon Socrates' death the person that was Socrates survives as
Socrates's soul.  Before death Socrates was composed of a soul and a
body.  After death he is composed simply of a soul.  If we hold that
position then, because of the incorruptibility of the soul, while the
animal that Socrates was dies, the soul that Socrates becomes
survives, and thus Socrates himself is immortal, and not subject to
death, not subject to death even by nature as the animal is.  Socrates
is simply immortal.  On this proposed account when Thomas wrote
“anima mea non est ego,” he was merely speaking
of this life.  He should then have added “anima mea ero
ego,” “I will be my soul.”
However as an interpretation of Thomas this approach will suffer
several severe difficulties.  First, on its own terms it is hard to
avoid the conclusion that before Socrates' death, there are two
persons present.  The argument of 75.2 was not that the intellectual
soul becomes a particular thing and subsistent upon the death
of the human being.  It was that the intellectual soul as such is a
particular thing and subsistent, and that includes while it is the
soul of a living thing.  So if we are going to take the recent
minimalist account of person that the term expresses in this proposed
interpretation, a thinking or conscious thing, then we have
the person that is the particular and subsistent thing that is the
soul before the death of Socrates.  But Thomas thinks Socrates thinks,
and is thus a thinking thing.  So we also have the person Socrates.
Is the person that is the soul identical to the person that is
Socrates?  It seems not, given the argument of 75.4 that Socrates is
not identical to his soul.  So this interpretation suggests that even
if after death there is only one person, Socrates, before death there
are two persons, Socrates and Socrates' soul.
 In the second place, this interpretation explicitly relies upon an
equivocation on the term 'person'.  Thomas accepts from Boethius the
definition of a person as  an individual substance of a rational
nature.  (Summa Theologiae IIIa.2.2) But Thomas insists
that the soul is incomplete in its nature.  It does not have
a nature, but is one of the principles of a corporeal nature along
with matter.  It can only be said to “have” a nature
improperly and by analogy.  And when we do so speak, what is meant is
that its nature is to be the substantial form of an animal.  Again,
that is why it is not an angel.  So strictly speaking, the human soul,
even as a subsistent, is not and cannot be a person, unless one
equivocates on the term, and in so doing abandons the Philosophy of
Nature and Metaphysics within which Thomas thinks.
In the third place, this interpretation would make hay of Thomas'
argument in 75.4 that Socrates is not identical to his soul.  There
Thomas relied upon the vital activities of Socrates to make that
argument--Socrates has vital activities that the soul does not possess
as a subject or subsistent.  But they are Socrates' activities as
agent just as much as is the operation of intellect.  The powers that
those activities manifest are powers of Socrates in just the way the
power of intellect is.  Again this resolves into the
“nature” of the soul as substantial form.  All of
Socrates' powers “flow from” the soul as their formal
principle, even as one of them, intellect, also has the soul as its
subject along with Socrates.  So if one were to ask which of the
powers might be thought to be not quite Socrates' power in the full
sense, one ought to opt for the intellect, not the vital powers of the
living body, since it seems that intellect belongs to something other
that Socrates and is at best shared with Socrates.  But then why would
Socrates become identical to the subject in virtue of a power that is
not quite his, rather than cease to be with the powers that are
properly his?  Such questions, and the answers one might give to them,
are again senseless if we situate what Thomas thinks back in what he
wrote.  The reason that intellectual power is no less Socrates' power
than it is the soul's is because the act of being of Socrates is the
act of being of his soul.  It is a mistake to think that because
Socrates is not identical to his soul, his soul forms some other being
with which he would share some power. Again, this has to do with the
soul being his substantial form.
In the fourth place, this interpretation would suggest, in Thomas'
terms, that the body with its powers is per accidens related
to Socrates' being.  If Socrates is a substance, and the body
is per accidens to his being, then the body is per
accidens to his substance.  In which case he is not a corporeal
substance or animal at all, even in this life.  The interpretation
seems to return to giving the appearance that the intellectual soul is
a kind of angel, only now adding that this angel is Socrates for a
time associated with bodily powers.  But recall Thomas' rejection of
the Plurality of Substantial Forms position.  His own account of the
soul is that the animal powers of the soul are as much powers of the
human soul as is the intellectual power—they are all powers in
the second mode of per se predication.  In that respect they
are all alike, and the human soul is thus per se the
substantial form of a living body, not per accidens, and the
person Socrates is that living body.  When that living body ceases to
exist through death, so also does the person who is Socratres.
“Anima mea non est ego” simply.  
Finally, Thomas clearly understands and accepts the implications of
his view that Socrates is the living animal, namely, that the
continued existence of the human soul after death is not sufficient
for the continued existence of the human person.  If the living animal
no longer exists after death, then neither does Socrates.  If the
living animal is not immortal, then neither is Socrates.  Consider
these objections that Thomas himself considers.  There is no
resurrection of the body; only the souls of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob
live after death.  Thomas writes in response that the soul of Abraham
is not Abraham, and the life of Abraham's soul is not sufficient for
the life of Abraham.  The whole composite of Abraham's soul and body
must live for Abraham to live. Thus if only Abraham's soul lives after
death, Abraham does not.  (Summa Theologiae 75.1 ad 2)
Similarly when in the Commentary on First Corinthians Thomas writes
“anima mea non est ego,” it is precisely to
emphasize the importance of the resurrection of the body for human
salvation.  He writes that “hence allowing that the soul gains
salvation in another life, neither I nor any other human being
does,” (unde licet anima consequatur salutem in alia vita,
non tamen ego vel quilibet homo.) because “anima mea non
est ego.” The importance of the theological doctrine of Christ's
Resurrection is that it affirms that it is I who am ultimately saved
through my resurrection from the dead, which involves me coming to
exist when my body rises from the dead.
Of course Thomas does not think that the resurrection of the body is
demonstrable in philosophy.  For him it is a revealed truth, not one
of the praeambula fidei.  Nonetheless he thinks it is
rationally fitting for God to bring it about, since otherwise there
would be these very odd beings in existence for all time, incorporeal,
immaterial, incorruptible subsistent forms the “nature” of
which is to be the substantial forms of living bodies.  Earlier we saw
how Thomas' use of philosophical analysis helped to avoid the
potentially distorting view of the theologian upon the nature of the
soul.  Here, we see how a revealed truth helps the philosopher avoid
an equally distorting philosophical account of the soul and personal
identity that would skew the philosophical books toward a personal
human immortality without having to live as a human animal.
When Aristotle rejected the Platonic Ideas or Forms, accepting some of
the arguments against them that Plato himself had devised in the
Parmenides, he did not thereby reject the notion that the 
telos of philosophical enquiry is a wisdom which turns on what man 
can know of God. The magnificent panorama provided at the beginning 
of the Metaphysics as gloss on the claim that all men 
naturally desire to know rises to and culminates in the conception of
wisdom as knowledge of all things in their ultimate or first causes. 
For much of the twentieth century, Aristotelian studies had been 
conducted under the influence of Werner Jaeger's (1934) evolutionary 
hypothesis. On this view, Aristotle began as an ardent Platonist for 
whom the really real lay beyond sensible reality. With maturity, 
however, came the sober Macedonian empiricism which trained its 
attention on the things of this world and eschewed all efforts to 
transcend it. As for the Metaphysics, Jaeger saw it as an 
amalgam of both theories. The passage just alluded to at the 
beginning of the work is ascribed to the Platonic phase. Other 
passages have a far more modest understanding of the range and point 
of a science over and above natural philosophy and mathematics. 
Platonice loquendo, there are entities which exist 
separately from sensible things and they constitute the object of the
higher science. The more sober view finds a role for a science beyond
natural philosophy and mathematics, but it will deal with things 
those particular sciences leave unattended, e.g. defense of the first
principle of reasoning. But these tasks do not call for, and do not 
imply, a range of beings over and above sensible things.
Jaeger (1934) found both these conceptions of metaphysics juxtaposed
in a crucial passage of Book Six.
Jaeger invites us to see here a monument to a lost hope and an 
abiding reluctance to bid it a definitive farewell. Aristotle 
mentions the possibility of an immovable substance, something 
existing apart from the natural realm. Without such a separate 
substance, natural philosophy will be first philosophy. If there is 
such a substance, it will be a kind of being different from material 
being. The science that studies it will bear on a certain kind of 
being, immovable substance, immaterial being, not on being as being. 
It will be a special, not a universal, science. Jaeger sees Aristotle
seeking to glue on to the special science the tasks that belong to a 
universal science, to make a theology into an ontology. 
Jaeger's hypothesis dominated interpretations of the 
Metaphysics until very recently. Giovanni Reale's book (1961)
had to await English translation before it could have any impact in
English circles of interpretation. By that time, people were turning
from Jaeger's account and toward a more direct reading of
Aristotle. When we reconsider Thomas as a commentator on
the Metaphysics, it becomes clear that his reading is in
stark opposition to Jaeger's claims.
But let us first lay out Thomas's view of metaphysics. His question 
is Aristotle's: is there any science beyond natural science and 
mathematics? If to be and to be material are identical, then the 
science of being as being will be identical with the science of 
material being. That is what Aristotle rejects in the passage just 
quoted. It is in the course of doing natural philosophy that one 
gains certain knowledge that not everything that is is material. At 
the end of the Physics, Aristotle argues from the nature of 
moved movers that they require a first unmoved mover. If successful, 
this proof establishes that there is a first mover of all moved 
movers which is not itself material. Furthermore, the discussion of 
intellect in On the Soul III, to which we alluded in the 
preceding paragraph, points beyond the material world. If the 
activity of intellect provides a basis for saying that, while the 
human soul is the substantial form of the body, it can exist apart 
from the body, that is, survive death, it is an immaterial existent. 
The Prime Mover and the immortal souls of human beings entail that to
be and to be material are not identical. Since these are acquisitions
at the limit of natural philosophy, they represent possible objects 
of inquiry in their own right. This is pre-eminently the case with 
the Prime Mover. It seems inevitable that there should be a 
discipline whose principal aim is to know more about the divine. How 
can it be described?
Thomas discusses early the way theoretical sciences are distinguished
from one another in the course of his exposition of the tractate of
Boethius On the Trinity. The text speaks of three kinds of
theoretical science, physics, mathematics and theology, and Thomas
invokes the methodology of the Posterior
Analytics. A scientia is constituted by a demonstrative
syllogism. From a formal point of view, a conclusion follows
necessarily from the premises in a well-formed syllogism. Still the
conclusion may state a merely contingent truth. What is needed in a
demonstrative syllogism is not just the necessity of the consequence
but a necessary consequent, and this requires that the premises
express necessary truths. That which is necessary cannot be otherwise
than as it is; it cannot change.  Science thus requires that it bear
on immobile things. There is another requirement of the object of
speculative or theoretical knowledge which stems from
intellection. The activity of the mind, as has been mentioned, is not
a material event; it is immaterial. Since it is the mind that knows,
science is a mode of its knowing, and will share its nature. Thomas
thus states two essential characteristics of the object of
speculation, the speculabile: it must be removed both from
matter and from motion. If that is the case then insofar as there are
formally different ways in which
speculabilia can be removed from matter and motion, there 
will be formally different speculative sciences.
By this analysis, Thomas has provided the necessary background for 
understanding the text of Boethius but also more importantly that of 
Aristotle as it is developed in the chapter from which Werner Jaeger 
quoted in order to display the failure of the Aristotelian project. 
“Now we must not fail to notice the nature of the essence and 
of its formula, for, without this, inquiry is but idle. Of things 
defined, i.e. of essences, some are like snub, and some like concave.
And these differ because snub is bound up with matter (for what is 
snub is a concave nose), while concavity is independent of 
perceptible matter.” (1025a28–32) The objects of natural 
philosophy are defined like ‘snub’ and the objects of 
mathematics like ‘concave’. This makes it clear that the 
way in which natural things are separated from sensible matter is the
way in which the definition common to many things abstracts from the 
singular characteristics of each. But it is the matter as singular 
that is the principle of change in things, so the common definition 
has the requisite necessity for science. This or that man comes to 
be, but what-it-is-to-be-a-man does not come to be or pass away.
Mathematical things, on the analogy of ‘concave’, do not 
have sensible matter in their definitions. Lines, points, numbers, 
triangles—these do not have sensible qualities whether stated 
universally or singularly. The fact that we define mathematicals 
without sensible matter does not commit us to the view that 
mathematicals actually exist apart from sensible matter.
In the commentary on Boethius to which reference has been made, 
Thomas has early on recalled another fundamental aspect of 
Aristotle's thought. The objects of thought are either simple or 
complex, where complex means that one thing is affirmed or denied of 
another. Knowledge of simples is expressed in a definition, that of 
the complex in a proposition. Thinking of human nature without 
thinking of singular characters of this man or that is a matter of 
definition, not of assertion, as if one were denying that human 
nature is found in singular matter. So too defining mathematicals 
without sensible matter is not tantamount to the judgment that 
mathematicals exist apart from sensible matter. These are both 
instances of abstraction, where abstraction means to think apart what
does not exist apart. Thus it is that the question of metaphysics 
turns on what Thomas calls separatio. To separate differs 
from abstraction in this that separation is expressed in a negative 
judgment, an asserted proposition: this is not that, that 
this exists apart from that. The relevant 
separation for metaphysics is the negative judgment that to be and to
be material are not the same. That is, there are things which exist 
apart from matter and motion—not just are defined without, but 
exist without matter and motion.
What then is the subject of metaphysics? “Subject” here 
means the subject of the conclusion of the demonstrative syllogism. 
The discussion of definition in effect bore on the middle terms of 
demonstrative syllogisms. The suggestion is that formally different 
modes of defining, with respect to removal from matter and motion, 
ground the formal difference between types of theoretical science. 
The subject of a demonstration in natural philosophy is defined 
without singular but with common or universal sensible matter; the 
subject of a mathematical demonstration is defined without any 
sensible matter. How can the subject of metaphysics be expressed? The
possibility of the science depends on our knowing that some things 
exist apart from matter and motion. Mathematics does not presuppose 
the separate existence of its objects; metaphysics does. Why not then
say that metaphysics deals with things separated from matter and 
motion, that is with a particular kind of being? But that is not 
the subject ever assigned to this effort by Aristotle. The 
methodological reasons can be found in chapter 17 of Book Seven of 
the Metaphysics: the subject of a science must always be a 
complex. That is why the subject of this discipline is being 
as being.
Why should we say that, in our desire to learn more about separate 
substances, we should take as our subject all the things that are? 
The short answer is this: in order to be a theology, metaphysics must
first be an ontology. Separate substance, divine being, is not 
directly accessible for our inspection or study. We come upon our 
first secure knowledge of a god in the proof of the Prime Mover. 
Tantalizingly, once seen as a necessary requirement for there being 
any moved movers, the Prime Mover does not become a thematic object 
of inquiry in natural philosophy. One obvious reason for this is that
such an entity is not an instance of the things which fall under the 
scope of the science. Knowledge of it comes about obliquely and 
indirectly. The same restriction is operative when the philosopher 
turns his culminating attention to a deity. How can he know more 
about the first cause of things? If the Prime Mover is known through 
moved movers as his effects, any further knowledge of him must be 
through his effects. It is by describing the effect as widely as 
possible that one seeks to come to a knowledge of the first cause 
unrestricted by the characteristics of mobile things. That 
characterization is being as being. The subject of metaphysics is 
being in all its amplitude in order to acquire a knowledge of the 
cause of being that will be correspondingly unbounded.
Earlier we indicated the difference between philosophy and theology 
in the writings of St. Thomas. That distinction takes theology to 
mean discourse that takes its rise from the revealed truths of the 
Bible. But there is also a theology which constitutes the defining 
telos of philosophical inquiry. In the following passage, Thomas 
contrasts the two theologies in a way which throws light on what was 
said in the preceding paragraph. 
Philosophical theology is not some science distinct from metaphysics;
it is simply the name that can be given to metaphysics because it 
appeals to a god as the cause of its subject. This may make it seem 
that knowledge of a god is merely a bonus, a tangential consideration; 
on the contrary, it is the chief aim of the science. But the divine 
can only be known indirectly, through its effects. For this reason, 
metaphysics can be viewed as an extended effort to examine substance 
in order to come to knowledge of the first cause. And given the 
principle that we name things as we know them (ST Ia.13.1), this can 
be regarded as a prolonged effort to develop the language with which 
we speak of a god. 
Thomas says that the truth of the proposition a god exists is
knowable in itself, because the predicate is included in the essence 
of the subject. But it is not knowable to us, because the essence of 
a god is unknowable to us. He also says that the essence of a god is 
existence, that such a being is ipsum esse subsistens, and yet that we
cannot know this essence. How is any of this coherent? Mustn't one 
know what one is talking about to deny anything of it, in particular 
to deny that it is knowable to us? How can Thomas simultaneously assert 
what the essence of a god is and deny that we know it? 
In order to understand why his claims about the existence and essence
of a god are not incoherent, we need to place them within the context
of Aristotle's Posterior Analytics. According to Aristotle,
one mode of per se predication, the first, is that in which
the predicate of the proposition is included within the definition of
the subject.  We've already seen the second, where the subject is
included in the defintion of the predicate, the mode appropriate to
the powers of a subject. So in the first mode, if one immediately knew
the essential definition of the subject, one would immediately know
that a particular proposition is per se true simply by
knowing that its predicate is included within that essential
definition. Any proposition in which the predicate is included in the
essential definition of the subject is knowable in itself. For
instance, Thomas thinks that anyone who knows the language will know
the truth of a proposition like a whole consists of the sum of its
parts. Because the terms are related in this fashion and so
fundamental in the language, no special knowledge is necessary to
grasp its truth. Such a proposition is thus knowable in itself but
also to us.
However, clearly this account leaves open the possibility of subjects
in which the essential definition is either unknown or even
unknowable. For instance, if we suppose that H2O is the essential
definition of water, we have to recognize that there will be many who
will not know it. It will not be immediately “known to
us,” but require learning. No doubt we can still refer to water
in statements about it because the term ‘water’ has a
nominal definition, clear-potable-odorless etc., used by the community
to refer to what is in fact H2O. So that water is H2O will be
knowable in itself, even if unknowable to us, until we engage in
Chemistry. Consider the mind. Clearly we use the term 'mind'
meaningfully in any number of sentences. But perhaps, as Colin McGinn
has argued, the actual nature of mind is incomprehensible to limited
minds such as ours. In that case it might be knowable in itself, and
yet strictly unknowable to us. Thus the distinction between what is
knowable in itself and what is knowable to us is not incoherent.
What of the claims that the essence of a god is not just unknown to
us, but unknowable to us, that the essence of a god is His existence,
and that it is ipsum esse subsistens? Don't these remain
jointly inconsistent and thus incoherent, even if the underlying
distinction is not? No. In claiming that the essence of a god is not
knowable to us, Thomas is talking about its accessibility to
philosophical inquiry. The human mind of itself is proportioned to
knowing material things. It can only know immaterial things insofar as
causal arguments can be made to posit the existence of such things as
necessary to the explanation of material things—causes that are
only appealed to when one has excluded the possibility of a material
explanation of the phenomenon. But we've already seen that to claim
that something is immaterial is not to know any property of it, much
less its essence. Still, it remains available to Thomas to claim that
while the knowledge of the essence of a god is unknowable to
philosophy, it is known to us by Revelation. Indeed, he appeals to
God's revelation to Moses on Sinai to establish the claim that God's
essence is ipsum esse subsistens—that is to say, the
being who reveals Himself to Moses identifies Himself as what the
philosophers are looking for but cannot find in its essence.  And
Christians believe that God further discloses Himself in the
Incarnation of Christ and the Gospel narratives as a Trinity of
Persons in Unity of Substance. (Summa theologiae Ia.31.1 ad
4) Here, in knowing the essence of God as trinitarian we have another
example, like the Resurrection, of something that can only be known by
faith in God's Revelation. It is not something that can be known by
both Revelation and Philosophy. So the essence of God is knowable in
itself, and also to the learned. But the learned are not the
philosophers. Rather they are all those who know it by faith in God's
revelation.
So, can the existence of God be philosophically demonstrated? If God's
essence is His existence, and His essence remains in principle
philosophically unknowable to us, how could it be demonstrated? In
fact, Aquinas claims that it can be demonstrated that there
is a god, and that there is only one god. That God's
essence remains in principle philosophically unknowable to us is the
basis for Aquinas' denial that the existence of God can be
demonstrated a priori. And any reliance upon knowledge of the
essence that is only known to us by faith would by that fact cease to
be properly philosophical. However, we have seen that Aquinas relies
upon the distinction between nominal definitions of terms and
essential definitions of the subjects referred to by those terms. To
demonstrate the existence of a god one may use nominal definitions
that appeal to a god as the cause of various phenomena. This is to
argue a posteriori. The appeal to these nominal definitions
forms the basis for Aquinas' Five Ways (Summa Theologiae,
Ia.2.3) all of which end with some claim about how the term
‘god’ is used.
Again, some will claim that Aquinas isn't really interested in proving
the existence of God in these Five Ways. After all, he already knows
the existence of God by faith, and he is writing a theological work
for beginners. What need is there of proving the existence of
something he already knows exists? The Ways are very sketchy, and
don't even necessarily conclude to a single being, much less God or
the Christian God. In addition, Aquinas claims that God's essence is
his existence and that we cannot know His essence, so we cannot know
His existence. Aquinas must really intend the Five Ways as less than
proofs; they are more like incomplete propaedeutic considerations for
thinking adequately about God in Sacred Theology.  In effect, Aquinas
doesn't think philosophy can in fact demonstrate the existence of
God.
But as elsewhere these claims are ambiguous and suffer at the hands of
Thomas' own texts. In the first place, the objection that he already
knows by faith that God exists has some merit in it, if we understand
it as directed at a reading of Thomas that would have him attempting a
foundational enterprise of grounding religious faith in what is
rationally demonstrable by Philosophy. But that reading is
anachronistic, and does not attend to the context of the Summa
Theologiae. There is no reason to think that Thomas thinks the
proofs are necessary for the rationality of religious faith. They are
part of the enterprise of showing that Sacra Doctrina meets
the condition of a science as described by Aristotle in the
Posterior Analytics, which he had argued in the first
question of the Summa, an issue that is different from the
question of the broad rationality of religious faith.
In addition, the objections end up denying what Aquinas writes
immediately before the Five Ways—that the existence of a god is
“demonstrable.” (Summa Theologiae Ia.2.2) And his
introduction of the Five Ways begins by saying that the existence of a
god can be “proved” in Five Ways. To counter the objection
that he must mean something informal here by “demonstrate”
and “prove,” one need only recognize the explicit use of
Aristotle's Posterior Analytics to sort through the
question. He cites Aristotle's distinction between demonstrating the
existence of some subject, and going on to demonstrate properties of
that subject by appeal to the essence of the subject as cause of those
properties. The first kind of demonstration is called
demonstration quia, the second demonstration propter
quid. In order to have any science at all, the subject matter
must exist. So demonstration quia must precede
demonstration propter quid. If you want to have a science of
unicorns, you have to show me that there is at least one unicorn to be
studied. There is no science of what does not exist. So there are two
demonstrative stages in any science, the demonstration of the
existence of the subject (quia), and the demonstration of the
properties of the subject through its essence (propter
quid). Aquinas' denial that the essence of God can be known
philosophically is a denial that one can have propter quid
scientific understanding of a god through philosophy. It is not a
denial that there can be demonstration quia of the existence
of a god. There is no reason to deny that Thomas thinks the Five Ways
are proofs or demonstrations in the most robust sense, namely that
which he appeals to as set out by Aristotle in the Posterior
Analytics.
Notice however the back and forth between the use of ‘God’
as a proper name and the use of ‘god’ as a common
noun. One source of the ambiguity in the objections comes about
because it is claimed that Aquinas does not think one can demonstrate
the existence of God. But in terms of the Posterior Analytics
one cannot demonstrate the existence of anything under a proper
name. One can point at Socrates, and say “see, Socrates is
alive.” One cannot do that with God. In addition, one cannot
give a formal argument for Socrates existence using
‘Socrates’. One can only demonstrate in the relevant sense
using common nouns, since such nouns are the only ones that have
definitions, either nominal or essential. So strictly speaking it is
true that Thomas doesn't think one can demonstrate the existence
of God in the Five Ways.  He recognizes the difference
between ‘God’ used as a proper noun, and ‘god’
used as a common noun. (Summa Theologiae Ia.13.9) The
ambiguity is pronounced in Latin which lacks the indefinite article
‘a’, where in English we can disambiguate between
‘God’ and ‘a god’. The situation is
exacerbated by translations that simply translate ‘deus’
in the Ways as ‘God’ in English. In the Five Ways, he does
not use ‘god’as a proper name, but as a common noun having
five different nominal definitions. So each of the ways concludes that
there is “a god.” Thus, it is also true that the Five Ways
do not as such prove that there is only one god. It is for that reason
that Thomas himself thinks one must actually argue additionally that a
god must be utterly unique, and thus that there can be only one, which
he does several questions after the Five Ways (Summa
Theologiae Ia.11). Of course, once the utter uniqueness of a god
has been shown, one can begin to use “God” as a proper
name to refer to that utterly unique being, as he subsequently argues
in Summa Theologiae Ia.13 does happen.
It is the utter uniqueness and singularity of a god that undermines
the objection that whatever the philosophical arguments terminate in,
it is not the god of Judaism, Christianity, and Islam, a god who is
only known by faith. That is simply to deny Thomas' claim that the god
Jews, Christians, and Muslims believe in can be known, but only
partially by philosophical analysis. If the demonstrations work, as
Thomas thinks they do, what other god would the Jews, Christians, and
Muslims believe in? There is no other god.  Given God's revelation, He
must be identified with the utterly unique being the philosopher's
argument terminates in.
Finally, the sketchy character of the Ways reflects the fact that they
are directed at beginning students. However the audience of beginners
that Thomas has in mind are not beginners in Philosophy.  They are
beginners in Sacra Doctrina. As we have seen, in the medieval
educational setting such beginners would be thoroughly steeped in the
philosophical disciplines before ever being allowed to study Sacra
Doctrina. So Aquinas could expect his readers to know the much
more extensive and complete arguments he was gesturing at with the
Five Ways, arguments to be found in detail in other figures like
Aristotle, Avicenna, and so on, as well as in other works of his own,
the Summa Contra Gentiles for example. In short, even if the
Five Ways are judged to be unsound demonstrations, a judgment that
requires close analysis and examination of the filled out arguments,
there is no reason to suggest that Thomas took them any less seriously
as demonstrations or proofs in the fullest sense.
Now, even though there can be no demonstration propter quid
of God's essence or nature, this does not mean that philosophical
theology is left with a bare knowledge of the existence of God, and
nothing more. The second stage of science will go on, but it will go
on in a mode deeply indebted to Pseudo-Dionysius and Neoplatonism with
the approach often called the “via negativa.” Instead of
arguing positively from the essence of God to His properties, one will
argue from God's effects, particularly the perfections of creatures
that do not of necessity involve material embodiment, to the
affirmation that God possesses these perfections. However, recognizing
that the way in which God possesses these perfections must be
different from the way in which creatures possess them, one must deny
that God has them in the creaturely mode. Instead He must possess them
in a “super eminent” fashion that we cannot
comprehend. So, while on the basis of effect to cause arguments we can
say that God is just, wise, good, perfect, and so on, we do not know
what it is for God to be just, wise, good, and perfect. We end up
denying of God the creaturely mode of these perfections. In this way
God is approached negatively by denying things of Him rather than by
directly knowing what God is. This account relies heavily upon the use
of analogous names in talking about God and creatures. 
Aristotle spoke of “things said in many ways,” a notable
instance of which is “being.” One of the difficulties with
assigning being, or being qua being as the subject of a science is
that a subject must be univocally common to the things that fall under
it. But ‘being’ is not univocal, as it has a plurality of
meanings. Aristotle solved this problem with his account of
“things said in many ways,” by observing that while they
have many meanings, these form an ordered set with one of the meanings
as primary and regulative. Substance is being in the primary sense,
which is why the science of being as being is effectively a science of
substance. Thomas's term for such names is analogy:
‘being’ is an analogous term and its primary analogate is
substance. 
In the crucial middle books of the Metaphysics—Seven
and Eight—we have an analysis of substance which takes off from
material substance, which is a compound of matter and form, and
arrives at a notion of substance as form alone. This definition does
not fit material substance, of course, but it is devised in order to
be able to apply the term substance to the immaterial things whose
existence has been established in natural philosophy. This extension
of names, whose natural habitat is sensible things, to God is another
instance of analogous naming for Thomas. Names common to God and
creatures bring out another feature of our knowing. If we ask what the
primary analogate of names common to God and creatures is, the answer
is: the meaning of the term as it applies to creatures. The word must
be refined before it can be applied to God and this means the
formation of an extended meaning which leans on the primary meaning
for its intelligibility.
Consider the example of ‘wise’. Both men and God are said
to be wise. What can we mean when we say that God is wise? Not the
same thing as when we say that Socrates is wise. Socrates became wise
and wisdom is a trait which with age and forgetfulness he could lose.
Thus to be Socrates and to be wise are not the same thing. But in the
case of God, ‘wise’ does not signify some incidental
property He might or might not have. This is captured by noting that
while we say God is wise, we also say he is wisdom. This
suffices to indicate the way in which the meaning of the term as
applied to God involves negating features of its meaning as it applies
to men.
If God is thus named secondarily by the common name, so that the
creature is primarily named by it, nonetheless God's wisdom is the
cause and source of human wisdom. Ontologically, God is primary and
the creature secondary. Names analogously common to God and creature
thus underscore the way in which what comes to be known first for us
is not first in reality, and what is first in reality is not first in
our knowledge.
It is evident that material substances exist contingently. They come
into being and they pass out of being. While they exist, their
existing is not what they are. Thomas accepts from Boethius that it is
self-evident that what a thing is and its existing differ
(diversum est esse et id quod est). Material things depend
upon causes to exist, both to become and to be. There is no need to
dwell on this except insofar as it provides a springboard to speak of
immaterial substance. Only in God is it the case that what he is and
his existing are identical: God is His own existence. The phrase
Thomas uses to express this is ipsum esse subsistens. Of
course this is paradoxical. Existence is the actuality of a substance,
not itself something subsistent. This is true with material
substances. But when we ask what we mean by saying that God exists, we
have to negate aspects of material existence in order to avoid
speaking of Him as if he were a contingent being. 
The problem that Thomas now faces is how to speak of the immaterial
substances which are less than God although superior to material
substances, that is, angels. For a material thing to exist is for its
form actually to inhere in its matter. But what is it for a pure form
to exist? Since immaterial substances less than God are dependent on
the divine causality in order to exist, existing cannot be what they
are of their essence. In short, in angels too there is a distinction
of essence and existence. Thomas notes that a created separate
substance is what it is and not another thing: that is, it has the
perfection it has, but not unlimited perfection. It is a being of a
kind, not being as such. Gabriel is perfect as to his nature, but he
lacks the perfection of being Raphael or Michael. Form thus operates
as a restriction on existence as such. In God alone is there
unrestricted existence; He is existence, ipsum esse
subsistens. Here we have an argument for the fact that God's
essence is his existence, because His essence is not a
restriction of esse to a finite expression or character. And
yet it remains true that while we know the fact, we do not know the
why of the fact because the knowledge of God's essence remains unknown
to us.
Thomas' Moral Doctrine is primarily eudaimonistic and virtue based.
Human beings always act for an end that is conceived of as good.  A
desired good provides the motive for initiating and completing some
act.  Action begins in desire and ends in satisfaction or joy in
completion— the achievement or acquisition of the good
apprehended and desired.  Properly human action proceeds from and is
under the control of intellect and will.  While human beings have many
appetites informed by sense cognition of the world, they also have
rational appetite that is informed by an intellectual apprehension of
the world and the goods within it appropriate to human flourishing.
Errors of apprehension are certainly possible, and yet a human action
always originates in the apprehension of some apparent good by
intellect and the desire for it by the will informed by the
apprehension.  Will is rational appetite.  Actions are judged to be
good or bad in relation to real human goods for which they are either
conducive (good) or detrimental (bad).  Given the complexity of human
life and the goods appropriate to it, it may well happen that a
particular action may be judged to be good in many ways, and yet also
bad in others.  For one to have acted well simply is for one to have
done something that is good in every respect.  There is one single
ultimate human good that provides an ordering of all other human goods
as partial in relation to it, namely, happiness or better in the
Latin beatitudo.
When Aristotle sought to isolate the human good, he employed the 
so-called function argument. If one knows what a carpenter is or does
he has the criteria for recognizing a good carpenter. So too with 
bank-tellers, golfers, brain surgeons and locksmiths. If then man as 
such has a function, we will have a basis for deciding whether 
someone is a good human being. But what could this function be? Just 
as we do not appraise carpenters on the basis of their golf game or 
golfers on the basis of their being able to pick locks, we will not 
want to appraise the human agent on an incidental basis. So too we do
not appraise the carpenter in terms of his weight, the condition of 
his lungs, or his taste buds. No more would we appraise a human being 
on the basis of activities similar to those engaged in by non-human 
animals. The activity that sets the human agent apart from all others
is rational activity. The human agent acts knowingly-willingly. 
If this is the human function, the human being who performs it well 
will be a good person and be happy.
Thomas argues that there is one single end for all human beings, and
that it is happiness.  However, that is a formal description of the
end, leaving open the material specification of just what that
happiness is for a human being.  Thomas distinguishes in the Summa
Theologiae between the imperfect happiness of this life and the
perfect happiness of the next life in beatitude or union with God. And
on the basis of this distinction some will argue that Aquinas
ultimately finds Aristotle's function argument unsatisfying, insofar
as the result of the function argument is supposed to be the claim
that happiness consists in a complete life lived in accord with reason
and virtue. And here again it will be claimed that Aquinas in some
sense rejects the fundamentals of the Aristotelian account. Insofar as
he describes the life in accord with reason and virtue in this life as
imperfect, he must be suggesting that it is in some sense faulty, not
true or real happiness. Real happiness is something other. 
But such an interpretation fails on a number of counts. In the first
place it misunderstands Aquinas' use of ‘imperfect’ which
does not mean faulty or false. It can mean not
as great by comparison, as in the claim that human beings are
imperfect with regard to the angels. This claim is not meant to
suggest that human beings are faulty or false angels; it simply means
that their perfection is not as great in the scale of being as that of
the angels. It can also mean incomplete in the constitution of some
overall good. So the pursuit of some limited good, say education, is
imperfect because not the complete human good, even though it is
partially constitutive of the human good. But it is certainly not a
faulty or false human good.
In the second place, such a claim about Aquinas has to confront his
own understanding of Aristotle. Aquinas claims that Aristotle
understood that a complete life in accord with reason and virtue in
this life is incomplete or imperfect happiness. (See his commentary on
the Nichomachean Ethics, Book 1, lect. 16,
#200–202). Indeed, Aristotle himself says that perfect happiness
is to be associated with the divine. (Nichomachean Ethics,
1099b9–13) Thus Aquinas does not claim for himself the
distinction between imperfect and perfect happiness, but attributes it
to Aristotle. And so his use of it in the Summa Theologiae
cannot be taken to be a rejection of the analysis Aristotle provides
of the formal characteristics of happiness.
Obviously, one may fault Thomas for his understanding of Aristotle.
But the claim that he misinterprets Aristotle is no argument that he
rejects Aristotle. In fact, his interpretation of Aristotle on
imperfect and perfect happiness embodies the thesis he expresses in
the Summa Theologiae that we saw above. The philosophers are
capable of grasping some of the things that are constitutive of or
necessary for perfect happiness in beatitude. Revelation concerning
even those matters they can grasp is necessary, because what they have
grasped takes a long time, is very difficult, and may be filled with
errors. God in his mercy makes these things known in revelation in
order that perfect happiness may be attained. And yet, Thomas never
abandons the fundamental affirmation of the human capacity to
understand apart from revelation the nature of happiness in formal
terms and what constitutes its imperfect material status in this life,
even as its perfect embodiment in the next remains unattainable to
philosophy without the resources of faith. 
Many have come to this point, pulse quickened by the possibilities of
the function-argument, only to be gripped with doubt at this final
application of it. Rational activity seems too unmanageable a
description to permit a function-analysis of it. Of course Aristotle
agrees, having made the point himself. Rational activity is said in
many ways or, as Thomas would put it, it is an analogous term. It
covers an ordered set of instances. There is the activity of reason as
such, there is the activity of reason in its directive or practical
capacity, and there are bodily movements and the like which are
rational insofar as rational provides the adequate formal description
of them. If the virtue of a function is to perform it well, the
analogy of “rational activity” makes clear that there is a
plurality of virtues. Moral virtues are habits of appetite brought
about by the direction of reason. Temperance is to seek pleasure
rationally; courage is to react to the threat of harm rationally. The
virtues of practical intellect are art and prudence; the virtues of
theoretical intellect are insight, science and wisdom.
All this and much more enters into Thomas's moral teaching. Thomas
will distinguish acts of a human from human acts, the former being
activities truly found in human agents, but also found in other
non-human agents too. For example, the act of a human might be as
important as the beating of his heart or or as trivial as the nervous
tapping of his fingers. The human act is one which proceeds from and
is under the control of reason and will. Since the human act by
definition is the pursuit of a known good, the question arises as to
the relationship between the objects of the myriad acts that humans
perform. Is there some over-all good sought by human agents? Is there
an ultimate end of human action?
In commenting on chapter two of Book One of the Nicomachean
Ethics where Aristotle argues for there being an ultimate end,
Thomas points out that the argument is actually a series of
reductiones ad absurdum. That is, the denial of an ultimate 
end of human action reduces to the claim that there is no end to 
human seeking at all, that it is pointless. This analysis has not 
gotten the attention it deserves: the implication is that it is 
self-evident that there is an ultimate end which is why denials of it
must flounder in incoherence. The argument for an ultimate end that 
Thomas puts forth in the Summa Theologiae is somewhat 
different. Any action aims at some good. A particular good by 
definition shares in and is not identical with goodness itself. What 
binds together all the acts that humans perform is the overarching 
goodness they seek in this, that, and the other thing. That over 
arching goodness, what Thomas calls the ratio bonitatis, is 
the ultimate end. It follows that anything a human agent does is done
for the sake of the ultimate end.
This dissatisfies because we feel we are owed a richer account of
goodness. After all, human agents differ insofar as they have
different notions of what goodness is. Fame, wealth, pleasure, power,
and so on seem to function as the dominant purpose of different
persons. Thomas could scarcely overlook this, let alone deny it. Can
his earlier position on the unity of the ultimate end still stand?
The fact that there are false or inadequate identifications of
goodness does not mean that there is not a true and adequate account
of what is perfecting or fulfilling of human agents. Everyone acts on
the supposition that what he does will contribute to his overall good;
one's overall good is the ultimate reason for doing anything.  But not
everything one does under this aegis actually contributes to one's
overall good. Thus in one sense there is one and the same ultimate end
for every human agent—the integral human good—and there
are correct and mistaken notions of what actually constitutes this
integral good.
This may seem like an empty claim, but it provides a basis on which to
proceed. If indeed every human agent acts for the sake of his overall
good, the discussion can turn to whether or not what he here and now
pursues, or his general theory of what constitutes the overall good,
can withstand scrutiny. It is not necessary to persuade anyone that he
ought to pursue the ultimate end in the sense of his overall
good. What else would he pursue? But if one is persuaded that what he
pursues does not contribute to his overall good, he already has
reasons for changing his ways.
Thomas' broad account of virtues as excellences or perfections of
the various human powers formally echoes Aristotle, both with regard
to the nature of a virtue and many specific virtues.  Virtues are
developed habits of powers disposing agents to good actions.  Because
human actions are those acts that are subject to the rule of human
reason and will, the human virtues reside in the various powers that
are subject to the rule of reason and will.  As developed dispositions
they stand as intermediate states between the powers simply and the
full blown exercises of those powers.  A virtue is a kind of mean
between excess and defect in the exercise of a power.  For example,
with regard to eating a temperate person eats what is appropriate to
him or her, pursuing neither too much which would lead to gluttony nor
to little which would lead to starvation.
However, it is a mistake to think that Thomas simply repeats
Aristotle.  In the first place, he discusses a wide array of both
particular virtues and vices never discussed by Aristotle.  More
importantly the theological setting of his work results in a number of
distinctions concerning the virtues that pertain to human life and
happiness.  Thomas first distinguishes a twofold happiness for human
beings.  One is the sort of happiness that is achievable by a human
agent in this life through the exercise of the powers he or she is
endowed with by nature.  He says this is a happiness that is
“proportionate” to human nature.  It may well include the
sort of contemplation of the nature of divinity the philosophers
aspire to.  However, Thomas adds that there is “another”
happiness that cannot be achieved simply by the exercise of the human
powers without divine supernatural assistance. (Summa
theologiae Ia-IIae.62.1) This is a happiness not to be found
perfectly in this life, but only in the next.  It
is beatitudo or blessedness strictly speaking.  It consists
in the intellectual vision of God and all things “in” God.
While the kind of contemplation of God the philosophers aspire to in
this life consists in knowing God through His effects and the ways in
which they represent Him as cause, this beatitudo of the next
life Thomas describes as a participation in the life of divinity
itself as the essence of God Himself is united by the “light of
glory” to the intellect of the human being (Summa
theologiae Ia.12), a union with God that results in the
experience of ultimate and final joy or delight of the
will. (Summa theologiae IIa-IIae.11.3-4) However, even though
this beatitudo is brought about supernaturally by the power
of God, it is not utterly foreign to human nature.  In effect, the
supernatural power of God elevates or expands the powers of intellect
and will to a kind of completion beyond themselves and yet not foreign
to them.  So this distinction of a “twofold happiness”
should not be thought of as involving two fundamentally distinct goals
or ends of human life.  The second supernatural happiness is seen as a
kind of surpassing perfection of the first.
This distinction of a twofold happiness in human life leads to a
distinction between the natural virtues and the theological virtues.
Natural virtues are virtues that pertain to the happiness of this life
that is “proportionate” to human nature.  Theological
virtues pertain to the beatitudo that is not proportionate to
human nature, the supernatural good of life with God.  Natural virtues
are divided into moral virtues and intellectual virtues.  The
intellectual virtues perfect the intellect and confer an aptness for
the good work of the intellect which is the apprehension of truth.
The moral virtues are the habits that perfect the various powers
concerned with human appetites, including rational appetite,
conferring upon them an aptness for the right use of those
appetites.
The cardinal natural virtues are Prudence, Justice, Courage, and
Temperance.  Prudence is an intellectual virtue since it bears upon
the goal of truth in the good ordering of action.  In addition,
because there are two specific powers of the generic sensitive
appetite, the concupiscent and the irascible, there are two cardinal
virtues that pertain to them.  The concupiscent appetite inclines one
toward what is suitable and away from what is harmful to human bodily
life.  Temperance is the cardinal virtue that pertains to it.  The
irascible appetite inclines one toward resisting those things that
attack human bodily life.  Courage is the cardinal virtue that
pertains to it.  Finally, Justice is a virtue of the rational appetite
or will.  These virtues are called “cardinal” both because
of their specific importance, but also as general headings under which
the wide array of particular virtues are classed.  Temperance and
Courage are ordered toward and perfect the good of the individual as
such, while Justice is ordered toward and perfects the good of others
in relation to the individual.
The theological virtues are Faith, Hope, and Love.  They bear upon
eternal beatitude and are simply infused by God's gift of grace.  They
cannot be acquired by human effort.  However, as noted above the
“second” supernatural happiness is not foreign to the
first natural happiness, but a kind of surpassing perfection of it.
So along with the infusion of the theological virtues, Thomas holds
that natural virtues are infused along with them.  Thus there is a
distinction between “infused natural virtues” and
“acquired natural virtues.” As infused, the natural
virtues cannot be acquired by human effort, although they may be
strengthened by it.  Acquired natural virtues, on the other hand, are
the corresponding virtues that can be acquired by human effort without
the gift of divine grace.  While Thomas acknowledges that these
acquired natural virtues can in principle be developed by human effort
without grace, he thinks that their actual acquisition by human effort
is very difficult due to the influence of sin.
In addition, the infused natural virtues spring from Charity as its
effects, and thus bear upon its object, which is the love of God and
the love of neighbor in God.  A primary example for Thomas
is Misericordia which is the virtue that pertains to
suffering with others and acting to alleviate their suffering.  It
looks like Justice because it bears upon the good of another.  And yet
it is different from Justice because it springs from the natural
friendship that all human beings bear to one another, and requires
that one take upon oneself the sufferings of other human beings.
Thomas explicitly but unconvincingly claims that Aristotle recognized
it.  And yet in the Summa Theologiae he says that it is an
effect of Charity.  In that case there is an acquired form of it and
an infused form of it.  As infused, it is informed by the love of God
and the love of neighbor in God which is beatitude.
The infused natural virtues differ in important respects
from the corresponding acquired virtues because as infused they point
toward the supernatural end, and the mean in acquired virtue is fixed
by human reason while the mean in the infused virtue is according to
divine rule.  Thomas gives as an example the difference between
acquired and infused Temperance.  Acquired temperance is a mean
inclining a human being to eat enough food to sustain his or her
health and not harm the body.  Infused temperance is a mean inclining
the human being through abstinence to castigate and subject the
body.
Even one mortal or grave sin destroys both Charity and all the infused
moral virtues that proceed from it, while leaving Hope and Faith as
lifeless habits that are no longer virtues.  On the other hand, a
single sin, whether venial or mortal, does not destroy the acquired
natural virtues.
Charity, as we've seen, is the love of God and neighbor in God. It
resides in the will. Hope is the desire for the difficult but
attainable good of eternal happiness or beatitude.  It too resides in
the will.  Faith is intellectual assent to revealed supernatural
truths that are not evident in themselves or through demonstration
from truths evident in themselves. So it resides in the intellect. It
is divided into believing that there is a god and other truths
pertaining to that truth, believing God, and believing
“in” God.  The distinction between the last two is subtle.
It is one thing to say you believe me.  It is a different thing to say
you believe in me.  The latter connotes the relation of your intellect
to the will's desire to direct yourself to me in love. Thus believing
in God goes well beyond believing that there is a god.  It suggests
the other theological virtues of Charity and Hope.
In beatitude and felicity, the fulfillment of intellect and will
respectively, the virtues of Faith and Hope fall away, and do not
exist, for one now sees with the intellect what one believed, and has
attained what one hoped for with the will.  Only Charity abides.
Thomas's reading of Aristotle's argument for the ultimate end as a
reductio and his own claim that in one sense of it everyone 
pursues the ultimate end since one chooses whatever he chooses 
sub ratione boni and as conducive to or a constituent of his
fulfillment and perfection, tell us something important about 
Thomas's mode of procedure. We said earlier that philosophy begins 
from pre-philosophical principles already had by everyone. In the 
moral order, it is essential that one uncover the starting point, the
latent presupposition of any action, clarify it and proceed from 
there. This procedure is equally manifest in Thomas's treatment of 
what he calls natural law. 
What is natural law? One description of it is: the peculiarly human
participation in the eternal law, in providence. All creatures are
ordered to an end, have natures whose fulfillment is what it is
because of those natures. It is not peculiar to man that he is
fashioned so as to find his good in the fulfillment of his nature.
That is true of anything. But other things are ordered to ends of
which they themselves are not conscious. It is peculiar to man that he
becomes aware of the good and freely directs himself to it. Of course
man is not free to choose the good—any choice is a choice under
the aspect of the good. And as to what is really as opposed to only
apparently his good, he is not free to make that what it is. He is,
however, free to direct himself or not to his true end.
A second description of natural law is: the first principles or
starting points of practical reasoning. To indicate what he means by
this, Thomas invokes the analogy of the starting points of reasoning
as such. We have already mentioned the distinction between knowledge
of the simple and knowledge of the complex. The former is a concept
and is expressed in a definition or description. The latter is an
affirmation or negation of one thing of another. There is something
which is first in each of these orders. That is, Thomas holds that
there is a conception which is prior to and presupposed by all other
conceptions and a judgment that is prior to and presupposed by all
other judgments. Since knowledge is expressed by language, this seems
to come down to the assertion that there is a first word that everyone
utters and a first statement that would appear in everyone's baby book
on the appropriate page. But surely that is false. So what does Thomas
mean?
He says that our first conception is of being, of that which is, and
our first judgment is that you cannot affirm and deny the same thing
in the same sense simultaneously. Since few if any humans first utter
‘being’ or its equivalent and no one fashions as his first
enunciation the principle of contradiction, facts as known to Thomas
as ourselves, his meaning must be more subtle. It is that whatever
concept one first forms and expresses verbally—Mama, hot,
whatever,is a specification or an instance of that which
is, being. Aristotle had observed that children at first call
all men father and all women mother. The terms then function as
generic for any male or female. Even more basically, each presupposes
that what is generically grasped is an instance of being. Being is
prior not because it is grasped absolutely, without reference to this
being or that. It is some particular being that is first of all
grasped, and however it is named it will mean minimally something that
is.
So too with regard to the first judgment. Children express their
recognition of this principle when they disagree over the location of
some quite specific thing, say a baseball mitt. One accuses the other
of taking it. You did. I didn't. You did. I didn't. A fundamental
disagreement. But what they are agreed on is that if it were true that
one did it could not simultaneously and in the same sense be true that
he did not. The principle is latent in, implicit in, any concrete
judgment just as being is involved in any other conception.
It is on an analogy with these starting points of thinking as such
that Thomas develops what he means by natural law. In the practical
order there is a first concept analogous to being in the theoretical
order and it is the good. The good means what is sought as fulfilling
of the seeker. The first practical judgment is: the good should be
done and pursued and evil avoided. Any other practical judgment is a
specification of this one and thus includes it. Natural Law consists
of this first judgment and other most general ones that are beyond
contest. These will be fashioned with reference to constituents of our
complete good—existence, food, drink, sex and family, society,
desire to know. We have natural inclinations to such goods.  Natural
law precepts concerning them refer the objects of natural inclinations
to our overall or integral good, which they specify.
Most moral judgments are true, if true, only by and large. They
express means to achieve our overall good. But because there is not a
necessary connection between the means and end, they can hold only for
the most part. Thus there are innumerable ways in which human beings
lead their lives in keeping with the ultimate end. Not all means are
necessarily related to the end. Moral philosophy reposes on natural
law precepts as common presuppositions, but its advice will be true
only in the main.  So the lives of human beings will show a great deal
of variation in the ways they pursue the human end in accord with
these general principles.  Thus the need for the virtues bearing upon
the contingencies of life, Prudence in particular.
It might be noted that when Thomas, following Aristotle, says that man
is by nature a social or political animal, he does not mean that each
of us has a tendency to enter into social contracts or the like.  The
natural in this sense is what is not chosen, but given, and what is
given about human life is that we are in the first place born into the
community of the family, are dependent on it for years in order to
survive, and that we flourish as human beings within various larger
social and political communities. The moral consists in behaving well
in these given settings.
Thomas's teaching came under attack, largely by Franciscans,
immediately after his death. Dominicans responded. This had the effect
of making Dominicans Thomists and Franciscans
non–Thomists—Bonaventurians, Scotists, Ockhamists. The
Jesuits were founded after the Reformation and they tended to be
Thomists, often with a Suarezian twist. 
When in 1879 Leo XIII issued the encyclical Aeterni Patris
calling for the revival of the study of Thomas Aquinas, he was not
directing his readers to one school as opposed to others. Thomas was
put forward as the paladin of philosophy in its true sense, as over
and against the vagaries of modern thought since Descartes. The
response to Leo's call was global and sustained. New journals and
learned societies were founded, curricula were reshaped to benefit
from the thought of Thomas and this not simply in seminaries and
pontifical universities but throughout the world in colleges and
universities. Such giants as Jacques Maritain and Etienne Gilson may
be taken to symbolize the best of this Thomistic revival.
Vatican II, the ecumenical council that met from 1962–1965 drew
this stage of the Thomistic Revival to a close. It was widely held
that the Council had dethroned Thomas in favor of unnamed contemporary
philosophers. (When they were named, quarrels began.) In the
post-conciliar period, Catholics have adopted many contemporary
philosophical trends with mixed results, as the speed with which such
trends come and go has appeared to accelerate, without obvious lasting
results. Now with the vogue of the notion that modernity has failed
and the Enlightenment Project come a cropper, many, Catholics and
non-Catholics alike, are turning to Thomas as a spur or foil for their
thinking. In 1998 John Paul II issued an encyclical called
Fides et Ratio. In its reaffirmation of the importance of 
Thomas, it may be regarded as the charter of the Thomism of the 
third millennium.