Anselm was born in 1033 near Aosta, in those days a Burgundian town on
the frontier with Lombardy. Little is known of his early life. He left
home at twenty-three, and after three years of apparently aimless
travelling through Burgundy and France, he came to Normandy in 1059.
Once he was in Normandy, Anselm’s interest was captured by the
Benedictine abbey at Bec, whose famous school was under the direction
of Lanfranc, the abbey’s prior. Lanfranc was a scholar and
teacher of wide reputation, and under his leadership the school at Bec
had become an important center of learning, especially in
dialectic. In 1060 Anselm entered the abbey as a novice. His
intellectual and spiritual gifts brought him rapid advancement, and
when Lanfranc was appointed abbot of Caen in 1063, Anselm was elected
to succeed him as prior. He was elected abbot in 1078 upon the death
of Herluin, the founder and first abbot of Bec. Under Anselm’s
leadership the reputation of Bec as an intellectual center grew, and
Anselm managed to write a good deal of philosophy and theology in
addition to his teaching, administrative duties, and extensive
correspondence as an adviser and counselor to rulers and nobles all
over Europe and beyond. His works while at Bec include the
Monologion (1075–76), the Proslogion
(1077–78), and his four philosophical dialogues: De
grammatico (probably 1059–60, though the dating of this
work is much disputed), and De veritate, De libertate
arbitrii, and De casu diaboli (1080–86). 
In 1093 Anselm was enthroned as Archbishop of Canterbury. The previous
Archbishop, Anselm’s old master Lanfranc, had died four years
earlier, but the King, William Rufus, had left the see vacant in order
to plunder the archiepiscopal revenues. Anselm was understandably
reluctant to undertake the primacy of the Church of England under a
ruler as ruthless and venal as William, and his tenure as Archbishop
proved to be as turbulent and vexatious as he must have
feared. William was intent on maintaining royal authority over
ecclesiastical affairs and would not be dictated to by Archbishop or
Pope or anyone else. So, for example, when Anselm went to Rome in 1097
without the King’s permission, William would not allow him to
return. When William was killed in 1100, his successor, Henry I,
invited Anselm to return to his see. But Henry was as intent as
William had been on maintaining royal jurisdiction over the Church,
and Anselm found himself in exile again from 1103 to 1107. Despite
these distractions and troubles, Anselm continued to write. His works
as Archbishop of Canterbury include the Epistola de Incarnatione
Verbi (1094), Cur Deus Homo (1095–98), De
conceptu virginali (1099), De processione Spiritus
Sancti (1102), the Epistola de sacrificio azymi et
fermentati (1106–7), De sacramentis ecclesiae
(1106–7), and De concordia (1107–8). Anselm died
on 21 April 1109. He was canonized in 1494 and named a Doctor of the
Church in 1720.
Anselm’s motto is “faith seeking understanding”
(fides quaerens intellectum). This motto lends itself to at
least two misunderstandings. First, many philosophers have taken it to
mean that Anselm hopes to replace faith with
understanding. If one takes ‘faith’ to mean roughly
‘belief on the basis of testimony’ and
‘understanding’ to mean ‘belief on the basis of
philosophical insight’, one is likely to regard faith as an
epistemically substandard position; any self-respecting philosopher
would surely want to leave faith behind as quickly as possible. The
theistic proofs are then interpreted as the means by which we come to
have philosophical insight into things we previously believed solely
on testimony. But Anselm is not hoping to replace faith with
understanding.  Faith for Anselm is more a volitional state than an
epistemic state: it is love for God and a drive to act as God
wills. In fact, Anselm describes the sort of faith that “merely
believes what it ought to believe” as “dead”
(M 78). (For the abbreviations used in references, see the
Bibliography below.) So “faith seeking understanding”
means something like “an active love of God seeking a deeper
knowledge of God.”
Other philosophers have noted that “faith seeking
understanding” begins with “faith,” not with doubt
or suspension of belief.  Hence, they argue, the theistic
arguments proposed by faith seeking understanding are not really meant
to convince unbelievers; they are intended solely for the edification
of those who already believe.  This too is a misreading of
Anselm’s motto. For although the theistic proofs are borne of an
active love of God seeking a deeper knowledge of the beloved, the
proofs themselves are intended to be convincing even to
unbelievers. Thus Anselm opens the Monologion with these
words:
And in the Proslogion Anselm sets out to convince “the fool,”
that is, the person who “has said in his heart, ‘There is no
God’ ” (Psalm 14:1; 53:1). 
Having clarified what Anselm takes himself to be doing in his theistic
proofs, we can now examine the proofs themselves. In the first chapter
of the Monologion Anselm argues that there must be some one
thing that is supremely good, through which all good things have their
goodness. For whenever we say that different things are F in
different degrees, we must understand them as being F through
F-ness; F-ness itself is the same in each of them.
Thus, for example, all more or less just things “must be more or
less just through justice, which is not different in diverse
things” (M 1). Now we speak of things as being
good in different degrees. So by the principle just stated,
these things must be good through some one thing. Clearly that thing
is itself a great good, since it is the source of the goodness of all
other things.  Moreover, that thing is good through itself;
after all, if all good things are good through that thing, it follows
trivially that that thing, being good, is good through itself. Things
that are good through another (i.e., things whose goodness derives
from something other than themselves) cannot be equal to or greater
than the good thing that is good through itself, and so that which is
good through itself is supremely good. Anselm concludes,
“Now that which is supremely good is also supremely great. There
is, therefore, some one thing that is supremely good and supremely
great – in other words, supreme among all existing things”
(M 1). In chapter 2 he applies the principle of chapter 1 in
order to derive (again) the conclusion that there is something
supremely great. 
In chapter 3 Anselm argues that all existing things exist through
some one thing. Every existing thing, he begins, exists either through
something or through nothing. But of course nothing exists through
nothing, so every existing thing exists through something. There is,
then, either some one thing through which all existing things exist, or
there is more than one such thing. If there is more than one, either
(i) they all exist through some one thing, or (ii) each of them exists
through itself, or (iii) they exist through each other. (iii) makes no
sense. If (ii) is true, then “there is surely some one power or nature
of self-existing that they have in order to exist through themselves”
(M 3); in that case, “all things exist more truly through that
one thing than through the several things that cannot exist without
that one thing” (M 3). So (ii) collapses into (i), and there
is some one thing through which all things exist. That one thing, of
course, exists through itself, and so it is greater than all the other
things. It is therefore “best and greatest and supreme among all
existing things” (M 3).
In chapter 4 Anselm begins with the premise that things “are not all
of equal dignity; rather, some of them are on different and unequal
levels” (M 4). For example, a horse is better than wood, and a
human being is more excellent than a horse. Now it is absurd to think
that there is no limit to how high these levels can go, “so that there
is no level so high that an even higher level cannot be found”
(M 4). The only question is how many beings occupy that
highest level of all. Is there just one, or are there more than one?
Suppose there are more than one. By hypothesis, they must all be
equals. If they are equals, they are equals through the same thing.
That thing is either identical with them or distinct from them. If it
is identical with them, then they are not in fact many, but one, since
they are all identical with some one thing. On the other hand, if that
thing is distinct from them, then they do not occupy the highest level
after all. Instead, that thing is greater than they are. Either way,
there can be only one being occupying the highest level of all.
Anselm concludes the first four chapters by summarizing his
results:
He then goes on (in chapters 5–65) to derive the attributes that must
belong to the being who fits this description. But before we look at
Anselm’s understanding of the divine attributes, we should turn to the
famous proof in the Proslogion. 
Looking back on the sixty-five chapters of complicated argument in the
Monologion, Anselm found himself wishing for a simpler way to
establish all the conclusions he wanted to prove. As he tells us in the
preface to the Proslogion, he wanted to find 
That “single argument” is the one that appears in chapter
2 of the Proslogion. (Or so it is commonly said: but some interpreters
understand the “one argument” as extending into chapter 3, and
Holopainen 1996 argues that it is the formula “that than
which a greater cannot be thought.”)
The proper way to state Anselm’s argument is a matter of dispute, and
any detailed statement of the argument will beg interpretative
questions.  But on a fairly neutral or consensus reading of the
argument (which I shall go on to reject), Anselm’s argument goes like
this. God is “that than which a greater cannot be
thought”; in other words, he is a being so great, so full of
metaphysical oomph, that one cannot so much as conceive of a being who
would be greater than God. The Psalmist, however, tells us that
“The fool has said in his heart, ‘There is no God’
” (Psalm 14:1; 53:1). Is it possible to convince the fool that
he is wrong? It is. All we need is the characterization of God as
“that than which a greater cannot be thought.” The fool
does at least understand that definition. But whatever is understood
exists in the understanding, just as the plan of a painting he has yet
to execute already exists in the understanding of the painter. So that
than which a greater cannot be thought exists in the
understanding. But if it exists in the understanding, it must also
exist in reality. For it is greater to exist in reality than to exist
merely in the understanding. Therefore, if that than which a greater
can be thought existed only in the understanding, it would be possible
to think of something greater than it (namely, that same being
existing in reality as well). It follows, then, that if that than
which a greater cannot be thought existed only in the understanding,
it would not be that than which a greater cannot be thought; and that,
obviously, is a contradiction. So that than which a greater cannot be
thought must exist in reality, not merely in the understanding.
Versions of this argument have been defended and criticized by a
succession of philosophers from Anselm’s time through the present day
(see
 ontological arguments).
 Our concern here is with Anselm’s own version, the
criticism he encountered, and his response to that criticism. A monk
named Gaunilo wrote a “Reply on Behalf of the Fool,” contending that
Anselm’s argument gave the Psalmist’s fool no good reason at all to
believe that that than which a greater cannot be thought exists in
reality. Gaunilo’s most famous objection is an argument intended to be
exactly parallel to Anselm’s that generates an obviously absurd
conclusion. Gaunilo proposes that instead of “that than which a
greater cannot be thought” we consider “that island than
which a greater cannot be thought.” We understand what that
expression means, so (following Anselm’s reasoning) the greatest
conceivable island exists in our understanding. But (again following
Anselm’s reasoning) that island must exist in reality as well; for if
it did not, we could imagine a greater island – namely, one that
existed in reality – and the greatest conceivable island would not
be the greatest conceivable island after all. Surely, though, it is
absurd to suppose that the greatest conceivable island actually exists
in reality. Gaunilo concludes that Anselm’s reasoning is
fallacious.
Gaunilo’s counterargument is so ingenious that it stands out as by far
the most devastating criticism in his catalogue of Anselm’s errors.
Not surprisingly, then, interpreters have read Anselm’s reply to
Gaunilo primarily in order to find his rejoinder to the Lost Island
argument.  Sympathetic interpreters (such as Klima 2000 and Ward 2018) have offered
ways for Anselm to respond, but at least one commentator (Wolterstorff
1993) argues that Anselm offers no such rejoinder, precisely because
he knew Gaunilo’s criticism was unanswerable but could not bring
himself to admit that fact.
A more careful look at Anselm’s reply to Gaunilo, however, shows that
Anselm offered no rejoinder to the Lost Island argument because he
rejected Gaunilo’s interpretation of the original argument of the
Proslogion.  Gaunilo had understood the argument in the way I
stated it above.  Anselm understood it quite differently.  In
particular, Anselm insists that the original argument did not rely on
any general principle to the effect that a thing is greater when it
exists in reality than when it exists only in the
understanding.[1] 
And since that is the principle that does the mischief in Gaunilo’s
counterargument, Anselm sees no need to respond to the Lost Island
argument in particular.
Correctly understood, Anselm says, the argument of the
Proslogion can be summarized as follows:
Therefore,
Anselm defends (1) by showing how we can form a conception of that
than which a greater cannot be thought on the basis of our
experience and understanding of those things than which a greater
can be thought.  For example,
Once we have formed this idea of that than which a greater cannot be
thought, Anselm says, we can see that such a being has features that
cannot belong to a possible but non-existent object – or, in
other words, that (2) is true.  For example, a being that is capable
of non-existence is less great than a being that exists necessarily.
If that than which a greater cannot be thought does not exist, it is
obviously capable of non-existence; and if it is capable of
non-existence, then even if it were to exist, it would not be that
than which a greater cannot be thought after all.  So if that than
which a greater cannot be thought can be thought – that is, if
it is a possible being – it actually exists.  (This reading of
the argument of the Proslogion is developed at length in
Visser and Williams 2008, chapter 5.)
Recall that Anselm’s intention in the Proslogion was to offer
a single argument that would establish not only the existence of God
but also the various attributes that Christians believe God possesses.
If the argument of chapter 2 proved only the existence of God, leaving
the divine attributes to be established piecemeal as in the
Monologion, Anselm would consider the Proslogion a
failure. But in fact the concept of that than which nothing greater can
be thought turns out to be marvelously fertile. God must, for example,
be omnipotent. For if he were not, we could conceive of a being greater
than he. But God is that than which no greater can be thought, so he
must be omnipotent. Similarly, God must be just, self-existent,
invulnerable to suffering, merciful, timelessly eternal, non-physical,
non-composite, and so forth. For if he lacked any of these qualities,
he would be less than the greatest conceivable being, which is
impossible. 
The ontological argument thus works as a sort of
divine-attribute-generating machine. Admittedly, though, the
appearance of theoretical simplicity is somewhat misleading. The
“single argument” produces conclusions about the divine attributes
only when conjoined with certain beliefs about what is greater or
better. That is, the ontological argument tells us that God has
whatever characteristics it is better or greater to have than to lack,
but it does not tell us which characteristics those are. We must have
some independent way of identifying them before we can plug them into
the ontological argument and generate a full-blown conception of the
divine nature. Anselm identifies these characteristics in part by
appeal to intuitions about value, in part by independent argument. To
illustrate Anselm’s method, I shall examine his discussions of God’s
impassibility, timelessness, and simplicity.
According to the doctrine of divine impassibility, God is invulnerable
to suffering. Nothing can act upon him; he is in no way passive. He
therefore does not feel emotions, since emotions are states that one
undergoes rather than actions one performs. Anselm does not find it
necessary to argue that impassibility is a perfection; he
thinks it is perfectly obvious that “it is better to be …
impassible than not” (P 6), just as it is perfectly
obvious that it is better to be just than not-just. His intuitions
about value are shaped by the Platonic-Augustinian tradition of which
he was a part. Augustine took from the Platonists the idea that the
really real things, the greatest and best of beings, are stable,
uniform, and unchanging. He says in On Free Choice of the
Will 2.10, “And you surely could not deny that the
uncorrupted is better than the corrupt, the eternal than the temporal,
and the invulnerable than the vulnerable”; his interlocutor
replies simply, “Could anyone?” Through Augustine (and
others) these ideas, and the conception of God to which they naturally
lead, became the common view of Christian theologians for well over a
millennium. For Anselm, then, it is obvious that a being who is in no
way passive, who cannot experience anything of which he is not himself
the origin, is better and greater than any being who can be acted upon
by something outside himself. So God, being that than which nothing
greater can be thought, is wholly active; he is impassible.
Notice that Augustine also found it obvious that the eternal is better
than the temporal. According to Plato’s Timaeus, time is a
“moving image of eternity” (37d). It is a shifting and
shadowy reflection of the really real. As later Platonists, including
Augustine, develop this idea, temporal beings have their existence
piecemeal; they exist only in this tiny sliver of a now, which is
constantly flowing away from them and passing into nothingness. An
eternal being, by contrast, is (to use my earlier description) stable,
uniform, and unchanging. What it has, it always has; what it is, it
always is; what it does, it always does. So it seems intuitively
obvious to Anselm that if God is to be that than which nothing greater
can be thought, he must be eternal. That is, he must be not merely
everlasting, but outside time 
altogether.[2]
In addition to this strong intuitive consideration, Anselm at least
hints at a further argument for the claim that it is better to be
eternal than temporal. He opens chapter 13 of the Proslogion
by observing, “Everything that is at all enclosed in a place or time is
less than that which is subject to no law of place or time” (P
13). His idea seems to be that if God were in time (or in a place), he
would be bound by certain constraints inherent in the nature of time
(or place). His discussion in Monologion 22 makes the problem
clear:
So at least part of the reason for holding that God is timeless is that
the nature of time would impose constraints upon God, and of course it
is better to be subject to no external constraints. 
The other part of the reason, though, is that if God were in place or
time he would have parts. But what is so bad about having
parts? This question brings us naturally to the doctrine of divine
simplicity, which is simply the doctrine that God has no parts of any
kind. Even for an Augustinian like Anselm, the claim that it is better
to lack parts than to have them is less than intuitively compelling,
so Anselm offers further arguments for that claim. In the
Proslogion he argues that “whatever is composed of
parts is not completely one. It is in some sense a plurality and not
identical with itself, and it can be broken up either in fact or at
least in the understanding” (P 18). The argument in
the Monologion goes somewhat differently. “Every
composite,” Anselm argues, “needs the things of which it
is composed if it is to subsist, and it owes its existence to them,
since whatever it is, it is through them, whereas those things are not
through it what they are” (M 17). The argument in
the Proslogion, then, seeks to relate simplicity to the
intuitive considerations that identify what is greatest and best with
what is stable, uniform, and unchanging; the argument in the
Monologion, by contrast, seeks to show that simplicity is
necessary if God is to be – as the theistic proofs have already
established – the ultimate source of his own goodness and existence.
Anselm’s success in generating a whole host of divine attributes
through the ontological argument does present him with a
problem.  He must show that the attributes are consistent with
each other – in other words, that it is possible for one and the
same being to have all of them. For example, there seems at first
glance to be a conflict between justice and omnipotence. If God is
perfectly just, he cannot lie. But if God is omnipotent, how can there
be something he cannot do? Anselm’s solution is to explain that
omnipotence does not mean the ability to do everything; instead, it
means the possession of unlimited power. Now the so-called
“ability” or “power” to lie is not really a
power at all; it is a kind of weakness. Being omnipotent, God has no
weakness. So it turns out that omnipotence actually entails
the inability to lie. 
Another apparent contradiction is between God’s mercy and his
justice. If God is just, he will surely punish the wicked as they
deserve. But because he is merciful, he spares the wicked. Anselm
tries to resolve this apparent contradiction by appeal to God’s
goodness. It is better, he says, for God “to be good both to the
good and to the wicked than to be good only to the good, and it is
better to be good to the wicked both in punishing and in sparing them
than to be good only in punishing them” (P 9). So God’s
supreme goodness requires that he be both just and merciful. But
Anselm is not content to resolve the apparent tension between justice
and mercy by appealing to some other attribute, goodness, that entails
both justice and mercy; he goes on to argue that justice itself
requires mercy. Justice to sinners obviously requires that God punish
them; but God’s justice to himself requires that he exercise
his supreme goodness in sparing the wicked. “Thus,” Anselm
says to God, “in saving us whom you might justly destroy
… you are just, not because you give us our due, but because you
do what is fitting for you who are supremely good” (P
10). In spite of these arguments, Anselm acknowledges that there is a
residue of mystery here:
In other words, the philosopher can trace the conceptual relations
among goodness, justice, and mercy, and show that God not only can but
must have all three; but no human reasoning can hope to show why God
displays his justice and mercy in precisely the ways in which he
does. (For a detailed and sympathetic reconstruction of Anselm’s arguments concerning justice and mercy, see Mann 2019.)
In On Freedom of Choice (De libertate arbitrii)
Anselm defines freedom of choice as “the power to preserve rectitude of
will for its own sake” (DLA 3). He explores the notion of
rectitude of will most thoroughly in On Truth (De
veritate), so in order to understand the definition of freedom of
choice, we must look first at Anselm’s discussion of truth. Truth
is a much broader notion for Anselm than for us; he speaks of truth not
only in statements and opinions but also in the will, actions, the
senses, and even the essences of things. In every case, he argues,
truth consists in correctness or “rectitude.” Rectitude, in turn, is
understood teleologically; a thing is correct whenever it is or does
whatever it ought, or was designed, to be or do. For example,
statements are made for the purpose of “signifying that what-is is”
(DV 2). A statement therefore is correct (has rectitude) when,
and only when, it signifies that what-is is. So Anselm holds a
correspondence theory of truth, but it is a somewhat unusual
correspondence theory. Statements are true when they correspond to
reality, but only because corresponding to reality is what statements
are for. That is, statements (like anything else) are true
when they do what they were designed to do; and what they were designed
to do, as it happens, is to correspond to reality. 
Truth in the will also turns out to be rectitude, again understood
teleologically. Rectitude of will means willing what one ought to will
or (in other words) willing that for the sake of which one was given a
will. So, just as the truth or rectitude of a statement is the
statement’s doing what statements were made to do, the truth or
rectitude of a will is the will’s doing what wills were made to do. In
DV 12 Anselm connects rectitude of will to both justice and
moral evaluation. In a broad sense of ‘just’, whatever is
as it ought to be is just. Thus, an animal is just when it blindly
follows its appetites, because that is what animals were meant to do.
But in the narrower sense of ‘just’, in which justice is
what deserves moral approval and injustice is what deserves reproach,
justice is best defined as “rectitude of will preserved for its own
sake” (DV 12). Such rectitude requires that agents perceive
the rectitude of their actions and will them for the sake of that
rectitude. Anselm takes the second requirement to exclude both coercion
and “being bribed by an extraneous reward” (DV 12). For an
agent who is coerced into doing what is right is not willing rectitude
for its own sake; and similarly, an agent who must be bribed to do what
is right is willing rectitude for the sake of the bribe, not for the
sake of rectitude.
Since, as we have already seen, Anselm will define freedom as “the
power to preserve rectitude of will for its own sake,” the arguments of
On Truth imply that freedom is also the capacity for justice
and the capacity for moral praiseworthiness. Now it is both necessary
and sufficient for justice, and thus for praiseworthiness, that an
agent wills what is right, knowing it to be right, because it is right.
That an agent wills what is right because it is right entails that he
is neither compelled nor bribed to perform the act. Freedom, then, must
be neither more nor less than the power to perform acts of that
sort.
Thus Anselm takes it to be obvious that freedom is a power for
something: its purpose is to preserve rectitude of will for its own
sake. God and the good angels cannot sin, but they are still free,
because they can (and do) preserve rectitude of will for its own sake.
In fact, they are freer than those who can sin: “someone who has what
is fitting and expedient in such a way that he cannot lose it is freer
than someone who has it in such a way that he can lose it and be
seduced into what is unfitting and inexpedient” (DLA 1). It
obviously follows, as Anselm points out, that freedom of choice neither
is nor entails the power to sin; God and the good angels have freedom
of choice, but they are incapable of sinning. 
But if free choice is the power to hold on to what is fitting and
expedient, and it is not the power to sin, does it make any sense to
say that the first human beings and the rebel angels sinned through
free choice? Anselm’s reply to this question is both subtle and
plausible. In order to be able to preserve rectitude of will for its
own sake, an agent must be able to perform an action that has its
ultimate origin in the agent him- or herself rather than in some
external source. (For convenience I will refer to that power as “the
power for self-initiated action.”) Any being that has freedom of
choice, therefore, will thereby have the power for self-initiated
action. The first human beings and the rebel angels sinned through an
exercise of their power for self-initiated action, and so it is
appropriate to say that they sinned through free choice. 
Nonetheless, free choice does not entail the power to sin. For free
choice can be perfected by something else, as yet unspecified, that
renders it incapable of sinning.
In On the Fall of the Devil (De casu diaboli)
Anselm extends his account of freedom and sin by discussing the first
sin of the angels. In order for the angels to have the power to
preserve rectitude of will for its own sake, they had to have both a
will for justice and a will for happiness. If God had given them only a
will for happiness, they would have been necessitated to will whatever
they thought would make them happy. Their willing of happiness would
have had its ultimate origin in God and not in the angels themselves.
So they would not have had the power for self-initiated action, which
means that they would not have had free choice. The same thing would
have been true, mutatis mutandis, if God had given them only
the will for justice.
Since God gave them both the will for happiness and the will for justice, however, they had the power for
self-initiated action. Whether they chose to subject their wills for
happiness to the demands of justice or to ignore the demands of justice
in the interest of happiness, that choice had its ultimate origin in
the angels; it was not received from God. The rebel angels chose to
abandon justice in an attempt to gain happiness for themselves, whereas
the good angels chose to persevere in justice even if it meant less
happiness. God punished the rebel angels by taking away their
happiness; he rewarded the good angels by granting them all the
happiness they could possibly want. For this reason, the good angels
are no longer able to sin. Since there is no further happiness left for
them to will, their will for happiness can no longer entice them to
overstep the bounds of justice. Thus Anselm finally explains what it is
that perfects free choice so that it becomes unable to sin.
Like the fallen angels, the first human beings willed happiness in
preference to justice. By doing so they abandoned the will for justice
and became unable to will justice for its own sake. Apart from divine
grace, then, fallen human beings cannot help but sin. Anselm claims
that we are still free, because we continue to be such that if we had
rectitude of will, we could preserve it for its own sake; but we cannot
exercise our freedom, since we no longer have the rectitude of
will to preserve. (Whether fallen human beings also retain the power
for self-initiated action apart from divine grace is a tricky question,
and one I do not propose to answer here.) 
So the restoration of human beings to the justice they were intended
to enjoy requires divine grace. But even more is needed than God’s
restoration of the will for justice. In Cur Deus Homo
(Why God Became A Human Being, or Why the God-Man?) Anselm famously attempts to
show on purely rational grounds that the debt incurred by human sin
could be suitably discharged, and the affront to God’s infinite
dignity could be suitably rectified, only if one who was both fully
divine and fully human took it upon himself to offer his own life on
our behalf.