Alexander was born in Sydney on 6 January 1859, to a Jewish family. He was the third son of
Samuel Alexander, a British emigrant and saddler. Alexander’s father
died a few weeks after his birth, and five years later the remaining
family moved to Melbourne. Alexander was home-educated by tutors
before entering Wesley College in 1871. Alexander entered the
University of Melbourne in 1875, and subsequently won awards in arts,
sciences, languages and natural philosophy. In 1877, Alexander sailed
for England, in an attempt to win a scholarship at Oxbridge. He
successfully obtained a scholarship at Balliol College, Oxford, and
went on to win a First in 1881. The following year, Alexander was
awarded a Fellowship at Lincoln College.
At this time, the Oxford philosophical scene was dominated by British
idealism, and Alexander formed lifelong ties with the Absolute
idealists F. H. Bradley, A. C. Bradley, and Bernard Bosanquet. This
idealist influence is evident in Alexander’s earliest works, on Hegel
and moral progress. Arguably, it is also evident in his later works on
metaphysics too. As a student, Alexander also read Plato—under
the tutelage of the idealist Benjamin Jowett—and Hegel.
Alexander remained at Oxford until 1893 whereupon he accepted a
Professorship at the University of Manchester. He took an active part
in the university life there, and strongly supported feminism.
Alexander remained at Manchester for the rest of his life, and in 1902
he brought various family members over—including his mother and
three of his siblings—from Australia to Manchester. Alexander
never married. Although Alexander never returned to Australia he
maintained a correspondence with several Australian philosophers,
including the Scottish-born John Anderson.
As Alexander developed his anti-idealist views, he published on
naturalism and realism. He corresponded at length with fellow British
emergentists C. Lloyd Morgan and C. D. Broad on psychology and
metaphysics. Whilst he rejected idealism, he also continued to
correspond with F. H. Bradley and Bosanquet. During the War, Alexander
canvassed for recruits, and assisted Belgian refugees. John Laird
reports that, after the War, Alexander struggled with writing his
greatest work, Space, Time, and Deity: “He was
overwhelmed by a sense of his littleness in comparison with the task
to which he was tied” (Laird 1939: 61). Nonetheless, Alexander
published the work in 1920, and with it assured his place in the
British philosophical landscape. His work was praised by new realists
and idealists alike. In a particularly fine turn of phrase, John
Passmore writes:
…even when he [Alexander] broke with the Idealists, they
continued to speak of him with a respect they rarely showed to the New
Realists—although this charity did not survive the bleakness of
Cambridge, where McTaggart, forgetting his own blackened pots,
complained of Space, Time, and Deity that “in every
chapter we come across some view which no philosopher, except
Professor Alexander, has ever maintained”. It would be inhuman
to expect the arch-enemy of Time to praise its arch-prophet. (Passmore
1957: 268)
The bleakness of Cambridge aside, Alexander received many honours
during his lifetime. These include his election as a Fellow of the
British Academy in 1913, an honorary D.Litt from Oxford in 1924, an
honorary Litt.D from the University of Liverpool in 1925, and another
from the University of Cambridge in 1934. In 1923, Alexander retired
from Manchester. In a speech, he described how proud and happy he was
during his time as a professor there, “during which I tried to
do my part” (Alexander, cited in Laird 1939: 71).
Alexander’s retirement did not stem the tide of his output.  Having
completed Space, Time, and Deity, Alexander continued to
produce a stream of articles as prolific as it was diverse. He wrote
several pieces comparing his metaphysics to that of Spinoza, and
Alexander took pride—perhaps rooted partly in their shared
Jewish heritage—in the deep similarity he perceived
there. Alexander also wrote on the nature of art, history, Moliere,
Pascal, theology and Jane Austen. Alexander was a lifelong fan of
Austen, and particularly loved Persuasion. His friend and
colleague, J. H. Muirhead, suggested that Alexander’s love of
literature may have been the result of his partial deafness, which
made it difficult for him to appreciate music.
Ultimately, Alexander turned his philosophic attention away from
metaphysics to art and value. Lord Listowel describes Alexander’s move
towards aesthetics:
But why, of the many unsailed seas he must have been tempted to chart,
did his insatiable curiosity launch him on a last voyage into the
rough waters of aesthetic theory? There is no certain answer to this
question. What we do know is that the third person of the hallowed
trinity whose members are Truth, Goodness, and Beauty had hitherto
been sadly neglected as compared with the first two, and that a
treatise on aesthetics was urgently required as the coping stone of a
neatly finished philosophical system. Yet it would be a grievous error
to suppose that his fondness for the subject was due solely or even
mainly to systematic grounds. Art, in its manifold shapes, attracted
him irresistibly… [he] wrote and talked about Art because he
really loved the pictures, statues, mansions, poems, novels, and plays
that are its concrete manifestations. (Listowel 1939: 181)
Alexander’s full system of aesthetics can be found in his final
monograph, Beauty and Other Forms of Value (1933).
In his late years, Alexander continued to publish, but Laird reports
that Alexander was greatly troubled from the 1930s by the suffering of
Jewish refugees; Alexander did all he could to help with pen and purse
(Laird 1939: 94). Alexander died on 13 September 1938, and his ashes
lie in the Manchester Southern Cemetery. He bequeathed the majority of
his estate, and his philosophical papers, to the University of
Manchester. A bust of Alexander, by the artist Epstein, stands in the
University of Manchester’s Samuel Alexander Building (formerly known
as the Hall of the Arts Building). Alexander reportedly said that he
would be happy to have Erravit cum Spinoza engraved on his
funeral urn; Muirhead suggested that instead he should have Ut
alter Spinoza 
philosophatus[1] 
(Muirhead 1939: 14). 
A biography of Alexander can be found in Laird’s (1939) memoir; see
also Muirhead’s (1939) and G. F. Stout’s (1940).
Alexander’s first publication, “Hegel’s Conception of
Nature” (1886), reveals Alexander’s philosophic upbringing in
the Oxford British Hegelian enclave. Alexander aims to set out Hegel’s
conception of nature—“so fantastic and so poetical that it
may often be thought not to be serious”—as clearly as
possible, and show where it agrees with, and diverges from,
contemporary science. He explains that science leads to a philosophy
of nature through observation—for example, transforming
seemingly isolated individuals into universals by discovering their
general character—and the discovery of laws. Alexander also
compares Hegel’s account to contemporary theories of evolution, and
argues that there is a “great likeness” (Alexander 1886:
518).  Arguably, some of the positions that Alexander attributes to
Hegel are similar to his own mature views; for example, Alexander
reads Hegel as holding that space and time are “in the
world” as much as matter (Alexander 1886: 506).
Alexander’s early monograph Locke (1908) discusses Locke’s
views on ethics, politics and religion as given in
Locke’s Essay. The book is extremely short but one comes away
with a keen sense of Alexander’s admiration for Locke.  Whilst this
work is mainly of scholarly interest, Alexander spends one chapter
“Observations on the Essay” critiquing Locke, and
here Alexander reveals the bent of his own early views. For example,
Alexander complains that Locke might have gone further had he applied
his observations regarding the continuity of mental experience to
substance (Alexander 1908: 52). This is suggestive, given that one of
Alexander’s later key claims concerning spacetime—the stuff of
substances—is that it is continuous. 
Alexander’s first monograph Moral Order and Progress (1889)
constitutes a defence of evolutionary ethics, the naturalistic thesis
that human morality is a product of biological evolution. The
monograph is based on a dissertation written by Alexander at Oxford,
for which he won the T. H. Green Moral Philosophy Prize in 1887. In
the preface, Alexander writes,
I am proud to have my work connected, however indirectly, with the
name of T. H. Green; and I feel this all the more because, though, as
will be obvious, my obligations to him are very great, I have not
scrupled to express my present dissent from his fundamental
principles. (vii)
The preface also reveals the strong idealist
backdrop against which Alexander’s work is set: the monograph is
dedicated to A. C. Bradley, and in the preface Alexander personally
thanks D. G. Ritchie, William Wallace, R. L. Nettleship and
J. S. Haldane. Alexander adds that he owes a special debt of gratitude
to F. H. Bradley who went through the essay with him (Alexander 1889:
ix). Alexander continued to exchange philosophic ideas with many of
these idealists throughout their lives.
Alexander opens the monograph by stating that the proper business of
ethics is the study of moral judgements, such as “It is wrong to
lie”. Alexander sets out to discover the nature of morality,
asking what these judgements actually express (Alexander 1889:
1–3).  He does so by examining a selection of “working
conceptions” in ethics—including right, wrong, and
duty—and asking what they correspond to. In the same way that
the working conceptions of physics—including energy, matter and
motion—are ordered according to a “natural
coherence”, Alexander aims to order ethical
conceptions. Alexander concludes that these working conceptions
correspond to ways of maintaining equilibrium in society.  For
example, ideas of good or right imply nothing more than “an
adjustment of parts in an orderly whole”: the equilibrium of
different persons in society.
[T]he predicate ‘good’ applied to an
action… means that the act is one by which the agent seeks to
perform the function required of him by his position in
society. (Alexander 1889: 113)
Alexander takes this thesis to be the common
 ground of at least two current rival ethical theories:
Now nothing is more striking at the present time than the convergence
of the main opposing ethical theories, at any rate, in our own
country—on the one hand, the traditional English mode of
thought, which advancing through utilitarianism has ended in the
so-called evolutionary ethics; and on the other, the idealistic
movement which is associated with the German philosophy derived from
Kant… Both these views recognise that kind of proportion
between the individual and his society, or between him and the law,
which is expressed under the phrase, organic connection. (Alexander
1889: 5–6)
Alexander’s perception of progress in ethical theory, towards this
correct end point, is Hegelian in style.
Alexander’s ethical system is a kind of evolutionary ethics.  By
applying the notion of evolution to ethics, Alexander explains that
one can mean either the mere integration of the biological into the
ethical sphere, or treating morals as one part of a comprehensive view
of the universe, in which a steady development from the lower to the
higher can be observed, a development which follows the law of the
survival of the fittest (Alexander 1889: 14). Alexander, of course,
means both. He emphasises that while his ethical system, based on the
organic nature of society, is due in part to the influence of the
biological sciences, it would be an “entire
misapprehension” to think that it were entirely due to this
influence; his views are also the result of progress in ethics and
politics (Alexander 1889: 7–8).
It is worth noting that, despite the influence of Absolute idealism
hovering in the background of this work, Alexander firmly resists the
tendency of idealism towards monism, the thesis that the universe is
in some sense One.
[T]he conception of a common good is apt to
suggest an absolute identity of good… in greater or less degree
all forms of so-called Monism, which hold that in the good act the
individual is at one with others, and with the Universal Being, are
victims of the misconception. (Alexander 1889: 174)
In other words, Alexander is arguing that just
because he is putting forward one conception of goodness—organic
connection within society—that does not mean that the
individuals within society are not individuals. 
In a series of papers published in quick succession—including
his 1909–10, 1912a, 1912b and 1914—Alexander put forward a
number of theses that he would later expand on in Space, Time, and
Deity (1920).
In “The Basis of Realism” (1914) Alexander rejects
idealism in favour of realism. He writes that the “temper”
of realism is to de-anthropomorphise: to put man and mind in their
proper places in the world of things. Whilst mind is properly
understood as part of nature, this does not diminish its value
(Alexander 1914: 279–80). For Alexander, realism is thus
naturalistic.  This paper is an expansion of Alexander’s less rigorous
(1909–10), where he compares the new conception of mind as a
mere part of the universe—as opposed to being at the centre of
the universe—to the move from geocentrism to heliocentrism.
A key part of Alexander’s thesis is that minds exist in the world
alongside other things. Minds are “compresent” with other
objects in the world, such as tables and mountains. In fact, all
existents are compresent with each other.
There is nothing peculiar in the relation itself between mind and its
objects; what is peculiar in the situation is the character of one of
the terms, its being mind or consciousness. The relation is one of
compresence. But there is compresence between two physical things. The
relation of mind and object is comparable to that between table and
floor. (Alexander 1914: 288)
According to Alexander, we perceive the world directly—we do not
perceive representations or ideas of tables, but the tables
themselves—and we are conscious of the process of our
perception, a consciousness that Alexander labels
“enjoyment”. Any direct theory of perception must account
for error: If we perceive the world directly, how is it that we make
mistakes about it? Alexander’s answer is that we do not perceive the
world incorrectly, but we can incorrectly apply partial perceptions to
wholes. For example, if we perceive a table as having a flat edge,
that is correct, but we would be incorrect to apply our perception of
part of the table to the table as a whole.
Alexander also argues here that minds emerge from lower-level living
organisms, and are no less real for it.
[M]ind, though descended on its physical side from lower forms of
existence, is, when it comes, a new quality in the world, and no more
ceases to be original because in certain respects it is resoluble into
physical motions, than colour disappears because it is resoluble into
vibrations. (Alexander 1914: 304) 
The biology that informed Alexander’s early (1889) work on ethics
survives in his account of mind: mind emerges in the world through
evolution. This theory of “emergent evolution” is akin to
that advanced by C. Lloyd Morgan; Alexander later references
Morgan’s Instinct and Experience (1912).
Alexander adds here that the lowest level of existence is space and
time—that they are “the foundation of all
reality”—and he greatly expands on this view in his book
(1920).
This difficult two-volume work sets out Alexander’s grand metaphysical
picture, a sweeping system that offers a cosmogony—an
explanation of how the world came to be in its current state—and
a hierarchical ontology based on emergence that attempts to account
for matter, life, mind, value, and deity. Alexander does not argue for
this picture; rather, he intends that his picture should provide a
description of the world. This is in line with his general
methodology.
Philosophy proceeds by description; it only uses
argument in order to help you to see the facts, just as a botanist
uses a microscope. (Alexander 1921b: 423)
The idea is that Space, Time, and Deity
offers us a description of the world that best fits the facts.
The first chapter of Space, Time, and Deity opens with
Alexander’s proclamation that all the vital problems of philosophy
depend on space and time (Alexander 1920i: 35). Alexander goes on to
conceive space and time as the stuff out of which all things are made:
space and time are real and concrete, and out of them emerge matter,
life and so on. Space and time are unified in a four-dimensional
manifold, spacetime. This single vast entity does not move but it
contains all motions within itself, and so Alexander labels it
“Motion”. In this respect, Alexander’s spacetime bears
some resemblance to F. H. Bradley’s (1893) Absolute: neither Motion
nor the Absolute move or exist in time, but they both contain motion
and time within themselves. 
Alexander presents a metaphysical argument for the unity of space and
time, arguing that they are merely distinguishable aspects of
Motion. He argues that space and time must be unified because, when
abstracted away from each other, it becomes clear that they could not
exist independently. Time would become a mere “now”,
incapable of succession; and space would become a mere
“blank”, without distinguishable elements (Alexander
1920i: 47). Motion is both successive and boasts distinguishable
elements, and this is because it is the union of space and time.
Alexander’s metaphysical argument for this union was severely
criticised by Broad’s (1921a,b) series of
papers.[2]
Alexander considered his account of spacetime to be in line with the
physics of his day; this might be understood as an argument from
physics for his position.
Our purely metaphysical analysis of Space-Time on
the basis of ordinary experience is in essence and spirit identical
with Minkowski’s conception of an absolute world of four dimensions,
of which the three-dimensional world of geometry omits the element of
time. (Alexander 1920i: 87)
Alexander goes on to distinguish between the characters of empirical
existents that are variable—such as life, redness or
sweetness—and those that are pervasive.
[These pervasive qualities] belong in some form to all existents
whatever. Such are identity (numerical identity for example),
substance, diversity, magnitude, even number… The pervasive
categories of existence are what are known from Kant’s usage as the
categories of experience, and I shall call them, in distinction from
the empirical ones or qualities, categorial characters. (Alexander
1920i: 184–5)
Categorical qualities are the properties of spacetime, and this is why
the categories apply to all things within spacetime. This discussion
builds on Alexander’s “The Method of Metaphysics; and the
Categories” (1912). In a later paper—“Some
Explanations” (1921b)—composed in order to answer some of
the worries of his critics, Alexander explains that the existence of
the categories implies the existence of something that contains them:
spacetime.
[F]or me the doctrine of the categories, taken along with the notion
of S-T [spacetime], is central… What is “relation”
in virtue of which duration is a whole of related successive moments?
What does relation stand for in our experience? I answer that it
already implies S-T, and that until it receives its concrete
interpretation it is in metaphysics a word. (Alexander 1921b:
411–2)
The idea is that, by positing the existence of spacetime, we explain
the existence of relations—characteristics of reality that hold
between all things—and, similarly, the existence of spacetime
explains the existence of all other categories. For more on relations,
see Alexander’s (1921b).
In the second volume of Space, Time, and Deity, Alexander
asks how spacetime is related to the various levels of existence
within it: matter, life, mind and deity. Alexander argues that we
should model the emergence of levels within spacetime on the emergence
of mind from body.
Empirical things are complexes of space-time with their qualities, and
it is now my duty to attempt to show how the different orders of
empirical existence are related to each other… [T]he nature of
mind and its relation to body is a simpler problem in itself than the
relation of lower qualities of existence to their inferior basis; and
for myself it has afforded the clue to the interpretation of the lower
levels of existence. (Alexander 1920ii: 3)
Analogous to the way that Alexander takes mind to emerge from body,
new levels of being emerge from spacetime when the motions within
spacetime become complex enough.
Empirical things or existents are… groupings within Space-Time,
that is, they are complexes of pure events or motions in various
degrees of complexity. Such finites have all the categorial
characters, that is, all the fundamental features which flow from the
nature of any space-time… [A]s in the course of Time new
complexity of motions comes into existence, a new quality
emerges… The case which we are using as a clue is the emergence
of the quality of consciousness from a lower level of complexity which
is vital [i.e., life]. (Alexander 1920ii: 45)
Alexander has been criticised for explaining the emergence of
qualities within spacetime by analogy with mind-body emergence, as the
latter kind of emergence is rarely taken to be as unproblematic as
Alexander appears to conceive it. For more on this, see for example
Emmet (1950). 
According to Alexander, the emergence of new levels of being within
spacetime is driven by a “nisus”, a striving or felt push
towards some end.
There is a nisus in Space-Time which, as it has
borne its creatures forward through matter and life to mind, will bear
them forward to some higher level of existence. (Alexander 1920ii:
346)
This means that the emergence of qualities in
 spacetime is not merely a process, it is a progress. Exactly what the
 nisus is has divided
 commentators.[3]
 but however it is best understood, it pushes the emergence of new
 qualities within spacetime, and this includes the push towards
 deity.
The second volume of Space, Time, and Deity also contains a
relatively brief discussion of beauty, and other forms of value.
Alexander hugely expands on this account in his 1933
monograph; see Section 4.2 below.
Alexander’s system drew many admirers, but few converts.  Alexander
engaged in extended correspondence on Space, Time, and
Deity—his letters with F. H. Bradley, C. D. Broad and
C. Lloyd Morgan are particularly important—and much of it has
survived in the Samuel Alexander Papers held at the John Rylands
Library, Manchester.
Secondary literature on Alexander’s spacetime metaphysics includes
Brettschneider (1964), Broad (1921a,b), Murphy’s (1927–1928)
series, Emmet (1950), Thomas (2013), and Fisher (2015). Schaffer’s (2009) argues for
the identification of spacetime with matter, and traces this line of
thought to Alexander. Secondary literature on Alexander’s account of
mind-body emergence include classic critiques from Broad (1921a,b),
Calkins (1923) and Emmet (1950). Stout (1922) discusses and rejects
Alexander’s theory of perception.  There has been more recent work on
Alexander’s account of emergence in general; see McLaughlin (1992),
Gillet (2006), and O’Connor and Wong (2012).
One of the optimistic conclusions of Space, Time, and Deity
is Alexander’s thesis that in the future deity will emerge as a
quality of the universe as a whole. This deity-world emergence is akin
to mind-body emergence. In the following passage, Alexander explains
that we should not identity God with spacetime. Instead, the spacetime
system is in the process of “engendering” God:
The universe, though it can be expressed without remainder in terms of
Space and Time, is not merely spatio-temporal. It exhibits materiality
and life and mind. It compels us to forecast the next empirical
quality of deity. On the one hand, we have the totality of the world,
which in the end is spatio-temporal; on the other the quality of deity
engendered or rather being engendered, within that whole. These two
features are united in the conception of the whole world as expressing
itself in the character of deity, and it is this and not bare
Space-Time which for speculation is the ideal conception of
God. (Alexander 1920ii: 353–4)
For Alexander, God is the whole world possessing the quality of deity
(Alexander 1920ii: 353). However, the “whole world” does
not yet exist because Alexander’s universe is one of process; the
universe is in progress towards becoming complete, and this is why
Alexander claims the universe is in process towards deity.  The whole
world, which will possess the quality of deity, does not yet exist,
but part of it does: “As an actual existent, God is the infinite
world with its nisus towards deity” (Alexander 1920ii: 353). The
quality of deity has not yet arrived—and indeed, may never
arrive—but God exists in the sense that part of his body, the
growing world, does. 
A potential problem for Alexander is that God is frequently perceived
as being atemporal. In contrast, it should be clear that on
Alexander’s system, God is both spatial and temporal. Alexander
recognises that this could be considered a problem, but argues that in
fact it is an advantage. If God does not “precede” the
world, but rather is the product of it, one is able to avoid one
formulation of the problem of evil, on which God creates the world and
allows suffering within it (Alexander 1920ii: 399).
God is then not responsible for the miseries
endured in working out his providence, but rather we are responsible
for our acts. (Alexander 1920ii: 400)
A created deity makes our positions as free
agents more important.
Alexander’s account of deity is explored further in his essay
“Theism and Pantheism”, originally published in 1927 and
reprinted in his Philosophical and Literary Pieces (1939). In
this paper, Alexander argues that theology is a kind of science that
aims to account for a certain kind of experience: one’s sense of the
divine in the world (Alexander 1939: 316). Alexander discusses a
particular philosophical problem facing theism, the question of
whether transcendence (i.e., being beyond the material world) and
immanence (i.e., living within the world) can be combined in one
being, as is often claimed of God. Alexander argues that he can offer
a solution: God can be understood as being transcendent and immanent
if he will emerge from the world.
God… is himself in the making, and his divine quality or deity
a stage in time beyond the human quality. And as the root and leaves
and sap of the plant feed its flower, so the whole world, as so far
unrolled in the process of time, flowers into deity… God’s
deity is thus the new quality of the universe which emerges in its
forward movement in time. (Alexander 1939: 330) 
God is transcendent in the sense that he is still in the making, and
immanent in the sense that he will bloom from the whole world. 
Extended discussions of Alexander’s theism can be found in Titus (1933) and Thomas (2016). More  limited discussions can be found in McCarthy (1948) and Stiernotte (1954). Emergentist
theologies—positions holding that in some sense God
will emerge from the universe—are currently enjoying a revival, and in this context Clayton (2004) discusses Alexander’s system as a rival to his own.
In a late series of papers following the publication of Space,
Time, and Deity, Alexander reportedly came across the system of
Spinoza for the first time. In these
papers—including Spinoza and Time (1921a) and
“Lessons from Spinoza” (1927)—Alexander reconstructs
his system as a “gloss” of Spinoza.
Alexander argues that philosophy and physics has only just begun to
“Take time seriously”, and had Spinoza been aware of these
developments, his ontology would ultimately have resembled
Alexander’s. Alexander particularly refers to the thesis that space
and time should be combined into the four dimensional manifold
spacetime.
Spinoza argues in the Ethics that there is only one
substance, and this substance is identical to God and nature. The
substance has an infinite number of attributes, including spatial
extension, and it supports an infinity of dependent modes. Alexander
argues that his system is similar to Spinoza’s except that he
understands the single substance—Motion—to have only two
attributes, space and time.
In our gloss upon Spinoza the ultimate reality is full of Time, not
timeless but essentially alive with Time, and the theatre of incessant
change. It is only timeless in the sense that taken as a whole it is
not particularised to any one moment of duration, but comprehends them
all… Reality is Space-Time or motion itself, infinite or
self-contained and having nothing outside itself. (Alexander 1921a:
39)
Alexander argues that his gloss of Spinoza solves various problems in
Spinoza’s original system. He also praises Spinoza for successfully
combining religious values and naturalism (Alexander 1927:
14). Alexander concludes one of his pieces on this topic by saying
that he takes pride in the similarity between his system and Spinoza’s
(Alexander 1921a: 79). Alexander was corresponding at this time with
the Spinoza scholar Harold Joachim.
There is very little secondary literature on this aspect of
Alexander’s thought, although it has been argued that Alexander is
best understood through Spinoza (Thomas 2013). 
Alexander’s writing on art falls into two kinds. First, there are a
number of essays on literature and art. These cover a wide range of
topics—from the art of Jane Austen, to the writings of Pascal,
to the origin of the creative impulse—and they are all reprinted
in Alexander’s 1939. Second, there are the pieces that make up
Alexander’s account of value. Alexander’s early interest in
ethics—exemplified in his first monograph (1889)—survived
in his later work as a preoccupation with the nature of value, albeit
with a focus on the aesthetic value of beauty. Alexander’s 1920
contained several chapters on the nature of value, and he goes on to
supplement these with a number of further papers on the same
theme. These include “Naturalism and Value”, and
“Value”, both of which are reprinted in
Alexander’s Philosophical and Literary Pieces (1939); and
“Morality as An Art” (1928). These papers culminate in
another monograph, Beauty and Other Forms of Value (1933) and
this constitutes Alexander’s most important work on the
topic. Alexander’s writings on value are of greater philosophic
interest than are those on literature and art.
The views that Alexander expresses in “Morality as An Art”
provide a useful introduction to his full account. In this paper,
Alexander argues that we can fruitfully understand morality by
comparing it to fine art. He argues that, just as the value of beauty
found in art is a human construction, so are moral values.
For it is the most obvious feature of fine art that it is a human
construction. But it is not so evident that truth and morality are as
much constructions of ours as beauty is… I am here to plead the
opposite doctrine. The highest so-called values, truth, beauty, and
goodness, are all of them human inventions, and the valuable is what
satisfies certain human instincts or impulses. (Alexander 1928:
143)
An obvious objection to this view is that beauty is not constructed;
we might find it in a natural landscape, for example. Alexander
replies to this that landscapes and other natural phenomena are
rendered beautiful by the parts that we pick out, akin to a
photographer composing a picture. As such, the beauty of nature is
composed by us (Alexander 1928:149). This entails that there is no
difference in kind between natural beauty and art; for more on this,
see Alexander’s “Art and the Material” (reprinted in
Alexander 1939).
Alexander argues that we construct values in response to certain
needs. For example, beauty satisfies the impulse of constructiveness
in humans. In “Value”, Alexander connects human art to the
dam building of beavers (Alexander 1939: 296). Analogously, morality
satisfies the impulse of gregariousness or sociality in humans.
[I]t is humanized out of the purely animal
sociality… which we find in animals that live in herds like
wild dogs, or form societies like bees. (Alexander 1928: 150)
Alexander expands on this account in Beauty and other forms of
Value (1933). Alexander perceives his naturalistic account of
value to be similar to that offered by Spinoza. In “Naturalism
and Value”, Alexander tells us that Spinoza’s is the
“true” naturalism: everything is extension, including
value, and yet everything is still divine (Alexander 1939: 279).
Building on the many smaller pieces that preceded it, Beauty and
Other Forms of Value provides Alexander’s full naturalist account
of value. Alexander’s approach is to discuss the supreme values in
turn—beginning with beauty, and moving on to truth and
goodness—and then continue down to lesser values. He aims to
explain not just what values are, but also how they came to be. 
Alexander argues that anything can have value if it matters to a
thing. In this sense, food is valuable to an animal, and moisture is
valuable to a plant. However, the “supreme”
values—beauty, goodness and truth—can be distinguished
from others because they are the only values that are valuable in
themselves, for their own sake. 
When we come to the highest values, the beautiful, the true and the
good, these in one respect are like wheat and apples: they are objects
of a certain constitution—statues and sonatas, landscapes,
generous deeds, chemistry. Their pre-eminence as values is that they
have no being apart from their value. That is because they are not
merely found, like apples, and their value, like the value of apples
for food, then discovered, but are made to have value, come into
existence along with their value. (Alexander 1933: 293)
The claim that these values come into existence along with their value
is of course referring to Alexander’s thesis—also given in
his Beauty and other forms of Value (1933)—that the
supreme values are human inventions.
As we saw above, Alexander argues that humans construct values in
response to certain needs or instincts. In the final part
of Beauty and Other Forms of Value, Alexander identifies the
animal origin of our supreme values. For example, there is an analogy
to be drawn between the social impulse in humans and in bees. In
“Naturalism and Value”, Alexander explains that in the
same way that the instinct of bees for finding honey once seemed to be
“magical” and yet it has been explained by biology in
naturalistic terms, similarly values appear to be magical and yet they
can be explained naturally (Alexander 1939: 282). Alexander goes on to
argue that Darwin’s theory of evolution plays an important role in the
development of value:
[T]he doctrine of natural selection may be described as the history of
how value makes its entry into the organic world. So far as it is a
necessary part of the process by which species are established, it is
the principle which constitutes the history of value, for it shows how
the mere interests of individual organisms come to be well-founded and
to be values. (Alexander 1933: 287)
The idea is that, for animals, things that have value are usually
those that will further the survival of the species, such as food.
Animals whose interests do not help to maintain their existence
succumb under the conditions of their existence, and “leave the
field” for others. In this way, natural selection provides a
history of value. More on this can be found in Alexander’s
“Naturalism and Value” (reprinted in Alexander 1939). This
integration of the theory of evolution into Alexander’s aesthetics
should come as no surprise to us, being as it is a theme in
Alexander’s larger work. 
Alexander’s writings on art and value were well received in their day.
[Alexander’s] happy blending of Herbert Spencer’s
patient empiricism with the bolder systematic sweep of Bradley and the
giant figures of German idealism was nowhere more fruitful than in his
treatment of aesthetics. (Listowel 1939: 183)
Secondary literature on them includes Listowel (1939), Fox (1934), Hooper
 (1950), and Innis (2017). 
“The Historicity of Things” (1936) is one of Alexander’s
latest papers. It is valuable in part because it gives a concise
overview of Alexander’s spacetime metaphysics in Alexander’s own
words. It is also valuable because it tackles an unusual theme: the
relationship between history and nature. Alexander argues that while
some of the contributions to philosophy from science are clear, it is
less clear what philosophy can learn from history (Alexander 1936:
12). Alexander argues that, as time and motion belong to the most
fundamental level of reality, all that exists is
“historical”. As such, science begins with history:
History can claim to be mistress of science, as much as mathematics,
though in a different sense. They stand for the two vital elements in
every science which cannot be separated, if they can be considered
separately, the constructive process by which we discover by our
thought the order inherent in things, and the raw material
itself… It must be remembered, however, of course, that
historical science is but one of the sciences which arise
from the facts and happenings of the world. (Alexander 1936: 24)
Alexander’s characterisation of history as having the whole world as
its subject matter is interesting not least because it proved so
controversial. Both R. G. Collingwood and Hilda Oakeley, two
philosophers of history associated with British idealism, took strong
issue with Alexander’s description; see Collingwood’s
reprinted Principles of History (1938 [1999: 56]) and Oakeley’s
“The World as Memory and as History” (1925–6).
Both Oakeley and Collingwood corresponded with Alexander, and what has
survived of their correspondence can be found in the Samuel Alexander
Papers at the John Rylands Library. A lone piece of secondary
literature on the relationship between Collingwood and Alexander is
O’Neill (2006).