Śāntarakṣita is probably best known as one of the 
great Indian Madhyamaka commentators. His thought in this regard has 
several features that make it unique including: his integration of 
Yogācāra thought, his integration of Buddhist 
logico-epistemological developments (discussed below), and his 
dynamic engagement with other Buddhist and non-Buddhist views 
(discussed below). His Madhyamaka view is most clearly and succinctly
articulated in his text Madhyamakālaṃkāra 
(The Ornament of the Middle Way, hereafter, MA) and his own 
commentary on that text, 
Madhyamakālaṃkāravṛtti (The 
Auto-Commentary on The Ornament of the Middle Way, hereafter, 
 MAV).[5]
A presentation of the two truths is a standard way by which 
Madhyamaka philosophers explain their views on the ontological status
of phenomena. It is seen as the most effective method for coursing a 
“middle way” between the philosophical extremes of 
asserting the absolute existence of phenomena on the one hand, and 
the non-existence of them on the other. Thus, Mādhyamikas will 
routinely claim that phenomena lack a certain mode of existence 
ultimately, but claim that such phenomena, or objects of knowledge, 
maintain another mode conventionally. Virtually all Indian Madhyamaka
philosophers will claim, in some detail, that an ultimate truth is an
object’s emptiness, or lack of having a truly existent essence or 
nature. This claim, which runs the danger of leading to nihilism, is 
then tempered to some degree by claims about the conventional mode of
existence of those phenomena. Though phenomena do not ultimately 
exist, they do exist conventionally. The precise way in which 
individual Madhyamaka thinkers define and describe these two truths 
gets at the core of what makes each of these important thinkers 
unique. Śāntarakṣita is famous for presenting his 
views on ultimate truths by way of one of the most famous Buddhist 
philosophical arguments on the ontological status of phenomena, the 
neither-one-nor-many argument.
The first two-thirds of MA comprise what is perhaps the most 
well-known rendering of the neither-one-nor-many argument, one of the
key philosophical arguments used by Madhyamaka philosophers to 
establish the emptiness, or lack of an inherent nature, in phenomena.
It is by way of this argument and his summary that 
Śāntarakṣita offers his presentation of the two 
truths, ultimate truth (paramārthasatya) and 
conventional truth (saṃvṛtisatya). The two 
truths are not only the primary means by which Mādhyamika 
philosophers present their positions on ontology, but form the ground
upon which issues of epistemology and logic are often discussed as 
well. The neither-one-nor-many argument is most succinctly presented 
in the first stanza of MA when he writes:
The point that Śāntarakṣita is attempting to make 
here is that no phenomena, including those which his philosophical 
rivals have claimed to have an inherently existent essence or nature,
in fact do have such a nature. The reason they cannot have such a 
nature, according to the argument, is that they have neither a truly 
singular nature, nor a truly manifold nature, the two being 
exhaustive of all possibilities for entities that have a real nature.
Over the course of the next sixty stanzas in his ninety-seven stanza 
text, MA, and accompanying auto-commentary, MAV, 
Śāntarakṣita puts all those phenomena asserted by his
Buddhist and non-Buddhist philosophical opponents to the test of the 
neither-one-nor-many reasoning. He begins by examining each instance 
in which some phenomena is asserted to be of a truly singular nature.
Through an analysis that reveals that such phenomena must have parts 
and thus could not be truly singular, he makes his way through all 
such cases current in late eighth century Indian philosophical discourse. 
For example, he begins his application of the argument with an 
analysis of the claim made by the non-Buddhist Sāṃkhya 
school that there is a Fundamental Nature (Prakṛti) or
creator god which is the permanent, uncaused, unobstructed absolute 
cause of all phenomena and which is of a truly singular nature. He 
argues in the second stanza of MA:
According to Śāntarakṣita, true singularity would be 
an absurd quality to claim for something which is permanent and has 
the ability to contribute to the periodic production of successive 
effects. If that were the case, there must be a part of the causal 
entity in moment #1 which contributes to the production of a seed, 
for example, a part in moment #2 which contributes to the production 
of the sprout, and a part in moment #3 which contributes to the 
production of a flower. Since the Fundamental Nature is described as 
the sole cause of the periodic arising of all effects, it must have 
all these parts, and more. It must have parts related with every 
entity for which it is a cause. The Fundamental Nature must include 
parts that cause entities to exist in one moment and parts that cause
them to cease to exist or transform into something else in another. 
That which causes a seed to exist in moment #1 must have at least 
some quality or qualities that distinguish it from that which causes 
a sprout to exist in moment #2. At a bare minimum, his opponent must 
be forced to admit parts to such a Fundamental Nature. Something with
manifold parts cannot, by definition, be truly singular. 
Śāntarakṣita thus considers that the application of 
this sort of reasoning undermines the existence of such a truly 
singular Fundamental Nature, as described in the Sāṃkhya 
system since it is illogical for there to be a permanent, truly 
singular, unobstructed cause of the successive effects of the 
manifold world. Arguments regarding the irrationality of asserting 
its permanence and those regarding its contradictions with our 
experience of causality in the world, are supplied in his own MAV on 
the above verse to strengthen his rejection of the notion of such a 
Fundamental Nature. 
Śāntarakṣita is not only critical of his non-Buddhist
philosophical opponents however. The bulk of the argument is 
addressed toward the views of philosophical opponents within in his 
own larger Buddhist camp that he feels have made errors in 
interpretation and logic. For example, he dedicates a lengthy portion
of the neither-one-nor-many argument to criticisms of a variety of 
Buddhist claims about the true singularity of consciousness made by 
both Buddhists associated with the Sautrāntika schools and those
associated with the Yogācāra/Cittamātra schools. In a 
variety of ways, proponents of these schools claim that consciousness
is truly singular and yet can be a knower of a multiplicity of 
objects. For Śāntarakṣita, such claims are fraught 
with errors in logic. If consciousness knows a multiplicity of 
objects, then it must not be singular by definition. There must be a 
part of the consciousness that knows object A and another than knows 
object B. Various Buddhists who want to hold consciousness to be 
truly singular, have attempted to avoid these faults in a variety of 
ways. Some have attempted to claim they avoid the faults because they
assert that there are an equal number of consciousnesses as objects. 
Others claim that they avoid these problems because they claim 
consciousness exists in a non-dual relationship with its objects. 
Each of these interpretive turns was met by 
Śāntarakṣita with logical analysis demonstrating what
he considered to be the inevitable contradictions that ensue by the 
various attempts at claiming that consciousness is truly singular. In
this manner, Śāntarakṣita analyzes a host of current 
claims of true singularity over the course of the first sixty stanzas
of the MA.
Having examined all those phenomena which his philosophical opponents
claim have or are of a truly singular nature and 
determined through reasoned analysis that they in fact, could not 
possibly have or be of a truly singular nature, 
Śāntarakṣita proceeds to consider the possibility of 
there being a truly manifold nature in phenomena. Because a manifold 
nature would depend upon the aggregation of true singularities, he 
concludes that just as there can be no inherently singular nature, 
there also can be no inherently manifold nature. And since there is 
no third alternative for entities with an inherent nature, there must
be no phenomena that have an inherently existent nature at all. While
elaborated upon in greater detail in his auto-commentary, MAV, his 
terse summary of the neither-one-nor many argument is found in the 
sixty-first and sixty-second stanzas of MA as follows:
The existence of an entity belonging to a class other than that which
has a single or manifold [nature] does not make sense because the two
are exhaustive of all possible 
 alternatives.[8]
Thus, an object’s lack of, or emptiness of having an inherently 
existent nature is an ultimate truth for 
Śāntarakṣita. This position, he feels, has been 
logically established by way of the neither-one-nor-many argument.
In a variety of ways, virtually all Mādhyamika’s reject the 
existence of an ultimate, absolute, unchanging nature in things, as 
Śāntarakṣita has done in the first sixty-two stanzas 
of MA. This is a key component in their presentations of ultimate 
truths. The anti-essentialist position of rejecting an ultimate 
nature in phenomena enables a Mādhyamika, such as 
Śāntarakṣita in this case, to avoid the 
“extreme” of clinging to objects as permanent, or more 
precisely, as enduring for more than a moment. Though the arguments 
may vary, most Mādhyamika thinkers are similar in their 
descriptions of ultimate truths. Debates among Mādhyamikas tend 
to rise in relation to their presentations of conventional truths, 
the means by which the “extreme” of non-existence is 
avoided.
After concluding that phenomena do not ultimately exist, 
Śāntarakṣita offers his concise summation and 
definition of a conventional truth in the sixty-third and sixty forth
stanzas of MA:
Those phenomena that are only agreeable when not put to the test of
In these stanzas and in his accompanying auto-commentary, MAV, 
Śāntarakṣita presents the parameters for his 
definition of a conventional truth. They are:
In addition, later in the text, Śāntarakṣita 
describes such objects in a manner previously only used by proponents
of the Yogācāra/Cittamātra school, namely, that such 
objects are “mere consciousness only”. (This aspect will 
be discussed below in the section entitled 
“Yogācāra-Madhyamaka Synthesis”.) 
Truths are objects of knowledge in Madhyamaka ontology, so the quality
of being known by a mind is an imperative and to some degree a
tautologous assertion. Being impermanent and causally efficacious
implies, in Buddhist thought, that they are dependently-arisen, that
they arise on the basis of impermanent causes and conditions that are
themselves, dependently-arisen. In his own commentary on these
stanzas, MAV, Śāntarakṣita explicitly describes
conventional truths as dependently-arisen. He goes on to state that
conventional truths are known with conceptual thought and designated
by worldly convention (MAV, 88–93).  Thus an object’s lack of an
inherent nature is an ultimate truth.  Those impermanent, dependently
arisen, causally efficacious objects of knowledge that are known by
conceptual thinking are conventional truths. This is how
Śāntarakṣita presents his views on the ontological
status of phenomena in his texts MA and MAV.
In addition to presenting the two truths as described above, a 
presentation that is not particularly out of the ordinary for a 
Madhyamaka thinker, Śāntarakṣita elaborates further, 
in ways that must have made his presentation seem unorthodox to 
mainline Mādhyamikas in eighth century India. Although there 
were other Indian Mādhyamikas who attempted to incorporate 
dimensions of Yogācāra/Cittamātra (Mind-Only) thought 
into their Madhyamaka perspective (including 
Śāntarakṣita’s own disciples Kamalaśīla and
Haribhadra, as well as predecessors like Ārya Vimuktsena and 
Śrigupta), Śāntarakṣita is undoubtedly the most 
noteworthy and most famous Yogācāra-Madhyamaka 
 synthesizer.[10]
 There are two primary areas where we find Yogācāra ideas 
incorporated into Śāntarakṣita’s thought: his 
presentation of conventional truths where he describes them as being 
of the nature of consciousness, and his conventional acceptance of 
self-cognizing consciousness or reflexive awareness.
One of the fundamental tenets of the 
Yogācāra/Cittamātra schools of Buddhist thought is the
assertion that phenomena are not of an utterly distinct nature from 
consciousness. The pan-Mahāyāna idea of emptiness is in 
fact described in this way Yogācāras/Cittamātras, by 
claiming that emptiness refers to an object’s lack of a nature that 
is distinct from the consciousness perceiving it. This is contrasted 
with the common Madhyamaka description of emptiness as referring to 
an object’s lack or emptiness of its own nature or essence in and of 
itself. Śāntarakṣita incorporates this 
Yogācāra line of thinking into his presentation of 
conventional truths when he writes in the ninety-first stanza of MA:
This statement refers to his earlier descriptions of conventional 
truths (cited above) where he describes conventional truths as 
phenomena that have the ability to function and which generate and 
disintegrate. In Mādhyamika discourse, “That which is 
cause and result,” is simply another way of referring to 
conventional truths. It refers to that which is impermanent, 
dependently-arisen, and causally efficacious, the three being 
co-extensive with each other and with conventional truths in general.
Thus, by stating that, “that which is cause and result is mere 
consciousness,” Śāntarakṣita is stating that 
conventional truths are of the nature of consciousness. This is an 
ultimate description of reality for proponents of the 
Yogācāra/Cittamātra systems, but for 
Śāntarakṣita here, this is part of his presentation 
of conventional truths, thus, incorporating a 
Yogācāra/Cittamātra orientation for his presentation 
of conventional truths.
A further development of this philosophical synthesis that 
Śāntarakṣita is putting forth is described even more 
explicitly in the next stanza, the ninety-second:
Here we find a particularly important and unique aspect of 
Śāntarakṣita’s presentation of the two truths. It is 
not merely that he incorporates aspects of Mind-Only thinking into 
his presentation that makes it unique. It is unique because for 
virtually all of Śāntarakṣita’s Madhyamaka 
predecessors in India, the two truths are utilized solely as a 
vehicle for presenting the ontological status of entities. It is done
by way of describing the mode of being for various objects of 
knowledge (ultimate truths and conventional truths). This common 
Madhyamaka way of approaching the two truths is present in 
Śāntarakṣita as well, but there is more here. In 
addition to stating the ultimate truths exist in x way and 
conventional truths exist in y way, 
Śāntarakṣita is also using his presentation of 
conventional truths as a stepping stone for his readers. A proper 
understanding of conventional truths takes a person part of the way 
towards an understanding of the ultimate. Previous Madhyamaka 
presentations of conventional truths do not incorporate this 
practical dimension. For Śāntarakṣita, conventional 
truths are not completely mistaken. By properly understanding 
conventional truths (i.e., as a follower of Cittamātra tenets 
understands the ultimate), one is well on the way to a proper 
understanding of the ultimate from his Madhyamaka 
perspective—the most subtle and accurate philosophical 
presentation of reality. There is a dynamic step at work in 
Śāntarakṣita’s presentation of the two truths; first 
one understands that entities are not of a distinct nature from that 
of the mind (as Mind-Only proponents claim) and then they progress to
realize that nothing exists in and of itself (the Madhyamaka 
perspective), even the mind. This dynamic engagement with 
conventional truths is unique among Madhyamaka thinkers and a 
critical innovation in the thought of Śāntarakṣita.
Śāntarakṣita was a towering figure in eighth century 
Indian philosophy. It appears from the little evidence we have that 
he was fully engaged in the philosophical arena of his day including 
the composition of polemical tracts against his rivals. We can assume
that these were taken seriously by his opponents because some of his 
extant writings are only known today because they were preserved in 
Jain libraries. But Śāntarakṣita’s philosophical 
style was richer than simple polemics. In texts like MA, he led his 
readers through a dynamic engagement with competing views. Competing 
views, particularly competing Buddhist philosophical views were 
utilized in his texts in ways that encouraged his readers to 
contemplate the full impact and import of those views. In other 
words, he seems to encourage a provisional acceptance of 
competing Buddhist views as he presents a philosophical hierarchy of 
tenets. This method makes for a quite dynamic engagement with those 
competing views where provisionally taking on the competing views 
serves to have a transformative affect on the mind of the student as 
they ascend the philosophical hierarchy. They were not simply used as
vehicles for illuminating his own view by contrasting it with those 
of his Buddhist rivals, though he was certainly doing that as well. 
Śāntarakṣita was doing more than that; he was 
encouraging his readers to take on those philosophical tenet systems 
he considered to be hierarchically “lower” in order to 
facilitate what seems to be a dynamic philosophical enterprise of 
multi-tiered engagement with a host of philosophical positions and 
views. In a tradition where philosophical inquiry is a form of 
religious praxis, it appears that provisional acceptance of the 
tenets of lower schools was used to ripen the mind for increasingly 
more subtle and accurate philosophical descriptions of reality. In 
other words, since the cultivation of experiential wisdom knowing 
reality is at the heart of what facilitates the larger tradition’s 
soteriological goals, this dynamic method can be said to serve 
soteriological 
 aims.[13]
This process can be witnessed to a degree in 
Śāntarakṣita’s encyclopedic tenets text, 
Tattvasaṃgraha, but is most clearly presented in MA. 
In his application of the neither-one-nor-many argument in MA 
(described above), the careful reader is drawn to notice that as 
Śāntarakṣita proceeds through his examination of 
competing views, he does so through the shifting lens of three 
philosophical 
 perspectives.[14]
 In the first fifteen stanzas of the text, he seems to be analyzing 
non-Buddhist and Vaibhāṣika tenets as a holder of 
Sautrāntika tenets would. His criticisms of those views are of a
type that a Sautrāntika would utilize and his forms of reasoning
are as well. It is as if he is encouraging his readers to adopt a 
Sautrāntika outlook and all that entails. Though there may be 
polemics involved (If x view can even be refuted by 
Sautrāntikas, what need is there to discuss the superiority of 
the Madhyamaka?), it appears that what is at work in an actual 
encouragement of his readers to seriously take on a Sautrāntika 
position, at least provisionally.
When he begins to examine the various positions of Sautrāntikas,
his perspective shifts and he starts to argue as a 
Yogācāra/Cittamātra would. He criticizes the varying 
Sautrāntika perspectives as a Yogācāra/Cittamātra
would, by making criticisms about how knowledge of entities external 
to consciousness could be known. And he makes these arguments both in
the context of the neither-one-nor-many framework and with the types 
of reasoning Yogācāra/Cittamātra thinkers such as 
Dharmakīrti, might utilize. One might think that the focus of 
his criticisms would be solely on Madhyamaka issues about 
own-essences (svabhāva), but a major focus at this 
point is on the separation of objects from consciousness. It is as if
Śāntarakṣita is encouraging his readers to take on
a Yogācāra/Cittamātra perspective, for at this point 
Śāntarakṣita seems to feign acceptance of a 
Yogācāra/Cittamātra perspective. He does not qualify 
his acceptance as merely conventional. He argues against 
Sautrāntika positions, as a Yogācāra/Cittamātra. 
It is only later in the text, when he begins to discuss the two 
truths that we come to learn that his acceptance of 
Yogācāra/Cittamātra tenets is qualified and 
provisional. Finally, beginning in the forty-fifth stanza, when 
Śāntarakṣita begins to analyze various positions 
asserted by proponents of Yogācāra/Cittamatra tenet, he 
takes on his final position as a Mādhyamika. He then criticizes 
such positions from a Mādhyamika perspective and utilizes the 
sorts of reasoning a Mādhyamika would use to refute 
Yogācāra/Cittamatra tenets, focusing on a rejection of 
essences. Thus, he has made his final shift in frames or scales of 
analysis. As he concludes the neither-one-nor-many argument and 
discusses a host of issues of great import in the remainder of the 
text, he maintains his final position as a Mādhyamika.
In the process of these shifting provisionalities, or scales of 
analysis, Śāntarakṣita has led his readers through a 
dynamic engagement with a host of philosophical views. They are not 
merely presented to be refuted (though that is certainly happening), 
but through an apparent feigned acceptance of “lower” 
tenets as he makes his way up a hierarchical ladder of philosophical 
views, his readers are actively encouraged to engage fully by taking 
on these other views that will ultimately be rejected. Rather than 
refute and dismiss competing views, Śāntarakṣita 
seems to recognize a utility in their engagement, one that serves the
teleological function of leading the reader to (in his opinion) the 
highest philosophical view, the Madhyamaka. For ultimately, the 
purpose of Buddhist philosophical inquiry has a soteriological 
function as well. Suffering, according to the Buddha, is caused by 
confusion and ignorance, by a misunderstanding of the world and its 
functions. Thus, the duty of the Buddhist philosopher is to attempt 
to indicate for the suffering masses, as clearly as possible, the 
precise nature of their confusions and misunderstandings that lay at 
the heart of their suffering. For Śāntarakṣita, it is
attachment to a fixed nature or essence in things which is at the 
root of the problem. So a dynamic philosophical process that can 
skillfully lead readers to the Madhyamaka perspective, the one that 
both understands and undermines all clinging to fixed natures, is a 
critical and creative part of ascending the spiritual path.
The spearheading of the Buddhist logico-epistemological tradition 
(pramāṇavāda 
 )[15]
 by Dignāga and Dharmakīrti, at first in response to Indian 
thought in the area of philosophy of language and in dialogue with 
non-Buddhist philosophers, resulted in a tremendous impact on many 
dimensions of Buddhist philosophical discourse in the middle and late
periods of Indian Buddhism. Though its impact could be seen before 
Śāntarakṣita (in facets of Bhāviveka’s 
writings), he was the first major Madhyamaka thinker who was also a 
commentator on Dharmakīrti, a contributor to this discourse, and
who attempted to integrate its insights into a Madhyamaka framework. 
(Both Dignāga and Dharmakīrti are more closely associated 
with the Mind-Only school). One can witness one dimension of the 
profound influence Śāntarakṣita had on Tibetan 
Buddhist thought, even given the differences in the details, when 
observing this integration of Madhyamaka and 
pramāṇavāda thought in towering Tibetan 
thinkers such as Sakya Pandita and Tsongkhapa among others. 
Śāntarakṣita’s thought on logico-epistemological 
issues is primarily found in his encyclopedic doxography, 
Tattvasaṃgraha and in his commentary on 
Dharmakīrti’s Vādanyāya entitled 
Vipañcitārthā. In order to properly situate
Śāntarakṣita’s thought on these issues, it is 
necessary to briefly discuss that of his two most important 
predecessors in this area: Dignāga and Dharmakīrti.
Central to the logico-epistemological tradition in general and 
Śantarakṣita in particular is the question of what 
constitutes a means by which one accrues an instance of indubitable 
knowing. In other words, how does one justify considering a moment of
awareness or cognitive episode as valid knowledge 
(pramāṇa)? What constitutes trustworthy 
awareness? For Śāntarakṣita, the 
pramāṇa that is the means of justifying an instant
of valid knowing is simultaneously indistinct from the instant of
valid knowing itself (McClintock 2002, 57).
As with Dharmakīrti, Śāntarakṣita describes 
valid knowledge or valid cognitions as instants of new knowledge in 
the sense that the cognizer knows newly something which to that point
was unknown. Generally speaking, Buddhist 
pramāṇavāda thinkers categorize two types of

 pramāṇa[16]:
 perception 
 (pratyakṣa)[17]
 and inference (anumāna). Objects of perception are 
causally efficacious particulars (svalakṣaṇa), 
actual instance of things in the world with temporal and spatial 
location. It is only particulars that are considered to be real. 
Generally, it would be thought that words apply to universals 
(sāmānyalakṣaṇa) which are conceptual 
constructs that have no causal efficacy in the world. Thus the early 
pramāṇavāda thinkers like Dignāga and 
Dharmakīrti can be considered to hold a soft form of 
connotationism in that they would reject a denotationist view that 
considers words to apply directly to actual particulars. The 
intuition that a word points to a particular would be very 
objectionable. A word cannot express a particular because particulars
are limitless and words have limits. Yet they are soft 
connotationists in that via a process of elimination or exclusion, 
they posit a way in which language is both not arbitrary and not a 
reference to particulars. Inferences are cognitions based on valid 
reasons that depend on this non-arbitrary use of 
 language.[18]
Among the philosophical issues that are important here is the 
fundamental question of how, if the world is only directly accessibly
by perception, can one come to valid knowledge by means of inference 
that relies on words that do not directly refer to particulars? How 
does one link the ineffable world of particulars to language, and 
thus to an inference that could produce valid knowledge? Since words 
do not apply to actual objects or particulars which are ineffable, 
Śāntarakṣita, like his predecessors Dharmakīrti 
and Dignāga, needs to explain how it is that we are talking 
about the world, while at the same time making it clear that we are 
not talking about the world, but our conceptual scheme. Yet he also 
must make clear that all conceptual schemes are not equal in that 
some can produce valid knowledge and some fail to do so. There must 
be a degree of non-arbitrariness to language if inference is to be 
considered as a source of valid knowledge. There are true and false 
statements and consequences for beliefs about them. So the challenge 
is: how does one link the ineffable world of particulars to language?
Each of the pramāṇavāda thinkers, including 
Śāntarakṣita, begin to address these questions with 
variations on a theory initiated by Dignāga and fine-tuned by 
Dharmakīrti and his followers, known as exclusion 
(apoha) theory. Dignāga’s response to the problem 
begins by claiming that language does not refer to universals, as one
might presume a Buddhist would argue, but rather, through a negative 
process of exclusions or apoha, eliminates that which 
contradicts the referred object. Words talk about entities in so far 
as they are qualified by the negation of other things. Though nothing
affirmative is said about reality, by use of exclusions, there is a 
relationship between concepts and particulars. Apoha or 
exclusions typically involves a double negation. Because in Buddhism 
the absence of something is a fiction in that absences are not caused
and do not function, exclusions can be used to explain away 
universals as the referents of words. Because negations are fictions,
this lightens the ontological commitment. A distinction is drawn 
between entities and pseudo-entities. Only particulars are real; 
negations are not real, but they are also not universals. Universals 
are positive or affirmative, whereas exclusions are negative. 
Dignāga’s position is explained quite succinctly by Bimal 
Matilal:
Dignāga argues for a way in which language can be construed to 
signify particulars, through a double negation that excludes that 
which contradicts the referent object while eliminating the 
philosophical commitment to universals. Though the process of 
exclusion seems quite cumbersome, in actuality our language formation
and conceptual processes seem to engage in it quite naturally.
Dharmakīrti adds several components to the thought of 
Dignāga on these issues concerning valid knowledge. In defining 
perception as a source or means of valid knowledge, Dharmakīrti 
describes it as that cognition that is free from conceptuality 
and non-erroneous. The inclusion of the qualification of it 
being non-erroneous eliminates erroneous non-conceptual cognitions, 
such as mistakenly seeing two moons, from the category of valid 
knowledge. Dharmakīrti further distinguishes two ways of 
apprehending objects: through perceptions which apprehend real 
objects positively, as they are, through the mediation of images 
(ākāra) which perfectly reflect them, and through 
concepts which get at their objects negatively, through the 
elimination of their opposites. Dharmakīrti’s insight is found 
in the connection he draws between reality and the conceptual realm 
of universals. For Dharmakīrti, experience and representations 
are the bridge. We construct concepts out of our experiences and 
representations of functional resemblances of real entities. In other
words, we can validly group together representations of actually 
unique entities on the basis that they can be excluded from the class
of things that do not perform a given function. Georges Dreyfus put 
it well:
In other words, there are several components to Dharmakīrti’s 
exclusion theory: the entity or particular, the image or 
representation, and the exclusion. First there are real events of 
real entities. Then there is a perception that has the mark of a real
entity because it is caused by something real. It is a mirror-like 
image of the real. This is followed by a conceptual representation 
superimposed on a real image. This is part real, part concept. 
Finally, after this is done, there is an assumption of commonality 
with other conceptual representations. This assumption is unreal and 
is the basis of the exclusion or universal. It derives not from the 
reality of common characteristics, but judgments of similarity. This 
is where concepts are conceived of as representing properties that 
are thought to exist in the world, such as permanence, which in fact 
do not. But it is through this process of exclusion that one can 
utilize positive language with the understanding that that language 
only refers to a common negation.
Śāntarakṣita’s treatment of these issues largely 
revolves around a response to the criticisms of non-Buddhists such as
Kumārila and Uddyotakara. Kumārila levels three criticisms 
of apoha theory in particular: that it is circular, that it 
is counter-intuitive, and that it is redundant. 
Śāntarakṣita’s response to these criticisms begins by
describing three primary types of negations which he equates with 
exclusions: non-implicative negations (niṣedha, med 
dgag) and two types of implicative negations 
(paryudāsa, ma yin dgag): mental exclusions and object 
exclusions. A non-implicative negation is a negation that does not 
imply the existence of some other thing. For example, the negation of
the existence of flowers that grows in the sky does not imply the 
existence of other plants that grow in the sky. It is a mere negation
with nothing implied. On the other hand, implicative negations, while
denying the existence of one thing, imply the existence of another. 
An example of an implicative negation would be if we were told that
either my aunt or my uncle came over last night.  If my aunt did 
not come, it implies that my uncle did.  Thus, there is 
something implied by the negation. Among the types of implicative 
negations, Śāntarakṣita includes mental exclusions. 
It is important to point out here that for 
Śāntarakṣita, negations and exclusions are virtually 
synonymous. Mental exclusions are conceptual representations that 
relate to the appearances or representations of entities, as 
discussed by Dignāga. Object exclusions are not conceptual 
representations of mere appearances or representations, but rather 
can relate to the real world. Thus, this form of exclusion is a real 
thing for Śāntarakṣita. It is these three types of 
exclusions that form the basis of Śāntarakṣita’s 
thought on this topic, the basis of his psychological interpretation 
of apoha, and the basis of his response to the critics of 
Dharmakīriti’s apoha theory, such as Kumārila.
In addition to the three types of exclusions, central to 
Śāntarakṣita’s thought on the topic is his unique 
presentation of representations and the psychological dimensions to 
his exclusion 
 theory.[19]
 According to Śāntarakṣita, it is our experiences of 
unifying similarities among representations that gives rise to our 
conceptual constructs. Mental representations of objects are 
exclusions because they exclude other representations. These 
conceptual representations are misconstrued to be the actual objects 
since the actual objects do not exist in them. For 
Śāntarakṣita, both the exclusion of that which is 
other than real particular and the exclusion of that which is other 
than the representation are both apohas or exclusions. The 
psychological dimension to exclusion is particularly important in 
Śāntarakṣita’s apoha theory in that he 
emphasizes the role of negation in relation to mental representations
and mental events in the conceptualizing process. For 
Dharmakīrti, universals are the objects of concepts. 
Śāntarakṣita agrees with this point but stresses that
the concept is the mental representation or mental event and that is 
an exclusion, whereas for Dharmakīrti the representations are 
the basis which supports the exclusions and concepts. For 
Dharmakīrti, exclusions are conceptual fictions, whereas for 
Śāntarakṣita they can be real entities.
Śāntarakṣita considers that he is fully able to 
respond to the criticisms of Kumārila with his presentation of 
exclusions. For example, Kumārila charges that the Buddhist 
apoha theories are counter-intuitive in that our intuition 
is not that words and concepts refer to negations or exclusions. 
Śāntarakṣita argues that Kumārila misunderstands
apoha to always be non-implicative negations. He misses the 
two types of implicative negations that Śāntarakṣita 
clearly specifies as included among forms of exclusions. For 
Śāntarakṣita, when we use words, the objects of such 
conceptual thoughts are the real objects. They are the indirect 
object of the exclusion that is a form of implicative negation, which
includes negative aspects by implication. Thus, words can be 
indicative of positive elements. The external object implies the 
image plus the exclusion of that which is other. The words or 
concepts thus take external objects as their objects and imply the 
conceptual exclusions. Thus when Kumārila mistakes all 
exclusions to be non-implicative negations, he misses this key 
component to the psychological functions at work and mistakes 
apoha theory to be counter-intuitive.
Kumārila’s charge of circularity in apoha theory is one
of the most critical for its defenders to answer. The main thrust of 
the argument was already found in Uddyotakara’s 
Nyāyavārttika, where he argues that apoha
entails the problems of circularity and denotationism (which 
apoha theorists consider it is imperative to avoid). This is
the case because there must be an affirmative denotation between 
words and particulars since the negation of an object implies that 
one first have a positive understanding of the object. One must first
have an affirmative understanding before one can negate its 
exclusion. Dreyfus summarizes Kumārila’s presentation of the 
argument succinctly as follows:
In other words, Kumārila argues that since a conceptual 
understanding of a cow is simply an understanding of non-non-cow 
according to apoha theory, that in order to understand 
non-non-cow, one must already understand cow. Thus, apoha 
theory must resort to circularity, or perhaps even more precisely, it
lacks a beginning point for the circle in the first place. 
Uddyotakara emphasizes that the only way out is to resort to a 
linguistic denotationism that apoha theorists want to avoid.
Kumārila stresses the interdependence of knowing cow and knowing
non-cow and not non-cow. Both question how a double negation is 
something other than a positive universal.
The crux of Śāntarakṣita’s response, again, relies on
his presentation of three types of exclusions, specifically the 
mental exclusion that is signified by words, a point he feels both 
Uddyotakara and Kumārila fail to recognize. According to 
Śāntarakṣita, there is a conceptual image that is an 
exclusion that is generated in the mind of one who hears the words, 
“This animal is a cow,” for example, but that this idea 
is an implicative negation that only implies that this animal is not 
a non-cow. According to Śāntarakṣita, the problem of 
circularity is thus avoided by a proper understanding of implicative 
negations: to understand cow one need not understand non-cow, but 
rather the mere idea of cow. Like Dharmakīrti, 
Śāntarakṣita relies on a judgment of similarity in 
functional efficacy among distinct particulars as conceptually 
construed to generate the idea. For Śāntarakṣita the 
emphasis is on similarity among the mental representations of them. 
Śāntarakṣita and Dharmakīrti both argue that 
there is not a problem with grouping things as x and 
non-x. The distinction between similar and dissimilar 
classes is made and the word merely applied to indicate this 
understood distinction. For Śāntarakṣita, based on 
judgments of similarity, the classes of cows and non-cows are 
established. It is the word that is applied to them which is not 
established. It is the word that is used to indicate this judgment of
similarity at the discretion of the speaker. Thus, for 
Śāntarakṣita, the perceived problem of circularity by
Uddyotakara and Kumārila is due to their misunderstanding of 
exclusions and negations.
Śāntarakṣita’s response to Hindu critics of 
apoha and the interpretive innovations that spring from it 
represent a critical juncture in Buddhist logico-epistemological 
thought. Though we see examples of integration of 
pramāṇavāda thinking into the ideas of a 
Mādhyamika philosopher, most notably with Bhāviveka, it is not
until Śāntarakṣita that we see this marriage of ideas
fully integrated and spelled out in a sophisticated way. It is 
difficult to overstate the tremendous impact this marriage of two 
major strands of late Indian philosophical thought in 
Śāntarakṣita had on the philosophical traditions of 
Tibet. 