Not much is known about Simplicius’ life. In Histories
II, 30.1 [Keydell], Agathias informs us
that Simplicius was born in Cilicia (south coastal region of Asia
Minor; today southern Turkey, north to northeast of the island
Cyprus). According to Simplicius’ own commentaries, he was
educated in Alexandria by Ammonius, son of Hermias (In Cael.
271.19), and in Athens by Damascius (In Phys. 601.19). Hence,
he refers to Proclus as “teacher of my teachers” (In
Phys. 611.11–12; 795.4–5) and “successor of
Plato (diadochos, i.e., head of the school) who lived shortly
before me” (In Cael. 640.24–25). The following
text from Simplicius’ Commentary on the Physics
illustrates well the important role that Proclus played in the
tradition of Athenian Neoplatonism:
All the philosophers after Proclus and down to my time, more or less,
followed Proclus not only on this detail, but in all the other dogmas,
except for Asclepiodorus, Proclus’ most gifted student, and our
Damascius. The former because of his immense talent, took pleasure in
innovating in doctrinal matters, whereas Damascius, because of his
love of work and his sympathy for Iamblichus, was not afraid to
reconsider many of Proclus’ dogmas. (Simplicius, In
Phys. 795.11–17, translated by I. Hadot and M. Chase, in I.
Hadot 2015: 126 n. 223
Several passages in Simplicius’ commentaries also testify to the
crucial role that Iamblichus’ philosophy and exegesis played for
him (see
 §1
 and
 §5 in the supplement on “The Commentaries of Simplicius”).
 Simplicius’ controversy with the Christian commentator
Philoponus, who taught in Alexandria, regarding whether the world was
created in time (see
 §3 in the supplement on “The Commentaries of Simplicius”) is well known. However, it seems that they never met personally
(“[I] feel no hostility against this man whom, to my knowledge,
I have never seen”; In Cael. 26.18–19, translated
by C. Wildberg).
In 529, a year that some historians have considered the end of
Antiquity, emperor Justinian ordered that “no one was any longer
allowed to teach philosophy and astronomy” (this is often
referred to as the closure of the Platonic Academy; for details and
further literature see Goulet & Coda 2016: 344). It is assumed
that this edict mainly targeted non-Christian philosophers such as
Neoplatonists and Manichaeans. Following this prohibition, but not
immediately, Simplicius travelled with six other Neoplatonic
philosophers under the lead of Damascius to the court of the Persian
King Chosroes, who had only come to power in Ctesiphon in 531.
Disappointed by their experience in Persia—the historian
Agathias suggests that the philosophers at first considered Chosroes a
kind of ideal Platonic philosopher king—and protected by a peace
treaty between Persia and Rome in 532, the philosophers left the
country, apparently several months after their arrival. Where the
seven went after that is still a matter of debate. The treaty says,
inter alia, that 
these men should be allowed to return to their own country and live
there henceforth in safety, without being forced to adopt opinions
which they did not hold, or to change their own faith. (translated by
A. Cameron 1969/1970: 169) 
Damascius recorded that he returned in 538 to his home country of
Syria (Hoffmann 1994: 590–591). Did the others follow him, or
did they return to Athens, Syria, or Harran (ancient Carrhae, in the
north of Mesopotamia, close to the Syrian border)? This question has
not been satisfactorily answered (for the ongoing discussion, see
Goulet & Coda 2016: 343–346; Watts 2005: 290–298).
However, it seems clear that, in order to write his
commentaries—which, as most scholars assume, were composed after
returning from Chosroes’ court (I. Hadot 2014:
135)—Simplicius needed quite an extensive library. Therefore, he
could only have returned to a place that provided such a library.
Simplicius wrote four commentaries that survive today (on
Epictetus’ Handbook and Aristotle’s
Categories, Physics, and De Caelo). It is
debatable whether, as univocally attested by the all manuscripts,
Simplicius is also the author of a fifth commentary, on
Aristotle’s De anima. Although there are several other
works that he might have written, these do not include any
commentaries on Plato aside from one work on the Phaedo
(Goulet & Coda 2016: 361–364, 390–394; see In
Cael. 369.4–6 and In Epict. I, 350–354
[Hadot]). As is discussed in the supplement
 The Commentaries of Simplicius, it is
 difficult to determine the order and periods in which Simplicius
 composed his commentaries.
Although there are no extant commentaries on Plato that are known to
come from Simplicius’ hand, Simplicius’ readers will
notice his intimate familiarity with and highest esteem for Plato.
Simplicius’ commentaries constitute a rich source for Platonic
philosophy, and he is well known for his tendency to harmonise Plato
and Aristotle (see
 §6).
 His work continues a tendency, probably initiated by Porphyry, to
make Plato’s pupil an integral part of the Platonic tradition,
reading Aristotle through Platonic—or rather
Neoplatonic—lenses. Simplicius frequently chooses a Platonic
dialogue in order to compare Plato’s and Aristotle’s
philosophy in a specific domain by way of contrast—for example,
when he comments on the Physics and the De Caelo,
where the Timaeus is always at hand. The Sophist and
his the doctrine of the highest kinds (megista genê)
play an important role in Simplicius’ commentary on the
Categories (cf. already in Plotinus VI 1–3
[42–44]). It should also be noted that Iamblichus’
Neoplatonic psychology, which can be considered a systematisation of
Plato’s views, lies in the background throughout
the Commentary on the De anima. When Simplicius finds
references to Eleatic philosophy in Aristotle (especially in
Physics I), the Sophist and Parmenides also
figure prominently.
It is also important to identify Simplicius’ purpose and
intended audience in writing his compendious exegetical works. Given
the sheer size of the commentaries and their argumentative structure,
which at times is rather complex, it is difficult to imagine that
Simplicius is aiming at students. Moreover, given the uneven length of
the exegeses of specific lemmata and the considerable number
of so-called digressions (see
 §2),
 it is not clear how a teacher could organise the material in the
commentaries for a series of lessons. To be suitable for the
classroom, Simplicius’ style would have needed to be much more
didactic and elementary. Although Baltussen (2010: 717) maintains that
Simplicius writes mostly for a student audience and that his works are
intended to be read (In Cael. 377.32, 653.9; In
Phys. 111.17, 762.29), 
this seems unlikely. Rather, his underlying incentive seems to be to
preserve as much original material (from Aristotle, his predecessors,
and his commentators) as possible and to present it in a way that
brings the unity of the Hellenic tradition to the fore. This would
explain why Simplicius continuously reminds his readers not only of
the harmony (sumphônia) between Plato and Aristotle,
with Aristotle as a loyal member of the Platonic tradition, but also
the continuity of Aristotle with the Presocratics, especially the
Pythagoreans and the Eleatics. There are several indications in
Simplicius’ collective text that he is addressing readers of
“considerable sophistication” (Bowen 2013: 5) and that the
target audience, as should be suspected given his use of the first
person plural, is 
contemporary Platonists in some community (to which he did or did not
belong) or […] readers imagined to be of like mind in a
counterfactual present. (2013: 5) 
This fully accords with the view that Simplicius probably did not
teach in any school and that when he wrote his commentaries, there was
therefore no philosophical curriculum. As Golitsis (2018: 95) has
convincingly suggested, 
[T]here was no place where they [sc. the Platonic philosophers] could
be trained […]. Simplicius invites them to learn by themselves
or, if possible, in groups. (see In Cat. 7.33–8.2)
What makes Simplicius’ commentaries a unique source for the
history of philosophy before him is the fact that he preserved so much
material from his predecessors, often in verbatim quotations:
[…] Simplicius, clearly aware of the fact that the works of
many philosophers earlier, contemporary with, and later than Aristotle
were in danger of disappearing made a point of quoting from them at
length. And so he has often preserved for us texts and information not
extant elsewhere. Suffice it to mention, by way of example, the
fragments of Anaximander, Parmenides, Zeno, Melissus, Empedocles,
Anaxagoras, Theophrastus (especially his History of
Philosophy or Physikôn Doxai), Eudemus (especially
his History of Geometry), Xenocrates, Epicurus, The Stoics,
Porphyry, etc. It is noteworthy that in the case of the Presocratics
Simplicius alone has preserved at least two thirds of all the verbatim
quotations. (Tarán 1987b: 247)
In his introduction to the Commentary on the Categories,
Simplicius provides a neat characterisation of the good commentator
(axion exêgêtên) on Aristotle (and
Plato):
The worthy exegete of Aristotle’s writings must not fall wholly
short of the latter’s greatness of intellect
(megalonoia). He must also have experience of everything the
Philosopher has written, and must be an expert
(epistemôn) of Aristotle’s customary use of
language (sunêtheia). His judgement must be impartial
(adekaston), so that he may neither, out of misplaced zeal,
seek to prove something well said to be unsatisfactory, nor, if some
point should require attention, should he obstinately persist in
trying to demonstrate that [Aristotle] is always and everywhere
infallible, as if he had enrolled himself in the Philosopher’s
school. [The good exegete] must, I believe, not convict the
philosophers of discordance (diaphônia) by looking only
at the letter (lexis) of what [Aristotle] says against Plato;
but he must look towards the spirit (nous), and track down
(anikhneuein) the harmony (sumphônia) which
reigns between them on the majority of points. (Simplicius, In
Cat. 7.23–32, translated by M. Chase, slightly
modified)
This is certainly one of the most interesting passages for those
trying to understand the Simplicius’ view of the role of the
commentator. The passage can, with caution, be considered a kind of
self-portrait of the Neoplatonic commentator at work, a glimpse into
his workshop, as it were. The good commentator must (1) be able to
understand and follow Aristotle’s arguments (“greatness of
intellect”). He must (2) have read all of Aristotle’s
works and must know his terminology and ways of expressing himself
(“customary use of language”). This is required in order
to explain “Aristotle by means of Aristotle” (see
[Pseudo-?]Simplicius, In de Anima 1.14–15, and
Elias/David, In Cat. 123.7–11) and show that he does
not contradict himself. The good commentator must also (3) be
impartial, that is, not openly polemical against Aristotle and merely
scoring points, but at the same time not an uncritical enthusiast.
Simplicius illustrates this elsewhere with his well-known saying,
“amicus Plato vel Aristoteles, sed magis amica
veritas” (“Plato or Aristotle are dear to me, but
much dearer is the truth”; see Tarán 1984 and In
Cael. 301.19–21 [about Alexander]). In other words, it is
certainly legitimate to criticise Aristotle. But things are different
with respect to Plato, because it seems that Simplicius never
criticised him. Finally, the good commentator must (4) strive for
harmony in most cases, by means of a distinction between the
superficial sense of a text (lexis) and its true or deeper
meaning (nous).
In order to forge a clearer profile of the commentator, it will be
useful to compare him to other Aristotelian commentators, such as
Alexander of Aphrodisias, Iamblichus, David, and Elias. The
Neoplatonists certainly did not consider Alexander to be an impartial
commentator on Aristotle. Rather, Simplicius often treats him as
someone who stands in firm opposition to the harmony of Plato and
Aristotle. As good a text as any to characterise Alexander’s
attitude towards Aristotle can be found in the opening words of his
De anima:
Just as I have great reverence for Aristotle’s works on other
subjects, since I find more truth in the views passed down from him
than in what others have claimed, I regard what he states in his
theory of the soul in the same way as well. I will therefore have
fulfilled my aim if I can set out his claims about the soul as clearly
as possible and offer suitable arguments to show how each of them is
well formulated. (Alexander, De anima 2.4–9 [Bruns],
translated by V. Caston)
On the other hand, the Neoplatonists viewed Iamblichus as someone who
brought Plato and Aristotle too close together. A text from Philoponus
points to interpreters who argued that the two even agreed on the
nature of universals:
Thus, also Proclus plainly and openly agrees with us about the
difference of the two philosophers [sc. as regards the status of
universals], or rather he has demonstrated it from the words/writings
of Aristotle himself. From this one can only wonder about the
overshooting amount of shamelessness among those who try to show that
Aristotle and Plato did agree also in this point. (Philoponus, De
aeternitate mundi 32.8–13 [Rabe], trans. by author)
It is very likely that Iamblichus was among these interpreters. We
know from elsewhere that he even saw agreement regarding the theory of
Forms (Elias/David, In Cat. 123.1–3). Along the same
lines, Simplicius seems to have reconciled Aristotle’s
comparison of the soul with an empty writing tablet (De anima
III 4, 429b31–430a2) and Plato’s theory of innate
knowledge (de Haas 2000, 169–170).
Was Simplicius impartial towards Plato? This is insisted upon, for
instance, by Elias/David (In Cat. 122.27–32), but not,
at least not explicitly, by Simplicius. As noted above, Simplicius is
prepared to criticise Aristotle time and again (for instance, in his
digression on place [topos]), but he never seems to criticise
Plato. For Simplicius, Plato is the one who brought the truth to
light, the explainer or interpreter of the truth (ho tês
alêtheias exêgêtês, In Cael.
131.1), but Aristotle is never granted such an honorary title (cf.
Syrianus’ and Proclus’ distinction between a “divine
Plato”and a (merely) “daimonic/semi-divine
Aristotle”). Therefore, one may surmise that Plato was not
subject to the impartiality requirement, since he was, compared to all
other representatives of the ancient philosophical tradition (hoi
palaioi), somehow closest to the truth.
If one were to name a single commentator apart from Simplicius’
Neoplatonic sources (esp. Porphyry and Iamblichus) who mostly strongly
shaped his commentaries, it would undoubtedly be Alexander of
Aphrodisias (around 200 CE):
[It is] profitable for those who choose to understand and explain
Aristotle’s thought by way of Alexander’s commentaries, to
examine what he said. (Simplicius, In Cael. 297.8–10,
translated by J. Hankinson)
Baltussen used this telling quotation to preface the chapter on
Alexander of Aphrodisias in his monograph on Simplicius (2008: 107).
It illustrates rather well that Simplicius by no means blindly
followed “the commentator” (ho
exêgêtês), as he calls him (In Phys.
1170.2, In Cael. 121.12 and 700.9), but was eager to
carefully examine what Alexander had to say. It is known, for
instance, that Simplicius had direct access to Alexander’s
commentaries on the Physics, the Heavens, and the
Categories. All of these are now lost, but a good deal can be
reconstructed based on Simplicius’ testimony (see the overview
in Kupreeva [2018: 387-388 and 443]). It can even be said without exaggeration that
large parts of Simplicius’ oeuvre are, in fact, extended
conversations with “Aristotle’s most famous exegete”
(Baltussen 2016: 1). While Simplicius owes much to Alexander, his
attitude towards him is ambiguous and comparable to how Syrianus deals
with Alexander’s Commentary on the Metaphysics.
Syrianus focuses especially on those passages where Aristotle attacks
Pythagorean-Platonic metaphysics (esp. in books 13 and 14 of the
Metaphysics), but in other cases, Alexander’s comments
suffice (O’Meara & Dillon 2008: 5). In other words,
Alexander’s comments generally have great value; he is the more
genuine (gnêsiôteros) commentator on Aristotle
(In Phys. 80.15–16), especially as far as the
Peripatetic tradition is concerned. Moreover, while Aristotle is the
most genuine disciple of Plato (gnêsiôtatos),
Alexander is the “most careful of Aristotle’s
partisans” (epimelestatos spoudastês, In
Cael. 378.20–22, borrowing the translation from
Mueller).
On the other hand, Alexander of Aphrodisias can also be a stumbling
block for integrating Aristotle into the Platonic tradition. This is
reflected in several passages where Simplicius remarks on
Alexander’s way of explaining Aristotle and, more specifically,
his attitude towards Plato. For while Simplicius as a rule tries to
explain away critical remarks that Aristotle aimed at his teacher, for
instance, via the distinction between the superficial meaning of a
text (lexis, to phainomenon) and its real purpose
(dianoia, nous), Alexander always sides with
Aristotle against Plato:
It is my opinion that Alexander of Aphrodisias obviously understands
the words of Aristotle well on other occasions—and does so
better than the other Peripatetics, but, in the case of the things
which Aristotle says concerning Plato, he does not seem to me to bear
in mind that Aristotle’s counter-arguments are directed at the
surface import of Plato’s statements (pros to
phainomenon). But, contesting Plato frivolously
(kakoscholôs) in a way, he tries not only, as Aristotle
also does, to refute the surface import of what Plato says, taking
simpler <people> into consideration, but he also attacks the
ideas (tas ennoias) of the divine Plato and tries to draw
consequences from what Plato says, frequently not even attending to
the surface import.
Consequently I, setting out the truth, which is dear to god and to
Aristotle, will here try to do a careful investigation, putting
forward the things which Alexander says are the opinions of Plato
about the motion of the soul. I do this because of those who deal with
his words in a more superficial way and dare to take from them in a
way which is hostile to the views of Plato, which is the same as to
say hostile to the opinions of Aristotle and to divine truth.
(Simplicius, In Cael. 377.20–34, translated by I.
Mueller)
But Alexander von Aphrodisias does not understand Plato’s
doctrines as Aristotle understood them, nor does he accept that their
views are in agreement (sumphônia) […].
(Simplicius, In Cael. 297.1–4, translated by R. J.
Hankinson)
I have said these things against Alexander for, while I respect the
man and wish him well, I think that honouring the truth the more is
dear to him too. (Simplicius, In Cael. 301.19–21,
translated by R. J. Hankinson)
But Alexander, although he is accustomed to drag in Plato even where
he is quite irrelevant, for some reason has here forgotten Plato
instead. (Simplicius, In Phys. 560.11–13, translated by
J. O. Urmson)
The Neoplatonic commentaries of late Antiquity represent rather
sophisticated readings of Plato and Aristotle, integrating a rich
prehistory of exegesis and philosophical debate, but also structured
according to certain well-defined rules and methods. Since Simplicius
comes almost at the end of this tradition, his commentaries are also a
repository from which such constituent parts of Platonic exegetical
practices can be reconstructed. Generally speaking, both ancient and
medieval commentators share a nondevelopmentalist approach to their
authors and treat single works as part of a greater philosophical
whole or system. Simplicius’ main aim is to clarify the
Aristotelian text, explain Aristotle by means of his own writings, and
demonstrate the harmony of Plato, Aristotle and older pre-Socratic
traditions.
Several elements are characteristic of Simplicius’ commentaries.
All are lemmatised, that is, Aristotle’s (or Epictetus’)
text is divided into smaller sections of text which are then commented
upon, and the commentaries are introduced with prologues of varying
lengths (see below for more details). The comments on a single lemma
are sometimes subdivided into two sections, one which mainly comments
on the philosophical content (theôria) and one which
comments on single expressions or words (lexis). Such a
distinction goes back to Proclus (Festugière 1963 [1971]).
Since the commentaries are probably not written for teaching purposes
(see
 §1),
 they are not structured according to “lessons”
(praxeis), as was the usual practice in the Alexandrian
school after Ammonius. Digressions or autonomous essays that interrupt
the running commentary are also characteristic of Simplicius (see
Golitsis 2008a and
 §2.3 in the supplement “The Commentaries of Simplicius”).
 Like Aristotle, Simplicius frequently integrates longer doxographies.
At times, he approaches philosophical issues through the method of
“difficulties and solutions” (aporiai kai
luseis), which can frequently be found in Damascius,
Simplicius’ teacher, and ultimately goes back to Aristotle (cf.
Metaphysics Beta, with its long list of aporiai).
From Iamblichus, Simplicius borrows the policy that each of
Plato’s and Aristotle’s works should be explained by first
establishing its main, overarching topics (skopos) which hold
all the parts together:
For the goal (skopos), once correctly identified, defines and
rectifies our thought (dianoia), so that we are not vainly
transported about in every direction, but refer everything to it.
(Simplicius, In Cat. 8.13–15, translated by Michael
Chase)
A common practice among later Neoplatonists was to preface their
commentaries with a series of questions or preliminary points
(kephalaia) that should be settled before embarking on the
exegesis proper (Hadot & Hoffmann 1990: 21–160; Hoffmann
1998; Mansfeld 1994; for an excellent (English) summary see Hoffmann
2006: 607–613). The form that these prolegomena, as
they were called, take in Simplicius was introduced by the
Neoplatonist Proclus (Elias/David, In Cat. 107.24–26).
In the case of Aristotle’s Categories, for instance, we
find not only prolegomena suited for this very text (in seven points),
but also a general introduction to Aristotle’s philosophy (in
ten points; for a useful overview see Hoffmann 2006: 607–613).
This is because the Categories was the first of
Aristotle’s texts to be read in the Neoplatonic school:
Since the Categories is the first book of Aristotle’s which we
encounter, and Aristotle’s school—the so-called
Peripatetic—is one of the schools of philosophy, we ought first
to say how and in how many ways the philosophical schools received
their appellations. Secondly, what is the division of the Aristotelian
writings, so that the class to which we shall assign the present work
shall be clear. Third, whence should one begin [the study of]
Aristotle’s writings? Fourth, what is the goal of
Aristotle’s philosophy? Fifth, which things lead us towards this
goal? Sixth, what is the form of the Aristotelian writings? Seventh,
why did the Philosopher practise obscurity? Eighth, what must the
exegete of accounts (logoi) such as these be like? Ninth,
what kind of student should be accepted? Tenth, in the case of each
Aristotelian treatise, how many main points (kephalaia)
should be taken up, which are they, and for what reason? (Simplicius,
In Cat. 3.18–29, translated by M. Chase)
Finally, the tenth of the matters set forth was: how many, and of what
kind, are the preliminary points (kephalaia) we must
articulate prior to the study of each Aristotelian treatise. They are
the following: the goal (skopos), the usefulness (to
chrêsimon), the reason for the title (aitia
epigraphês), its place in the order of reading (taxis
anagnôseôs), whether the book is a genuine work of
the Philosopher (gnêsion), its division into chapters
(eis kephalaia dihairesis). It may also not be inappropriate
to inquire under what part of his philosophy (meros tês
philosophias) the work is placed. (Simplicius, In Cat.
8.9–13, translated by M. Chase)
Such an introductory scheme could be modified according to the
specific needs and exigencies of a text, so that there is not always a
discussion of all preliminary points:
It is to be noted, however, that all these things do not always
require articulation, for often, the usefulness becomes clear at the
same time as the goal, while the title is obvious to everyone, as [in
the case of] the On the Soul. Authenticity, for its part,
does not need to be established in every case, but in general only
when there is some starting-point for controversy. (Simplicius, In
Cat. 8.31–9.3, translated by M. Chase)
I offer these things as a hymn to You, Lord (despota),
Creator (dêmiourgos) of the whole cosmos and of the
simple bodies in it, and to those who have been made by You, desiring
to behold the greatness of Your works and proclaim it to the worthy so
that, thinking nothing mean or merely human about You, we might kneel
down to You because of the superiority which You have over all the
things created by You. (Simplicius, In Cael. 731.25–29,
translated by I. Mueller)
Simplicius’ Commentary on the Heavens ends with a
prayer to the demiurge. In this prayer, the whole work is termed a
“hymn” (humnos) to the creator god. Several
recent studies have pointed out that the later Neoplatonists
considered theology and ritual (theurgy) an integral part of their
philosophy. For instance, Proclus composed several hymns and begins
his Commentary on the Parmenides with a long prayer. Both he
and his teacher Syrianus were eager to show that Plato was in harmony
with most ancient religious traditions such as the Orphics, the
Pythagoreans and the Chaldaean Oracles. Simplicius’ extant
commentaries all end with a prayer, the only exception being the
Commentary on the De anima, where we find a small prayer at
the beginning of the work:
And now, under the Guide who is the cause of all souls and all
reasoning, let us start upon the projected work. (Simplicius, In
de Anima 1.3–21, translated by J. O. Urmson, slightly
modified)
Surprisingly, and unexpectedly for readers familiar with
Aristotle’s Physics and De caelo, which are
both rather technical in character, Simplicius’ comments time
and again betray a deeply religious or spiritual mindset. In the
tradition of Athenian Neoplatonism, where religious and ritual
elements were crucial ingredients of philosophy, Simplicius’
Platonisation of Aristotle, as it were, also entails a
spiritualisation of Aristotle’s works.
This is where the ultimate usefulness (chrêsimon) of
Simplicius’ writings is located. Philippe Hoffmann has
demonstrated this admirably:
The example of Simplicius’s Commentary on Aristotle’s
Physics is emblematic of the connection between learned exegesis
and religion: the “usefulness” of physics, Simplicius
explains, is to provoke the awakening in souls of the anagogical triad
of Love, Truth, and Faith (to which is added a fourth term, Hope); and
the successive reading of the Physics and the De
Caelo leads the soul of the philosopher-exegete and those of his
audience (or of his readers) to a “union”
(henôsis), through Faith and the “vital
sympathy” correlative with it, with the divine Heaven and with
the demiurgic intellect that produces the World. (Hoffmann 2006:
599–600)
Within this text is a motif that may be called the ultimate goal
(telos) of all ancient philosophical schools, but especially
of the Platonic tradition, to wit, “assimilation to god” (Plato, Theaetetus 176b–c, trans. by author).
The average Aristotle
scholar today might find this far-fetched, to say the least. However,
neither of Simplicius’ commentaries on natural philosophy was by
any means a religious manifesto. Rather, they are both crammed with
technical details and a vast knowledge of texts and philosophical
problems. But to ignore this religious dimension would do injustice to
Simplicius’ general approach to philosophy and exegesis, for in
late Antiquity, philosophy was considered a “way of life”
(P. Hadot 1995) and always related
to ethics and the ultimate goal of human life, i.e., purification,
ascent, and salvation/deification of the soul:
If we take Simplicius at his word that the ‘study of physics
[…] arouses us to marvel and magnify the maker of the cosmos',
his commentaries on Physics and On the Heavens are
indeed also a form of worship in which his ingenuity and respect for
the established tradition contribute to the general effort of
clarifying the interpreters of nature (and the interpreters of the
interpreters). In trying to defend the Platonist point of view in
contradistinction to the Christian outlook he uses polemic to persuade
and refute, the comprehensive exegesis to clarify and proselytise. His
commentaries thus became one very elaborate protreptic and guide to
Aristotle's works. (Baltussen 2008: 195)
[The good exegete] must, I believe, not convict the philosophers of
discordance (diaphônia) by looking only at the letter
(lexis) of what [Aristotle] says against Plato; but he must
look towards the spirit (nous), and track down
(anikhneuein) the harmony (sumphônia) which
reigns between them on the majority of points. (Simplicius, In
Cat. 7.29–32, translated by M. Chase)
This programmatic statement from the introductory section to the
Commentary on the Categories shows that the harmony of Plato
and Aristotle was one of Simplicius’ top priorities as a
commentator. As mentioned earlier, the ancient notion of harmony
(sumphônia) did not entail a strict identity of
philosophical views. Rather, it referred to positions that are
reconcilable, compatible, or even complementary:
The text of the two philosophers can be in accord by being
complementary in a unified system, which is quite different from their
being in accord as to the very ideas they contain. (Golitsis 2018:
72)
Neoplatonists frequently characterised Aristotle as the secretary of
nature, as it were, while Plato was the metaphysician par excellence
(cf. Raphael’s “The School of Athens”). Each had his
own peculiar domain and his peculiar philosophical attitude, but one
could nevertheless speak of a harmony between the two approaches:
[Aristotle] always refuses to deviate from nature; on the contrary, he
considers even things which are above nature according to their
relation to nature, just as, by contrast, the divine Plato, according
to Pythagorean usage, examines even natural things insofar as they
participate in the things above nature. (Simplicius, In Cat.
6.27–30, translated by M. Chase)
One ought to know that Aristotle is always doing natural philosophy
when he does theology, while Plato is always doing theology when he
does natural philosophy. (Elias/David, In Cat.
120.30–121.4)
However, I think that one should also attend to the purpose
(skopos) as well as at the words and recognise that the
difference (diaphora) between the two philosophers on these
questions is not about things (pragmata) but about words:
Plato rejects the ordinary use of words (sunêtheia) in
the name of precision, but Aristotle makes use of the ordinary use of
words on the grounds that the truth is not at all harmed by this.
(Simplicius, In Cael. 69.11–15, translated by I.
Mueller)
Here, therefore, the difference (diaphora) between the
philosophers is not over a reality (pragma), but over a name
(onoma), as it is in most cases. I think the reason often is
that Aristotle wishes to preserve linguistic usage and carries out his
arguments on the basis of what is evident to the senses, while Plato
often scorns them and readily resorts to intellective theories.
(Simplicius, In Phys. 1249.12–17, translated by I.
Bodnár, M. Chase, and M. Share; cf. (Pseudo-?)Simplicius,
In de Anima 28.12–13)
Certainly, one may wonder whether such a program does justice to
either Plato or Aristotle, although this issue is not relevant to the
present discussion of Simplicius. Within the framework of Late
Neoplatonism, it seems advisable to distinguish Simplicius from
Syrianus and Proclus, since both of the latter are much more explicit
and polemical when it comes to reprimanding Aristotle for his
criticism of Plato. On the other hand, while it is true that
Simplicius makes a great effort to reconcile the two philosophers,
such a rapprochement could also be considered a Platonisation of
Aristotle and a stealthy neutralisation of his at times anti-Platonic
line of reasoning.
Be that as it may, it is nevertheless clear that there is a rich
pedigree in the history of the Platonic tradition regarding
harmonisation. Simplicius continues and extends a program that was
inaugurated by his teacher Ammonius, and also before him by Porphyry,
and it was afterwards continued in Alexandria by Hierocles and
Olympiodorus, more or less along the same lines as Simplicius.
Karamanolis (2018: 36) argues convincingly that Porphyry (and before
him some Middle Platonists) had already considered Aristotle a crucial
part of the Platonic tradition:
[…] Porphyry wrote commentaries on works of Aristotle because
he found these works to represent an elaboration on, and a development
of, Plato’s philosophy. […] What Porphyry does deny is
that Aristotle contradicts the essence of Plato’s philosophical
views when he articulates theories that are not in Plato, since these
may be inspired from Plato or continue in some way Plato’s
thinking on a given issue.
Scholars have remarked that Simplicius’ eagerness to harmonise
Plato and Aristotle should be seen in the context of the
Neoplatonist’s anti-Christian attitude and especially his
polemics against the Christian Platonist John Philoponus (Hoffmann
2014: 286). After Christianity became the official state religion (in
380 CE), it was ever more difficult for pagan philosophers to teach
and practice their cultic rituals. This development culminated in the
famous edict of 529, commonly referred to as the closing of the
Platonic Academy (see
 §1).
 One of the main criticisms, made as early as the first Christian
apologist Tertullian, was that Greek philosophers and their schools
would constantly contradict each other, so that it was impossible to
speak of a unified intellectual tradition or heritage. In this
respect, John Philoponus was particularly dangerous in criticising the
Hellenic tradition from within, and with an excellent knowledge of all
of the relevant texts. If all of this weren’t bad enough, the
Christian Platonist from Alexandria openly countered efforts toward
harmonisation. Being a fervent champion of the creation of the world
in time (according to the Christian creed), Philoponus argues that one
of the most common arguments of the harmonisers—that Aristotle
would only criticise the apparent meaning of Plato’s
words—is not valid. He even refers to it as a fiction
(muthos), adding that if it were true, Aristotle would have
said so explicitly:
From these passages we can most certainly see that Aristotle’s
refutations of Plato are not directed at people who have wrongly
understood Plato, which is a fiction created by some more recent
commentators out of embarrassment at the disagreement between the
<two> philosophers, but rather constitute a rebuttal of the
notions of Plato himself. For, if Aristotle had not been attacking
Plato’s own doctrine of the Forms but, as these commentators
claim, that of people who have misunderstood him, he would have
specified precisely this at the outset and not have refuted the
doctrine of the Forms generally and without qualification.
(Philoponus, De aet. Mundi 29.2–13, translated by P.
Golitsis 2018: 73)
Simplicius’ polemics with Philoponus in his commentaries on the
Physics and De Caelo will be examined in more detail
below.
Ammonius, pupil of Proclus was also an important predecessor for
Simplicius. Ammonius taught in Alexandria (around the second half of
the fifth century) and famously argued that Aristotle’s Unmoved
Mover is both a final and an efficient cause (Simplicius, In
Cael. 271.13–21 and In Phys.
1360.24–1363.24). Such a reading of Aristotle, which Proclus
still firmly opposes (In Parm. IV 842.20–27 [Steel],
where he calls the Unmoved Mover agonos, i.e., not productive
or infertile; see also Tempelis 1998: 134 n. 609), was an important
step in combining the demiurge in Plato’s Timaeus with
Aristotle’s self-thinking intellect (Metaphysics Lambda
6–7). Simplicius welcomes Ammonius’ innovation and, not
surprisingly, refers to him with great approval (see In Phys.
1362.11–16 and Golitsis 2017a).
But it should not be forgotten that there were also other threads to
Simplicius’ approach of harmonising the Hellenic tradition and
especially of integrating Aristotle. At In Cael.
297.1–6, he mentions some interpreters (tines) who
betrayed a hostile attitude towards Aristotle. It is likely that he
mainly had Syrianus and Proclus in mind. Simplicius had to deal with
such criticism with much more delicacy than the criticism coming from
Philoponus. There is a telling passage in In Cael.
640.20–31, where Simplicius explains that Proclus has refuted
Aristotle’s criticism of Plato in the De caelo in a
special monograph (now lost; see Steel 2005 and Luna, Segonds, and
Endress 2012: 1591–1596) in order to immediately remark that the
criticism was only apparent.
What are the different strategies Simplicius uses to harmonise Plato
and Aristotle or to integrate the Presocratics and even earlier
traditions (Chaldeans, Orphics) into the Platonic tradition? In
Platonic Theology I 4, Proclus discusses at length an
exegetical device that seems to be comparable to the doctrine of the
“four senses of scripture” (quattuor sensus sacrae
scripturae), well known from biblical exegesis. According to
Proclus, different hermeneutical methods may be applied to different
texts, depending on the mode of their composition. From the
perspective of the Neoplatonists, different authors or even schools of
thought had different ways of expressing themselves; this applied
mainly to traditions that were active or alleged to be active before
Socrates and Plato: the Chaldeans, the Orphics, Homer (and Hesiod),
the Presocratics (esp. Parmenides and Pythagoras, including the
Pseudo-Pythagorean tradition)—but also to Plato and Aristotle.
Texts could be written “in riddles”, “as
myths”, “in symbols”, or “in images”,
and they could be “inspired” or “dialectical”.
At times, this entailed that these texts needed to be translated or
decoded in order to serve in philosophical debates. It goes without
saying that such presuppositions also granted a certain kind of
exegetical freedom to the interpreters. Plato himself, Proclus
explains, betrays at least four modes of expressing himself in
different dialogues, while Aristotle was often considered to
intentionally write in an obscure way for members of his school.
Moreover, while Plato, according to Simplicius, “rejects the
ordinary use of words in the name of precision”, Aristotle
“makes use of the ordinary use” (Simplicius, In
Cael. 69.11–15).
It is against this background that Simplicius’ attempt to
harmonise the Greek tradition should be interpreted. Compared to
Proclus, Simplicius’ approach is less complex, and it is, in
fact, rather similar in principle. Regarding the Presocratics,
Simplicius remarks that they frequently speak in riddles
(ainigmatôdôs) and that Aristotle’s
criticism of them is merely directed against their apparent meaning.
What is more, we should keep in mind that they wrote before the
methods of philosophical discourse and formal logic were firmly
established by Plato and Aristotle:
But since we will hear Aristotle too refuting the opinions of earlier
philosophers, and before Aristotle Plato seems to do this, and before
both of them Parmenides and Xenophanes, it should be known that these
people, being concerned for those who listen more superficially,
refuted the apparent absurdity (to phainomenon atopon) in
their accounts, since the ancients were accustomed to express their
doctrines in riddles (ainigmatôdôs). (Simplicius,
In Phys. 36.25–31, translated by R. Barney and S.
Menn)
[…] Eudemus bears witness to this when he says: ‘Someone
might be amazed at Parmenides for following these untrustworthy
arguments and being deceived by things of this kind, but these matters
had not yet then been clarified. For neither did anyone refer to
“[being spoken of] in many ways” but Plato was the first
to introduce “in two ways”, nor [did anyone speak of] the
“in itself” or “the accidental”; and it seems
that he [i.e., Parmenides] was indeed misled by these points. These
have been studied through the arguments and counter arguments, and the
syllogistic <figure>. For there was no agreement unless it was
seen to be necessary. But our predecessors made claims without proof.
(Simplicius, In Phys. 120.6–12, translated by P. Huby
and C. C. W. Taylor)
Simplicius uses the same pattern of argument regarding
Aristotle’s criticism of Plato: Aristotle argues merely against
the apparent meaning of Plato’s words (see, for instance, In
Cael. 352.27–28, 296.6–8 and 26–30, 377.20
ff.). Pantelis Golitsis has rightly pointed out that such criticism had
a “preventive” and “pedagogical” function for
ordinary, more superficial, and inexperienced readers who were prone
to misunderstand Plato. This goes back, in part, to the Neoplatonist
Syrianus (Golitsis 2018: 94). For instance, Golitsis points to In
Phys. 821.27–29, where Simplicius explains that
“Aristotle philosophised in a way which is more suited to the
majority of people and because he was aware of their misunderstandings
[…]” (translated by J. O. Urmson and P. Golitsis).
Simplicius’ arguments are, as previously noted, indebted to
Ammonius. Olympiodorus, Ammonius’ pupil in Alexandria, shows a
strategy similar to Simplicius’ strategy. The only difference
may be that, as already noted, Simplicius never seems to disagree with
Plato. Was the Alexandrian or the Ammonian school more liberal in this
respect? Once again, it is interesting to compare Simplicius with
Olympiodorus:
Olympiodorus follows Ammonius in emphasizing the harmony between
Aristotle and his master […]. He calls him a true disciple of
Plato (In Alc. 5.29–32). Whenever possible he resolves
apparent contradictions and says that in the rare instances where
Aristotle diverges from Plato he is still indebted to him (In
Gorg. 41.9, 214.13–215.11). Olympiodorus is not blind to
the divergences, and in those cases he usually, though not always,
agrees with Plato. (Opsomer 2010: 707)
In the Middle Ages and after, Simplicius was read by a wide range of
authors, but to date no systematic study of his legacy has been
published. This final section presents only a limited selection of
evidence for his legacy. In the Latin West, the Dominican friar
William of Moerbeke (1215–1286) translated some of
Simplicius’ commentaries into Latin. This made them accessible
to readers such as Thomas Aquinas, Henry of Ghent, Duns Scotus, and
many others. Moerbeke finished translating the Commentary on the
Categories in 1266 (Chase 2008: 12–17 and 20–24). He
also translated a small part of the Commentary on the De
Caelo, the so-called fragmentum Toletanum, followed by a
full translation of the commentary in 1271 (see Bossier 1987). In
addition, there is a partial translation by Robert Grosseteste that is
older then the one by Moerbeke, but it is difficult to determine who
actually made use of it.
Regarding Moerbeke’s influence on Thomas, the latter seems to
have followed Simplicius in the way he conceives the history of
philosophy and, more specifically, the relation between Plato and
Aristotle (see Hankey 2002):
The diversity of these two positions stems from this, that some, in
order to seek the truth about the nature of things, have proceeded
from intelligible reasons, and this was the particular characteristic
of the Platonists. Some, however, have proceeded from sensible things,
and this was the particular characteristic of the philosophy of
Aristotle, as Simplicius says in his commentary Upon the
Categories. (Thomas Aquinas, De Spiritualibus creaturis
3.40.275–282, as quoted in Hankey 2002: n. 46)
Moreover, Thomas must have considered Simplicius a rich source of
information about ancient philosophers and their doctrines and
especially about the Peripatetic tradition. Bossier (1987) and others
have suggested that Thomas might have used material from the
previously mentioned fragmentum Toletanum in his
Commentary on Aristotle’s Metaphysics (XII 8, on
concentric spheres and their different movers). There is no evidence
of an early Latin translation of the other commentaries, with the
possible exception of a small part of the Commentary on the
Physics, which also goes back to Robert Grosseteste (Mansion
1956: 94).
The Arabic tradition is another important source of information about
Simplicius (for a concise summary, see Goulet & Coda 2016:
384–394; see also Vallat 2014a and 2014b and Gätje 1982).
As in the Latin tradition, the Commentaries on the
Categories and the De anima seem to have primarily
been read by scholars (in both Arabic and Syriac). However, there also
appears to be some evidence for a lost Commentary on the First
Book of Euclid (Goulet & Coda 2016: 390–394; I. Hadot
2014, 39–53; R. Rashed 2005). Before Simplicius, Proclus had
already commented on Euclid. Proclus’ commentary still exists,
and so there is a question regarding Simplicius’ motivation for
writing a second commentary, and it may be that Simplicius’
commentary was simply an augmented and revised version of
Proclus’ commentary. Philosophers in the Arabic tradition, like
those in the Latin tradition, also used Simplicius to defend the
harmony of Plato and Aristotle.
The Byzantine tradition is primarily relevant for the textual
transmission of Simplicius’ works. From the little that is
known, Byzantine scholars seem to have had a special interest in the
Commentary on the Physics. One of the most important
manuscripts conserving this commentary (Mosquensis Muz. 3649), not
used by Hermann Diels in his CAG edition, was copied by the Byzantine
princess Theodora Palaiologina Rhaulaina (ca. 1240–1300; see
Harlfinger 1987). Simplicius’ Commentary on the Physics
was used by Michael Psellus, Nicophorus Blemmydes (in his
Isagogical Epitome; Golitsis 2007), Georgios Pachymeres (in
his own Commentary on the Physics, traditionally attributed
to Psellus; Golitsis 2008b), Georgios Gemistius-Plethon, Georgios
Scholarius, and Theodorus of Gaza. Since there was a lively debate
among Byzantine philosophers on the relation between Plato and
Aristotle, it is very likely that Simplicius had an impact in this
respect.
Interest in the Commentary on the De anima can also be traced
in the Renaissance, for instance, the attention paid to
(Pseudo-?)Simplicius’ reading of De anima III 5 as
regarding the human intellect only, and also his explanation of the
key notion of entelecheia and his relation to Averroes’
psychology (Nardi 1951; Salatowsky 2006; Blackwell 2011). Moreover,
Renaissance philosophers, like scholars in Byzantium and the Latin
West, thought much about the relation between Plato and Aristotle,
with some sharing Simplicius’ preference for harmony or
concordism and others opposing it. Thus, for example, Thomas
Aquinas’ view on the harmony of Plato and Aristotle was partly
inspired by passages from Simplicius (in William of Moerbeke’s
Latin translation). Other than in the Middle Ages, we also find a
growing interest in his Commentary on Epictetus’
Handbook from the fifteenth century onwards, especially among
Humanists (P. Hadot 1987). Last, but not least, in his Lectures on
the History of Philosophy, G. W. F. Hegel (1770–1831) calls
Simplicius “the most learned and acute of the Greek commentators
on Aristotle” (“der gelehrteste und scharfsinnigste
der griechischen Kommentatoren des Aristoteles”) and
asserts that “we owe him much” (“wir verdanken
ihm Verdienstliches”).
Although much more could be said here about Simplicius’ legacy,
suffice it to say the following. As mentioned in the introduction, his
Commentary on the Physics was the basis for Diels’
fundamental studies on the Greek doxographers (Doxographi
graeci) and the fragments of the Presocratic philosophers
(Fragmente der Vorsokratiker). The reconstruction of the
Peripatetic tradition also depends to a large extent on Simplicius
(Falcon 2017 and Baltussen 2016). This is especially obvious in 
the work of Alexander of Aphrodisias, where substantial parts of lost
commentaries can be retrieved from Simplicius’ works (M. Rashed
2011), but also in the case of less well-known figures such as Boethos
of Sidon (Chiaradonna & Rashed forthcoming). Compared to Hermann
Diels and others, we now have a much better grasp of how Simplicius
handled his sources and how he portrayed the historical development of
Greek philosophy up to his time. Several recent studies have also
provided a clearer profile of Simplicius’ own philosophical
agenda. Nevertheless, considerable parts of his commentaries are still
relatively unexplored, and it now seems to be a good time for
contemporary scholars to rediscover the Neoplatonist as an inspiring
late-ancient colleague in the joint venture of coming to terms with
Aristotle.