This section sketches the argument from evil and the skeptical
theist's skepticism (or, sometimes, “agnosticism,” as in
Alston (1996, 98) Howard-Snyder (2009, 18)). 
We will say that an evil, E, is “pointless” or
“unjustified” if and only if there is no
all-things-considered sufficient reason for God to allow it (not even
a non-specific or indirect reason, such as that E occurred by
chance as a result of a random process that God saw that it was best
to allow). One standard kind of sufficient reason to allow an
evil, E, would be a great enough good, G, such that it
is permissible for God to allow (or risk allowing) E
and G to occur. Further, E's occurring makes
sufficiently probable the occurrence of G, and E
and G is more valuable than ~E and ~G. Another
standard kind of reason considered in the literature for
allowing E is that allowing E (or something equally bad
or worse) to occur is logically necessary for achieving some greater
good G or the avoiding of some equally bad or worse evil.  Such
goods can be conceived to exist whether or not there is a God, so the
existence of pointless evils is, as far as anything said thus far
goes, consistent with atheism. These terms are intended to be
understood so that a bad state of affairs can be pointless or
unjustified for a God whether or not there is a God.  
Since on the present notion of pointlessness, the existence of
unjustified evil is not compatible with the existence of
God–that is, no possible world contains both God and unjustified
evil–we can set forth a very simple template for an idealized,
generalized argument from evil that can take many forms when fleshed
out to various degrees in various ways.
Theological Premise: Necessarily, if there is a
God, there are no pointless evils.
Empirical Premise: There are pointless evils.
Conclusion: There is no God.
There are two main ways the empirical premise can be justified.
First, it could be an inference from the obvious existence
of inscrutable evils. Inscrutable evils are evils such that
one can discern no sufficient reason for allowing them, even after
careful examination. This is like a sampling argument: no observed
goods have been good enough to justify certain evils, so probably no
evil at all is. Second, it could be defended by reference to
particular examples of evil, especially very terrible evils, where it
just seems obvious the evils are unjustified. The version of the
argument from evil which has received the most attention is that of
William Rowe (1979, 1988, 1991, 1995, 1996, 2006; see also Trakakis
2007), who offered the sampling argument from evil. The four principal
forms of skeptical theism below were formulated primarily in response
to Rowe's arguments. Whether they can be extended to other arguments
like that of Draper (1989/1996) or Tooley (Tooley and Plantinga 2008)
or Dougherty (2008) will be briefly discussed in Section 6 of this
article.
Rowe's main line of defense for the empirical premise is the existence
of evils which seem pointless (inscrutable
evils). Seeming pointless has at times been interpreted as a direct
insight and at other times as resulting from an inference (Rowe 1979
and the early literature treats it both ways). A fair way to represent
the inference is as a kind of simple induction of the sampling variety
concerning some given terrible evil E. 
Premise: All possible reasons examined for allowing E
so far have turned out to be insufficient to justify God permitting
them.
Conclusion: There is no justification for E.
The Empirical Premise is just an existential generalization of this
conclusion. This is an example of a kind of inference that has come to
be called the “Noseeum Inference” after the bugs in the
Midwest which are so small one never seems to find them in one's tent,
even when one knows they're there (Wykstra 1996). Here is why that
name has been applied. Skeptical theists point out that absence of
evidence is not always evidence of absence. Some entities are such
that their presence is expected to be detected, others their presence
is not expected to be detected. If there were a grizzly bear in one's
camp, one expects to find it, so not seeing one is evidence one is not
there. But it is otherwise with small bugs. One's not seeing them in
one's camp is not good evidence that they are not there. Below, much
attention will be focused on reasons to think that God's reasons
should be detected.
In the above Premise, E can be filled in with a particular
evil, a set of evils, or it could be used as a name to refer to some
kind of organic sum of all evil (if there is such a thing) to make the
point that what we can't see a reason for is the general pattern of
evil we observe in the world: its magnitude, duration, and
distribution. There is considerable room for flexibility and
creativity when fleshing out the details of this argument along a
particular strategic line. Thus, if skeptical theism is to be fully
successful, it must be made applicable to each variety of the problem
of evil. 
Skepticisms of all kinds come in varying degrees. The skepticism of
most skeptical theists seems total or near total.  That is, they tend
to accept the No Weight Thesis.
That is, observations of evil do not even attain the status of
evidence (van Inwagen 1995, 94–5). Van Inwagen founds his
skeptical theism on his “extreme modal and moral
skepticism” (skepticism about our ability to discern the
relevant truths about morality and possibility, not skepticism about
whether there are such truths; 1995, 84) and goes on to assert
(repeatedly) that we have “no reason” to accept what he
takes to be the crucial premise of the evidential argument from
evil. Indeed, he thinks that owing to the truth of his skeptical
theses “the evidential argument from evil cannot get
started” (1995, 85). 
Alston is not quite as explicit, but seems to agree. He calls the
position he defends “agnosticism” (1996, 98). He says that
our cognitive resources are “radically insufficient to provide
sufficient warrant to accepting [the main premise of the evidential
argument],” so much so that “the inductive argument
collapses” (98). He concludes that “the inductive argument
from evil is in no better shape than its late lamented deductive
cousin” (121). It is generally accepted that the deductive
argument, sometimes called the “logical problem”, is
a complete failure, and by calling it “late”
Alston seems to agree. 
Wykstra backs off his 1984 claims (1984: 74, 79, 80, 90–91) that
evil provides no evidence for atheism. He now calls those claims
“reckless” (1996, 148 n. 14). He now admits that the
evidence from evil, bracketing evidence for God's existence,
“tilts” in favor (rather significantly, 1996, 138) of
atheism, but not enough to justify belief in atheism, even if one
starts from agnosticism. 
Bergmann seems clearly to advance No Weight. He also often says we
have “no reason” to think the goods we are aware of are
representative of the goods there are (2001: 288, 289 (three
times)). Three times in his 2001 and throughout his 2008 he uses the
phrase “in the dark” for our cognitive situation with
respect to God-justifying reasons. And Bergmann and Rea (2005,
esp. 248) seem to indicate that they accept that we cannot
assign any probability what so ever to the relevant class of
propositions about goods (a thesis also endorsed by van Inwagen 1995,
75). 
Bergman's commitment to No Weight can further be seen in his
endorsement of another thesis, the Non-starter Thesis.
A prima facie reason here is, roughly, one that could be
overturned upon further considerations. It is also sometimes called a
“defeasible” reason because it can be defeated by further
considerations. One might think that evil provided a
prima facie reason for atheism that skeptical theism was
designed to defeat. However, this is not how Bergmann thinks of
the situation. Swinburne (1998, 13) explains skeptical theism
this way, but Bergmann corrects him.
Bergmann goes on to say that the skeptical theist's response is:
 This seems a perfectly clear commitment to Non-starter and so to
No Weight. Thus we see that in general, the skeptical theist's
skepticism is of a very high degree concerning its target: our ability
to have knowledge of the kinds of possibilities – especially
moral possibilities – required to get the argument from evil
started. 
The earliest major approach in the contemporary literature to bringing
cognitive limits to bear upon the argument from evil is the epistemic
principles approach, inaugurated by Wykstra (1984, but see also Alston
1996/1991, 122, n11 in Howard-Snyder 1996b). He has continued to
defend and expand this strategy to the present day (Russell and
Wykstra 1988, Wykstra 1996, 2007, 2009, and Wykstra and Perrine 2012
and forthcoming). Howard-Snyder 2009 makes a similar but more detailed
reply based on a similar but importantly different epistemic
principle. Plantinga (1988) also touches on the topic. (Some of what
follows follows Dougherty 2011c.)
The argument from evil is meant to use evidence about evil in the
world to support the proposition that there is no God. Thus, one
natural line of reply to that argument is to show that some applicable
general principle about evidential support is not satisfied in the
case of evil and theism. Wykstra proposes just such a principle in his
Condition Of ReasoNable Epistemic Access.
Wykstra and Perrine (2012) also offer a probabilistic version of
CORNEA to address a counterexample in McBrayer (2009).
See Rowe (1996, 270ff) for treatment of interpretive issues concerning
CORNEA. Wykstra notes that:
It becomes clear in Wykstra's dialogue with Russell (Russell and
Wykstra 1988), that the key notion operating behind CORNEA is that the
hypothesis that God exists predicts that reasons for suffering would
not be transparent to the human observer but, rather, obscure.
Therefore we may focus on the following principle.
If Obscurity is true, it provides good reason to doubt justification
accrued via a common sense epistemic principle, the Principle of
Credulity (Swinburne 1998 states the problem of evil in terms of this
principle, Swinburne 2001 explicates and defends the principle).
or a weaker principle of Reasons Commonsensism:
Given RC, the reason S has for p is a consideration
which has some positive weight in favor of p which could
potentially be outweighed by contrary reasons. PC or RC or some such
principle can be used for direct support of the Empirical Premise
(this is how Swinburne 1998 sets up the problem). Obscurity's truth
would be the “further consideration” showing that the
seeming-that-p could not be trusted.
Wykstra defends Obscurity, or things that support Obscurity,
principally via the Parent Analogy.
Wykstra has repeatedly appealed to the parent analogy (1984, 88;
Russell and Wykstra 1988, 135, 144, 146; 1996, 139ff) in defense of
Obscurity (See Dougherty 2011 for a reply). At first, it seems to be a
common sense response to the argument from evil quite consonant with
what we would expect the average person to say. As we shall see, there
is reason to think the appearance may be deceiving. 
Howard-Snyder's principle (H-S) is importantly different. 
Recall that Wykstra's principle requires that one have good
reason for thinking x's would be apparent.
Howard-Snyder's only requires that one not be in doubt, or
perhaps, better, not have particular grounds for doubt, about their
seeability. If some basic beliefs are prima facie justified, that is,
justified until there is reason to doubt them, without explicit
reasons, then skepticism will be more of a threat with Wykstra's
epistemic principle than with Howard-Snyder's. Note that the truth of
Obscurity will also work with Howard-Snyder's principle, so a defense
of the parent analogy would also serve Howard-Snyder's case. 
Howard-Snyder adds two arguments to the defense of Obscurity.  First,
he offers the Progress Argument (1996, 301). The gist of the argument
is that there has been significant progress in knowledge and
understanding of moral truths, including knowledge of what intrinsic
goods there are, in the past, and there is no good reason to think
this trend is at an end. But if so, it follows that we are now
ignorant concerning certain intrinsic goods. And for all we know these
might include the goods for the sake of which God permits evil. He
combines this with the Argument from Complexity (1996, 301). This
argument begins by recalling that the data from which the strongest
arguments from evil start are the profusion or seeming excess of evil
in the world which, indeed, seems to be integrated into the fabric of
nature and society. But for that very reason (their complexity and
intricacy), any complex good whole of which these evils are a part
would have to be exceedingly complex. Thus, he infers that it
would not be surprising if it were beyond our ability to fathom. 
Resisting the epistemic principles strategy involves arguing for one
of two claims: either that the epistemic principle employed is false
(or inapplicable) or that the condition it imposes is in fact
met. Both of these kinds of objections have been leveled at the
epistemic principles strategy. 
Two kinds of arguments have been suggested to show that CORNEA is
false. Some (Laraudogoitia 2000; Graham and Maitzen 2007) have argued
that CORNEA violates a plausible closure principle.  Closure
principles are a family of principles stating that when a proposition
has some form of positive epistemic status, knowledge, say, and bears
some relevant relation to some other proposition, logically entailing
it, say, then that second proposition has the same epistemic status as
the first. A principle popular among friends of closure is the
following: If one knows p and competently deduces q
from p while retaining knowledge of p, and one comes to
believe q on that basis, then one knows q. These authors
argue that, if skeptical theism were true, then an intuitively
plausible closure principle would be false.  Others (Russell 1988;
McBrayer 2009) have also argued that CORNEA is false on the grounds
that it implies skepticism. The following two sections offer some
detail for each of these claims.
Laraudogoitia (2000) accuses CORNEA of backfiring by overlooking a
fact about closure. The skeptical theist argues that CORNEA entails
that the justified attitude concerning whether there are pointless
evils is agnosticism. But the theist thinks it is reasonable to
believe in God, and she knows that if God exists, then there is no
gratuitous evil. And the following closure principle will hold for
normal theists in normal circumstances.
 From this principle – together with the theist's theism and
knowledge about the relevant entailment – it follows that the
theist is justified in believing there is no gratuitous evil. But this
contradicts the agnosticism dictated by CORNEA. 
Graham and Maitzen (2007) note CORNEA's resemblance to some principles
from elsewhere in epistemology. They seek to bring objections to those
principles to bear on CORNEA. The principles are Nozick's
“sensitivity” condition on knowledge and Dretske's similar
account involving conclusive reasons. Nozick's sensitivity condition
on knowledge is roughly that you know only if, were p false,
you wouldn't believe
p. Dretske's account is, approximately, you know p if you have a conclusive
reason R for p, one such that were p not true you
would not have R (and/or R would not be true, details
vary). One of the main objections to those theories is that they
violate almost any plausible closure principle on knowledge. The
closure principle in question is, essentially, this one.
They argue that, like the principles of Nozick and Dretske, the
application of this principle to some cases is incompatible with
CORNEA.
Russell (1988, 148; 1996) notes that CORNEA seems to open the door to
something like Cartesian skepticism. Recall the condition CORNEA puts
in place, the thing it says one needs a reason to believe: if p were
not the case, s would likely be different than it is in some
way discernible by her. Now consider the following possibility: you
are a brain being kept alive in a vat of nutrients and stimulated in a
way that causes your current experiences and memory impressions. Let p
be I am not a brain in a vat, indexed to you, and consider
whether you have reason to think things would look different for you
if that were false, that is, if you were a brain in a
vat. Ex hypothesi, they would not. So CORNEA seems to lead
quickly to the skeptical conclusion that we do not know that we are
not mere brains in vats. McBrayer (2009) expands at length on this,
making the argument in more detail, also incorporating analogies to
the epistemology of Nozick and Dretske. 
Some proponents of the argument from evil have provided some reason to
think that in fact the condition that CORNEA imposes can be met. That
is, they provide some reason to think that if there were a God, then
likely things would be different. That is, they offer reasons
to think that if there were a God, then we would see more of the
reasons for why evils are allowed. In short, they offer reasons to
think Obscurity false. Russell (1988, 147ff) and Rowe (2001, 298;
1996, 274–276; 2006, 89) both advance a parental analogy on
behalf of the negation of Obscurity and Dougherty (2011b) has
expanded upon these arguments. The problem is that whereas the Parent
Analogy (PA) takes into account God's boundless
knowledge, it fails to give due to his boundless power and
love. Thus Russell, Rowe, and Dougherty defend a reverse
parent analogy (PA+), which is an extension of the parent analogy.
The reverse parent analogy seems to be stronger than PA because it
appeals to a more robust picture of God's attributes, and it supports
the negation of Obscurity. We can call that thesis Transparency.
This section considers brief replies to the above objections.
Wykstra (2007) replies to the closure problem by highlighting aspects
of CORNEA that suggest a way to avoid the problem.  Wykstra notes
(2007, 91) that in his original formulation he made a distinction that
is the crux of his response to Graham and Maitzen. The distinction in
question is – or is relevantly related to – Rudolf
Carnap's distinction between “incremental” confirmation
and “absolute” confirmation or what Wykstra calls
“dynamic” and “static” support. An item of
evidence E gives dynamic support to a target
proposition p when it gives p an additional increment or
“boost” of probability. Obviously, this is consistent
with p remaining very improbable on balance with respect to a
set of total evidence. A total body of
evidence E statically supports a target
proposition p when p is more likely than not,
given E.
Wykstra points out that he can accept closure. He can accept, for
instance, the implication of closure that S's knowing that she
sees a zebra and that being a zebra excludes being a disguised mule
entails that S is in a position to know that she is not looking
at a cleverly disguised mule while at the same time denying
that the very same evidence E whereby S comes to be
justified in believing there's a zebra can, by itself, justify
– or even boost the probability of – the proposition that
it's not a cleverly disguised mule.
Furthermore, Rowe is clear that he is setting aside the evidence for
theism for the sake of argument and only claiming that the individual
evidential contribution of evil was to lower the probability of theism
(and thus tilt toward atheism for the agnostic). Since Rowe isn't
considering all the evidence relevant to theism, he is only interested
in what Wykstra calls dynamic support. If we were to consider all our
evidence, we could, in principle, find that the balance of our total
evidence supports theism, and infer from the truth of theism that
there is no pointless evil. He calls this move from theism to the
denial of pointless evil the “Moorean Shift” (1996
(orig. 1979), 6–8) after Moore's curt reply to the skeptic. The
skeptical theist can consistently push CORNEA
and the Moorean shift, because she only argues that CORNEA
blocks the inductive inference to the conclusion that there is no justification for some evil (which is a case of alleged dynamic support), not that one's all-things-considered
attitude toward pointless evil ought to be agnosticism (which would be
a case of static support).
Both Russell's and McBrayer's objections alleging skeptical
implications of CORNEA depend on interpreting CORNEA as a
counterfactual conditional, that is, a subjunctive conditional with a
false antecedent. Though this is a natural interpretation, it has been
resisted by Wykstra and Perrine (2011, forthcoming). According to
standard principles of common sense defeasible reasoning, if it
appears to one that p, then one thereby has some reason
for p, though this reason can be outweighed in the end. Thus
the defender of the epistemic principles approach could grant that the
advocate of the argument from evil has defeasible reasons for atheism,
but add that the rational force of these reasons is neutralized by
Obscurity, which appears to be the core of CORNEA. This still leaves
the debate over Obscurity in place, but it plausibly avoids the
skeptical objections to which CORNEA has been subjected. 
Both proponents and opponents of the argument from evil have claimed
the parent analogy. In response to the reverse parent analogy,
however, note an important structural feature of the problem of evil.
When a hypothesis H makes very probably that an event E will occur and
E does not occur, E's not occurring clearly disconfirms H.  And if H
makes very probable that E will occur and E does occur, E's occurring
clearly confirms H.  If H doesn't make E's occurring very probable or
improbable--that is, H and E are nearly probabilistically
independent--then neither E's occurring nor E's not occurring makes a
clear difference to the probability of H. 
So, theism will be disconfirmed by our inability to discover reasons
for the evils we observe only if theism predicts with significant
strength that we should be able to detect the reasons.  Thus Rowe
(1991) says, 
Further, in replying to the reverse parent analogy the theist can
bring to bear on it reasons for divine hiddenness. As should be clear
at this point, the problem of evil leads quite naturally to the
problem of divine silence/hiddenness. Thus, if there were good reasons
for God to veil himself in some way, to provide some “epistemic
distance” between himself and the casual observer, then these
reasons could plausibly be used to defend Obscurity. For let R
be the reasons in question. The probability that we are unaware of the
reasons for so much suffering, given theism, might be low, but the
probability that we are unaware of the reasons for so much suffering,
given theism and R, could still be high. Of course, if the
probability of R, given theism, is high, then we might have
found out upon reflection that the first value isn't low after
all.
Alston's approach (1996a/1991) examines particular details involved in
the inference from inscrutable to pointless evil. He points to a
cluster of limitations, some of which clearly generalize beyond the
noseeum inference. 
Alston lists six disadvantages we face in discerning whether there are
pointless evils from the fact of inscrutable evils (1996b, 120). This
list will be referred to as The
Inventory.
These difficulties can be put to use in this argument.
There has been little doubt expressed that we are subject to the
difficulties in The Inventory, at least to a considerable degree, so
Premise 1 seems to be secure.  The question, then, is whether our
being subject to those limitations makes us completely unable to make
the inference from inscrutable evils to pointless evils with
justification. One way to think of the objection is that this
inference falls under a kind such that we are unjustified when making
inferences in those circumstances. 
To be perfectly relevant, we would need to add to this argument the
lemma that if one makes an unjustified inference, the conclusion of
that inference has low epistemic probability. This may be questioned,
but it is very plausible and discussion of it would take us too far
afield. 
The first thing to say in objection to the multiple limitations
approach is that each item in The Inventory seems to raise a problem
for theism itself. That is, each item is itself a bad state of affairs
that may seem surprising given theism (this is an expansion upon
Dougherty 2011b). One way to see this is to recall the reverse parent
analogy from §2.2.2 above. It is bad that we lack data relevant
to a very important matter. After all, many people seem to lose their
faith (eternal salvation?) as a result of evil. It is bad that we lack
the processing power to come to an extremely important decision
(whether there is a God). (Quick objection: Isn't it a good, though,
to have to work to discover important truths?  Quick reply: Sometimes
yes, sometimes no; plausibly not in the case of something this grave
which applies to each person individually.)  It is a bad thing that we
don't know the outcome space of an important matter and can't tell,
for particular proposals, whether they are on it. 
So it might be considered a very odd strategy to try to answer an
argument from evil by adverting to further bad states of affairs,
which are not what we would expect from theism in the first
place. 
One kind of reply to the objection given is to argue that the objector
has taken the data of the argument from evil – typically
horrendous evils – and replaced them with some relatively minor
evils. Expected or not, these minor evils would not make much of a
case against the existence of God. Now either Alston's argument works
or it does not. That is, either it does or does not show that we are
in no position to infer that there are pointless evils from the fact
that there are gratuitous evils. If the argument is successful--which
doesn't seem to be challenged by the objection--then the usual data of
horrendous evil cannot serve as a good foundation of an argument from
evil. Thus we would be left with the evils on The Inventory, which are
not likely to dramatically reduce credence in theism for many. (For
further thought: Let Inventory be the proposition that we are subject
to the limitations mentioned on The Inventory. One might think the
probability of Inventory, given theism, is very low, so that
probability of theism is approximately equal to the probability of
theism & ~Inventory. This would make relevant the probability of
inscrutable but not pointless evils, given theism & ~Inventory,
which might plausibly be thought very low.)  This is plausibly the
material for a rejoinder by the advocate of the argument from
evil.
Peter van Inwagen has long defended a form of "modal skepticism," that
is, skepticism concerning our knowledge of what states of affairs are
possible (see his “Ontological Arguments,” 1977/1995). He
applies it in a reply to the argument from evil (1991/1995, 1996,
2006). This is a vigorous application of items 3 and 4 from Alston's
inventory. The idea here is that there is no reason to think that our
modal intuitions about matters not related to ordinary life are
reliable. It is plausible that the moral skepticism involved is just a
sub-class of the modal skepticism involved, and even if it is not a
subclass, all the issues are quite parallel. Thus for the sake of
brevity the focus will be primarily on the “pure” modal
skepticism here, though there will be a bit more to say about
potential moral skepticism in Section 5.
Modal skepticism can be brought to bear on the argument from evil in
the following way.
What can be said on behalf of Premise 1? One idea (adverted to by van
Inwagen frequently and by Howard-Snyder 2009, 27) is that our
cognitive faculties evolved in a milieu which may underwrite their
reliability in ordinary life but which does not extend outside that
domain. So trusting our intuition in extramundane matters would be
like trusting the reading of a barometer calibrated at sea level at
14,200 feet on the West Buttress of Denali. It would be like trusting
vision underwater. It would simply be unwise to do so, and, it seems,
the results, being beliefs, inferences, judgments, what have you, of
trusting one's intuitions in those circumstances would have little by
way of justification. 
Van Inwagen himself applies the modal skepticism a bit differently. It
could be that he accepts a theory of knowledge relevantly similar to
that of David Lewis on which one must rule out all relevant, or in van
Inwagen's case “real,” possibilities, but there is another
way to take it. He tells a story according to which the world has the
amount and distribution of evils we think it has and God exists which,
he says, is a “real, possibility,” that is, something that
might be true for all we know. The idea of a real possibility is best
illustrated by what a TV lawyer would call an “alternative
theory of the crime” (van Inwagen, in discussion) which is
plausible enough to cause doubt, in the sense of inability to assent,
to the proposition that the accused is guilty.
His target is an argument like Draper's (1989/1996) neo-Humean
argument from evil, which is an argument inspired by Hume, but
significantly modernized. So the direct target is that the proposition
S – which describes what suffering there likely is – is
less probable on theism than on the “hypothesis of
indifference.” The argument must go something like this, where
the modal intuitions in question concern whether certain proposed
possibilities are genuine possibilities (with ‘T’
for theism).
1. Our modal intuitions not connected to ordinary life are
unreliable.
2′. A judgment about the value of the probability of there
being the suffering that there likely is, given theism, is justified
only if certain modal intuitions not related to ordinary life are
reliable.
3′. Thus any judgment about the value of the probability of
there being the suffering that there likely is, given theism, is
unjustified.
An example of the kind of proposed possibility in question will be
helpful.  Here is a state of affairs that some claim to intuit to be
possible which is relevant to an important version of the argument
from evil: God's seeing to it both that every animal who is not
observed does not suffer and that natural laws are not massively
irregular.  This is the kind of proposed possibility a proponent
of the argument from evil might advance to show that the present state
of affairs is unjustified.  Van Inwagen's modal skeptic will not
accept that this is a genuine possibility, since it is too removed
from ordinary life. Obviously, since relatedness to ordinary life
comes in degrees, there will be issues from vagueness affecting the
application of this strategy.  So it will often not be clear whether a
proposition is to be doubted by the modal realist on the basis of
distance from ordinary life.  In fact, we may use the above proposed
possibility concerning animal suffering and regularity as an example
of the problem of delineating “ordinary life.” For clearly
our folk physics–that is, our ordinary idea of how the physical
world works–includes that the world is very regular and animal
suffering and predation are a part of most people's lives, at least
those who have ever owned a pet or visited a farm or are regular meat
eaters. 
A first obvious question for the advocate of this argument is whether
Premise 1 itself is a matter of “ordinary life.” That is,
is the matter of when intuitions are justified a matter of ordinary
life?  It is not at all clear that they are.  And if they are not,
then the argument might have a self-referential problem: If the first
premise is true, then the first premise is unjustified. Another kind
of self-referential problem for van Inwagen himself is that he
advances a defense featuring a proposition just as far from ordinary
life as the example above. Specifically, the proposition above
– God's seeing to it both that every animal who is not
observed does not suffer and that natural laws are not massively
irregular – which van Inwagen would reject as genuinely
possible seems no farther from ordinary life than the possibilities
van Inwagen himself proposes as genuine (see van Inwagen 2006,
114).
Also, there are other problems concerning delineating the bounds of
delineating the bounds of “ordinary life.” There is both a
synchronic (at-a-moment) and diachronic (across time) problem
here. The synchronic problem is delineating the bounds of ordinary
life at any one time or short segment of time.
The diachronic problem here is that what counts as “everyday
life” changes over time. It has been a long time since the
emergence of Homo sapiens and our lives have changed
significantly since then. So arguments of the form “This wasn't
part of everyday life 115,000 years ago so we can't trust it”
are dubious. Our eyes did not evolve in a milieu to which driving a
car was relevant to survival, but we do pretty well at it,
nevertheless.
Second, even when we know something isn't functioning in the
environment for which it was designed (by God or evolution or both,
but more of that next), we can still trust judgments based on them, if
we know a little something about the manner in which they are likely
to be mistaken. So let's return to 14,200 feet on the West Buttress of
Denali with our barometer last calibrated at sea level. Since we know
something about the relationship between altitude and barometric
pressure, we can extrapolate or estimate the true value from the
reported value to derive a range in which the true value is likely to
be (if we have precise data we can generate confidence intervals which
under good circumstances would be quite narrow). And we can certainly
trust certain comparative judgments: even if we are almost completely
ignorant of how to correct for the altitude change, if the reading
falls fast consistently for an hour, we can safely infer that a low
pressure front is moving in.  So even a poorly calibrated instrument
can be of use if we have appropriate understanding of its inner
workings.
Therefore, even if we have reason to believe our modal intuitions will
be off in certain domains, we might either have a reasonable theory
about how they are likely to be off and thus have the ability to
correct them, or at least be able to make certain comparative
judgments. For example, if it seems blindingly obvious that the
fundamental constants of the universe could have had different values
than they do or that there could have been other fundamental
particles, forces, fields, or what have you, we might think, after
reflecting upon how far removed from ordinary life the proposed
possibility is, our intuition is giving too strong a reading and dial
it back to the more moderate conclusion that it is very likely that
these are genuine possibilities. It would be far too skeptical merely
to discard the intuition. 
Similarly, if it seems blindingly obvious to us that there is no way
that all the creation-worthy (or best or what have you)
worlds involve approximately the amount, or proportion, or severity of
evil we think there is, then, realizing that this is far removed from
daily life we might dial it back to the more moderate conclusion that
on balance there are creation-worthy worlds with a significantly
lesser amount, or severity, or proportion, or what have you, of
evil. This is a far cry from van Inwagen's own conclusion that we have
“no reason” (van Inwagen 1996/1991, 163) to accept the
relevant possibility claims.
Third, evolutionary theory does not seem to be a good reason to doubt
that intuition will be unreliable outside of ordinary life.  For there
are two ways for evolution to occur: with theism and without
theism. So let “extended intuition” name the thesis that
our intuition is reliable in ways importantly extended beyond everyday
life, assuming the latter notion gets coherently worked out. While the
probability of extended intuition, given Evolution & ~Theism,
might be low, the probability of extended intuition, given Evolution
& Theism, is plausibly quite high and surely not too low. So the
question of the reliability of our intuition in domains beyond
everyday life but relevant to our religiously proposed final end, and,
therefore perhaps an “everyday” matter anyway, is not
independent of whether one already thinks there is a God.
Fourth, it has been alleged that the modal skepticism used by the
skeptical theist leads to widespread skepticism about ordinary
matters, perhaps even total skepticism (Russell 1996, Gale 1996,
Hasker 2010b). The objection seems to be based on the thesis that the
skeptical theist's appeal to uneliminated possibilities can be
combined with any ordinary proposition to keep it from being known. To
use a more traditional version, Russell's (1996) example (see also
earlier Russell and Wykstra 1988 and later Russell 2004), consider the
proposition that the world was created about six thousand years ago at
nightfall of the evening preceding Sunday, October 23rd (yes, that's
the actual attribution of Bishop Usher) with the appearance of much
greater age. Young-earth creationists give reasons for thinking that
God has reasons for this geologic deceptiveness. Since the theory
includes misleading appearances, it is consistent with all
observational data. Thus it can never be ruled out by empirical
evidence. Accordingly, it seems not to be improbable on any of our
evidence. This objection suggests that the skeptical theist's
skepticism about that which is beyond ordinary life comes home to
roost in skepticism about ordinary matters, such as the age of the
Earth plausibly is (that is, plausibly the earth and the age of things
are ordinary matters, even if not an ordinary topic of conversation).
This suggests that nearly any ordinary belief is called into question
by skeptical theism. 
Fifth, the modal skeptic's thesis that our intuitions are not to be
trusted outside of ordinary life (or the milieu for which they
evolved) seems to be at odds with the effectiveness of mathematics in
particle physics, cosmology, and the like. The mathematical beliefs of
early Homo sapiens were surely quite primitive (it is
irrelevant for present purposes how much unconscious processing was
done by the brain). Interestingly, natural theology has been compared
with theoretical physics (Earman 2000). If this comparison holds up,
it seems to tell against the present modal skeptical argument. 
Sixth, in reference to the significance of the existence of
“real” possibilities some worries occur. The proper
procedures in a courtroom do not obviously apply to the philosophy
room. It might be prudent and socially utile to lock up, or otherwise
seriously punish, those convicted of felonies only if a case can be
made that they are guilty beyond a reasonable doubt. But when
considering what it is rational to believe, one can clearly rationally
disbelieve p when it is not beyond a reasonable doubt that
~p. An even safer claim is that one can still think it more
likely than not that ~p. Thus, even if van Inwagen is correct
that his defense against the argument from evil is successful on his
terms – as successful as an alternative theory of the crime in
acquitting the accused – one might still reasonably disbelieve
theism or at least believe it to be improbable.
Furthermore, how strong does a contrary reason need to be to
constitute a reasonable doubt? Parallel question: how probable does a
story need to be to be a “real possibility”? To be a real
possibility in an epistemic sense, a sense relevant to the
reasonableness of the belief, would it have to be at least 5%
probable?  It wouldn't need to be 50% probable. Is it somewhere in the
middle, say, 25–33%? And we mustn't confusedly bring in
considerations of practical rationality here. We might say, speaking
loosely, that there is a “real possibility” of a loaded
gun going off accidentally even though this is extremely rare. But
what about just aiming a standard six-shooter revolver down range with
one bullet spun into the magazine? We would bet against the first pull
of the trigger resulting in a fired bullet. But would this be a real
possibility, in van Inwagen's sense? It's hard to say, but here is an
argument that it is. It seems wrong to believe that the gun
will not fire. That suggests that the threshold for reasonable belief
is above 83%. So the thesis that there are real possibilities which
include both God that exists and that there exists evil of the sort we
find may only entail that there is about 10–15% likelihood that
there is such a possibility. So a real possibility containing both God
and evil such as we take to exist in this world might make it
unreasonable to believe that there is no God, but it
certainly doesn't rule out agnosticism concerning whether God
exists or a weak atheism to the effect that it is very probable that
there is no God. 
With respect to delineating the bounds of “ordinary life,”
the modal skeptic could perhaps rely on a physicalistic notion. That
is, they could take the reference to focus upon activities
appropriately related to reproduction, which entails survival through
the point of intercourse, which entails a certain life-span. This may
exacerbate the fifth objection and ones like it, but see below for a
reply to that problem.
With respect to the suggestion that we can still get useful
information from extramundane intuition, the modal skeptic can press
one who advances this objection to work out in more detail how the
extrapolation or adjustment works and then pick on the details. 
With respect to the charge of general skepticism little has been
said. van Inwagen (1996) claims that his defensive stories are not
– unlike general skeptical hypotheses – improbable
relative to what we know. Note that this is different from being
improbable relative to our empirical evidence, which skeptical
hypotheses are not.  Certainly general skeptical hypotheses are not
“real possibilities” in van Inwagen's sense, which he
insists on calling “epistemic possibilities,”; they are
not plausible alternatives that would cause ordinary folk to falter in
judgment. More will be said about this as the problem recurs in
Section 6.
With respect to the argument from the effectiveness of mathematics, it
could be replied that all the math involved in physics is somehow
“contained” in basic “everyday” math or at
least that the computational abilities of individuals who perform
advanced math are contained in the computational abilities of early
homo sapiens. Obviously, these are contentious and in some cases
empirical claims. So this line of reply would need to fill in lots of
details to be very effective.
With respect to the point about real possibilities and probability,
the modal skeptic might say that ruling out being certain that God
does not exist is something worth doing. It might make Pascalian
considerations relevant, for example.
The last section treated an “extreme” (van Inwagen
1996/1991, 163; 1995, 84; 2006, 123) modal and moral skepticism.  But
there are more focused modal and moral skepticisms, which purport to
be more moderate and targeted. That is, there are approaches that do
not attribute limits to modal and moral intuition as such. Rather,
they take some limitations on our modal knowledge that it seems all
should admit. Skeptical theists suggest that these limitations apply
specifically in the case of the argument from evil.
In its now-standard form (found primarily in Bergmann 2001, 279 and
2008, 376), the core of skeptical theism consists in four skeptical
theses. 
(ST1) We have no good reason for thinking that the possible goods
we know of are representative of the possible goods there are
[representative, that is, relative to figuring (positively) in a
(potentially) God-justifying reason for permitting the inscrutable
evils we see around us].
(ST2) We have no good reason for thinking that the possible evils
we know of are representative of the possible evils there are.
(ST3) We have no good reason for thinking that the entailment
relations we know of between possible goods and the permission of
possible evils are representative of the entailment relations there
are between possible goods and the permission of possible evils.
(ST4) We have no good reason for thinking that the total moral
value or disvalue we perceive in certain complex states of affairs
accurately reflects the total moral value or disvalue they really
have.
One way of defending the thesis that there is pointless evil (see Rowe
1979) is by reference to the fact that there are evils for which we
cannot think of any good reason, even upon considerable reflection,
i.e. inscrutable evils. Consider this example of the noseeum kind of
inference we met in section 1.1. 
This is just a first approximation, of course, and an adequate version
would require much refinement. For example, one would need special
confidence in oneself to wield the inference as is. Yet replacing
“I” with “No one” (and adjusting the grammar)
would be unjustified without further support as well, since it has far
too broad a scope. But the point of the inference is clear enough. One
version of the Noseeum Inference goes like this.
Note that (ST1)–(ST3) are all in the negative. That is, they
state that we lack a reason for thinking the sample
is representative. Therefore, to be applicable to the
noseeum inference, the skeptical theist needs to add a lemma like
this.
With this lemma, it seems clear that if (ST1)–(ST3) are true,
then the Expanded Noseeum Inference is unsound. 
Yet this may be a weakness, for notice a crucial difference between
the first of Bergmann's skeptical theses and Howard-Snyder's agnostic
thesis. 
ST1: We have no good reason for thinking that the possible
goods we know of are representative of the possible goods there
are. (Bergman 2001, 279, emphasis added).
AT1: We should be in doubt about whether the goods we know
of constitute a representative sample of all the goods there are.
(Howard-Snyder 2009, 18, emphasis added).
Whereas Bergmann focuses on lacking a positive reason for
representativeness, Howard-Snyder focuses on the presence of
doubt concerning representativeness. Here, Howard-Snyder's
approach is more consonant with Wykstra's, since Wykstra's defense of
Obscurity would establish AT1 (whereas it provides only weak support
for ST1). An advantage of AT1 is that it, unlike ST1, does not require
the Representativeness Principle in order to be effective. For it is
plausible that the lemma relies on something like the following
principle.
To be justified in believing P on the basis of E one
must not only be (1) justified in believing E, but also (2)
justified in believing that E makes probable P.
(See the entry on
 foundationalist theories of epistemic justification.)
Fumerton (Fumerton 1995, 36, 55ff.) makes a powerful case that once
this principle is accepted, it is very hard to avoid skepticism.
Thus, if Bergmann is committed to this principle, he seems to have
taken on a major commitment that Howard-Snyder has not. 
One reason for thinking (ST1)–(ST3) false is that in addition to
concerns about knowledge skepticism treated above, skeptical theism
has been accused of various kinds of moral skepticism (Russell 1996;
Almeida and Oppy 2003, 2004; Graham and Maitzen 2007, 2009). The main
threat comes from the open possibility – given (ST1)–(ST4)
– that we can never know which action will have the best
outcome. Indeed, we can't even sensibly assign probabilities to which
acts will have the best outcome. So, to illustrate the point, suppose
you are witnessing an attempted killing that you could easily prevent
by intervening. According to the approach under consideration, you
cannot sensibly assign any probability to the proposition that the one
being killed is a dangerous terrorist who is the target of an
emergency assassination. So it seems that you can't possibly conclude
that preventing the killing is the best thing to do. And if not, then
how could you rightly do it?
With respect to the charge of moral skepticism, one can argue that
sound moral judgment need only take into consideration what one knows
over the practically available period of time. Then one need only be
aware of a prima facie duty to prevent what ones current
evidence indicates to be bad states of affairs to have all one needs
to act rightly, whether or not the action has the best outcome. In
short, right action is based on known goods and bads, not a
set that contains unknown goods and bads. Being unknown, they simply
can't and so needn't be taken into consideration, bracketing issues of
foreseeability. So in the assassinated terrorist case, there is one
known bad outcome immanent – the death – so there is one
reason to intervene, and there is no known (or probable or
foreseeable) bad, or if there are, such as slightly wounding the
assailant, they are clearly outweighed, so the right thing to do is to
intervene. So the consequentialist portion of one's moral theory can
be made adequately subjective to avoid the problem. (Bergmann and Rea
2005 pursue a defense along these lines.)  An alternative reply is to
adopt a proximate consequentialism that only assesses the direct
causal consequences of an act or otherwise more narrowly circumscribes
the delineation of consequences (see Sinott-Armstrong 2011 for an
account of direct causal consequentialism, see Collins, Hall, Paul
2004 on denying the transitivity of causation). 
One concern with this response is that it is plausible that known
goods and bads are a sound basis for action only if one has reason to
think that the sample goods and bads are representative of all
connected goods and bads with respect to the property of justifying
the action, that is, that one has reason to think that knowing the
wider story would not reverse one's judgment, or at least lack reason
for thinking the wider story would lead in another direction. It is
even more plausible that known goods and bads are a sound basis for
action only if it is not the case that agnosticism is not the
justified attitude toward the proposition that the sample reasons are
representative of the total (objective) reasons, and, more plausible
yet, if the individual has thought of this. Furthermore, some (Hasker
2010b) think it is bad enough that skeptical theism admits that we can
never have good reason to believe an act is all-things-considered the
best, for we do sometimes have good reason to think that some action
is on-the-whole best in the sense of having the best outcome.
Also, skeptical theists can claim to have another route to knowing an
act is best, such as divine revelation, though it is not clear that
the problems don't recur, since one would need reason to think God
didn't have sufficient reason for deception in the purported
revelation. 
Skeptical theism has historically been aimed only at the noseeum
inference. But not all versions of the problem of evil rely on the
noseeum inference. 
Skeptical theism appears to have nothing to say about a Humean
argument from evil. A broadly Humean argument (Draper 1989/1996, 2008,
and 2009) will invoke explanatory considerations such as explanatory
power and simplicity. So consider this explanatory argument for
naturalism.
There is no noseeum inference in this argument. Do any of the
skeptical theist strategies work against this argument? Bergmann
(2009, 383ff) thinks so. For he thinks that premise 1 depends on
assigning a value to the probability of this (kind of) distribution of
suffering, given theism. But that's just what he thinks we can't do,
given his skeptical theses.
Skeptical theism attempts to block Premise 1 of the above argument by
blocking an assignment of probability to observed evil on
theism. However, consider this reformulation. Given: The universe
seems indifferent to the suffering of sentient beings.
1′. It is known that the hypothesis of indifference predicts
the data of an apparently indifferent universe.
2. It is unknown whether the hypothesis of theism predicts the
data.
3. The hypotheses have approximately equal prior probabilities
[that is, equal chance of being true before considering observational
evidence].
4. Therefore, the data confirm the hypothesis of indifference and
not the hypothesis of theism.
Here is how the argument works.  Imagine a pair of scales in which we
are weighing evidence concerning theism and atheism.  Once side of the
scales is labeled “Theism” and the other side is labeled
“Hypothesis of Indifference.” Premise 3 says the scales
are at first even.  Premise 2 says that there is nothing to put on the
sale marked “Theism.” Premise 1 says that there is
something to put in the scale marked “Hypothesis of
Indifference.” The conclusion says that after we have weighed
the evidence, the scales tip to the side labeled “Hypothesis of
Indifference.”
Not only does this argument not make a noseeum inference, it doesn't
assign any probability at all to observed evils given theism. So this
version seems to be fundamentally immune to considerations pertaining
to skeptical theism, except insofar as they can be brought to bear on
premise 3. 
A similar issue to the above stems from the Common Sense Problem of
Evil. The problem is this (Cf. Dougherty 2008). A reasonable person
can have a network of background beliefs about what to expect from an
infinitely resourceful being such that the addition of facts about
evil can cause them to have a basic (non-inferred) belief that God
does not exist. Though the justification depends on support relations
that might be called “inferential” in the sense that were
we to consciously rehearse them in steps we would call it an
inference, there are no inferences made, thus no noseeum
inference. Thus, the fact that the world strikes them as
nothing like what theism would predict – when, say, an evil
strikes them as unjustifiable – no standard form of skeptical
theism can apply, since all extant skeptical theisms are aimed at
noseeum inferences. The common sense problem of evil arises when
people see the world as unjustifiably bad (cf. Gellman
1992).
Consider the thesis of Reasons Commonsensism (RC).
Now consider the following values for p:
P1: That evil is unjustified.
P2: That evil is unjustifiable
P3: God would never allow that.
P4: That is absolutely impermissible to allow.
P5: The universe is indifferent to our suffering.
P6: There is no God.
There are possible, and probably actual, individuals who jointly
satisfy the following criteria at a given time:
C1: At least some value of p (listed above) satisfies RC
for S (and so S thereby has a reason to
believe p).
C2: S‘s background evidence contains nothing that
supports ~p more strongly than the reason they get for p
from C1 holding.
C3: S‘s background evidence contains nothing that
supports the thesis that the appearance that p is misleading
strongly enough to reduce the support S has for p in
virtue of C1 holding to the point that it is more reasonable for them
to believe ~p rather than p. 
C4: The relevant subset of S's cognitive faculties are
functioning properly in the relevant respects.
Such individuals have immediate, non-inferential justification for
believing that atheism is true. Thus, skeptical theism as standardly
devised – a mechanism of attack on a noseeum inference –
does not apply. The Non-starter thesis – that evil does not even
provide a prima facie reason against theism that would need to be
countered by skeptical considerations – is false when applied to
the Common Sense Problem of Evil. Perhaps skeptical theists could
adapt their strategy to offering a defeater for the reason one
acquires when one satisfies C1–C4, but this does change the
debate significantly (see Matheson 2011, forthcoming and Dougherty 2011b,
forthcoming). 
Bergmann (2012) offers an error theory to explain away the
overwhelming impression of unjustifiability: that we can't grasp evils
much worse than ones which give rise to this impression.  But this
seems irrelevant, for the spectrum of truly horrendous evils is broad
enough that the impression of unjustifiability can be generated from
the lower end of the spectrum, leaving instances at the higher end as
proof that we can conceive of worse evils than those minimally
sufficient for generating the common sense problem of evil.
This entry has thus far considered the present scope and limits of
skeptical theism. Now, briefly, possible future extensions of
skeptical theism will be considered. 
Between Bergmannian skeptical theism and van Inwagenian skeptical
theism, there are many degrees. One way in which skeptical theism can
be expanded is as follows. In the van Inwagen case, the way skepticism
plays into the defense is this.  He says, “Here's a story
containing both God and the pattern of evil we observe, and, because
we know so little, we don't know it's not true.” But this claim
seems weak. Suppose that the probability threshold for knowledge is
approximately .95. That puts these stories – the most that is
said for which is that it is not the case that we know they are false
– at between just greater than zero and perhaps 5%. There is
room for this strategy to be expanded to the broad category between
this and the truly credible, i.e. between 5% and whatever probability
is sufficient for belief, which some say is greater than 50%
(Swinburne, 2001) and others think as high as that for knowledge
(Williamson 2000). For example, one might have a story one takes very
seriously, one might even be somewhat tempted to believe it, which one
advocates as what we might call a “serious” possibility to
implicate its greater weight over “real”
possibilities. van Inwagen is explicit that “real”
possibilities do not have to be plausible (1996, 160–1). There
might be many such stories which due to some kind of cognitive
limitation, we can't support with great strength, not quite enough to
believe, but which are very plausible (start at 50/50 and go in either
direction – stories that are 30% likely, say, or 60%
likely). These kinds of stories place significant limits on how much
probability evil drains from theism. These stories would be more like
the “just so” stories scientists tell to cover
anomalies. They range from the merely not-known-not-to-be-false to the
not-quite-believable-but-quite-credible. Our ignorance often puts
possibilities in the neighborhood of 50%, and such stories can have
significant effects on the final probability of theism.  For
if p entails ~q, and p is 50% likely, q
has serious problems stemming from our evidence for p, even
though we are far from knowing whether p is true or false.
Rowe's original argument (1979) focused on the death of a fawn in a
forest fire. The case of animal suffering illustrates ways in which
skeptical theism can be applied beyond the ways it has been thus
far. Until surprisingly recently, the suffering of non-human animals
was not a major factor in the problem of evil. But with the rise of
concern for animal welfare, that problem has emerged as a major part
of the problem of evil. 
Many skeptical theists attempt to rebut the argument from evil by
urging skepticism about our ability to discern God's reasons for
action. But the skeptical theist might seek to block the argument from
evil by directing skepticism at other targets. For example, Michael
Murray, who is explicitly skeptical of human cognitive ability to
address animal suffering (2008, 199), is skeptical of our ability to
know whether animals experience morally significant pain. He considers
arguments originating from Descartes and others that some kind of
higher-order thought is required for experience to be morally
significant. He is explicit that he is not defending these views as
probable (2008, 58) but, rather, only as such that a person can have a
reasonable perspective that does not entail their rejection (2008,
72). This clearly has the marks of a skeptical theist strategy, but,
quite unlike Wykstra's strategy, the skepticism at play is not
motivated by God's greatness or, as in the cases of van Inwagen and
Bergmann, a kind of general moral-modal skepticism, but, rather, a
very different kind of human cognitive limitation: our inability to
penetrate the mind of the animal. 
Another natural extension of skeptical theist reasoning that is
illustrated in the case of animals is skepticism about whether we know
their post-mortem fate. So suppose one is a reasonable agnostic,
suspending judgment about whether or not there is a God, but having
somewhat better reason to doubt than to believe that there is a
God. If the skeptical theist can make a good argument that it is
highly likely (given theism) that animals' suffering will be defeated
in an afterlife – where, following Marilyn McCord Adams (2000),
an evil, like suffering, “is defeated within the context of the
individual's life if the individual's life is a good whole to which
[the evil] bears the relevant organic unity...by being relevantly
integrated into [the individual's] relation to a great enough
good” (28,29) – then the agnostic's own skepticism about
whether there is a God or not commits them to skepticism about whether
or not animals' suffering is defeated in the afterlife. And without
knowing whether or not animals' suffering is defeated in the
afterlife, the case against God from animal suffering is severely
blunted.