The first meaning of “sociobiology” is as Wilson’s
own term for a range of work that is currently referred to (and was
largely referred to at the time) as behavioral ecology.
Behavioral ecology is a science that uses evolutionary theory and
especially adaptationist methods to try to understand animal
behavior. Consider, for example the female parasitic jewel wasp. This
wasp lives and lays its eggs in blowfly pupae; after a female wasp of
this species is born and reaches adulthood she mates with one of the
males also occupying her pupa, and then emerges and flies off to lay
her eggs in another pupa. The jewel wasp is haplodiploid, and females
can control the sex of each of their offspring by controlling whether
or not the egg is fertilized when she lays it. What is particularly
interesting about this wasp is that the percentage of females to males
she lays depends on whether she got to the pupa first. If she is first
to the pupa she lays a number of eggs, with mostly females (about
91.3%) and some males (about 8.7%). However, if she lays eggs in a
pupa after another female has been there (this is called
superparasitism), she lays a lot more sons than daughters.
Behavioral ecologists are interested in understanding why animal
behaviors like this have the peculiar features they do.
Behavioral ecology is sometimes characterized in terms of its
relationships to the earlier “ethology” whose most famous
practitioners are probably Konrad Lorenz and Niko Tinbergen. 
Tinbergen (1963) famously described four types of questions that an
ethologist might ask in trying to understand some pattern of animal
behavior, such as the egg laying strategy of the jewel wasp
above. First, the ethologist could ask questions about the
proximate causes of the behavior: for example, what
neurological or psychological mechanisms lead the wasp to lay her eggs
in the pattern she does? What mechanisms are responsible for the
development of that mechanism—what developmental
processes build the neural tissue that directly causes the egg laying
behavior? Second, the ethologist could ask two ultimate,
evolutionary questions about the behavior: what is the evolutionary
function of the behavior, i.e. how does laying eggs in that
pattern contribute to the wasp’s reproductive success, to the
reproductive success of its ancestors, and hence to the
behavior’s history of evolution by natural selection (if that is
its history) in the jewel wasp population? Also, what is the
phylogeny of the behavior, i.e. where did it arise in the
evolutionary tree of the jewel wasp?
Unlike ethologists, behavioral ecologists studying animal behavior at
first tended to focus on the third question, the question of
evolutionary function, at the expense of the others (Griffiths, 2008;
Krebs and Davies, 1997). Griffiths (2008) has argued such a focus by
the behavioral ecologists on questions of function at the expense of
questions of causation, development and phylogeny (but especially
development) was highly problematic, since the four questions cannot
be properly answered independently. Development constrains the
evolution of biological traits in multiple ways, and behavior
especially, since behavior depends on development at both neurological
and psychological levels. Behavioral ecologists, however, for a long
time took the complexity of the developmental resources contributing
to behavior as a reason for (at least temporarily) avoiding such
studies as part of their study of the evolution of behavior. Grafen
(1984) argues that the problem with developmental approaches to
behavior is that they are hard and lengthy to perform, especially if
the only or primary purpose of the developmental
work is to check that the trait in question does indeed have an
evolutionary history that can be understood using adaptationist
methods. Grafen argues that if behavioral ecologists had to perform
developmental or psychological studies to be relatively confident of
their conclusions about the evolutionary history of traits, they would
probably never get as far as evolutionary studies, since such
developmental and genetic work would take a very long time. Worse,
such studies might well have no inherent interest of their own and
represent a waste of time and resources for the scientist—not
all traits have an interesting or enlightening developmental
background or are produced by interesting and unknown psychological
mechanisms. Instead, Grafen argues that behavioral ecologists should
use what he calls the “phenotypic gambit” in studying the
evolution of behavioral traits. This involves assuming that the
developmental, psychological and genetic proximate causes of a
behavioral trait, such as the jewel wasp’s egg-laying strategy
are of a type that will permit scientists to “pretend”
that they are very straightforward when building evolutionary models,
and yet still end up with models that give approximately the right
answers about the primary processes, conditions and constraints acting
on that trait during its evolution (for another similar view see
Maynard Smith, 1982, 6ff).
Since Grafen wrote his article, however, there has been a certain
shift in non-human behavioral ecology away from the phenotypic gambit
and in favor of paying attention to proximate mechanisms, not simply
because these enlighten whether a behavioral strategy could evolve by
natural selection in any particular case, but also the nature of the
fitness costs and benefits that accrue to an organism sometimes depend
on how the adaptive problem they face is solved. For example, Lotem et
al. (1995) appeal to the type of learning mechanism used by parenting
great reed warblers to detect the presence of cuckoos in their nests:
this limits how reliable their detection of cuckoo eggs can be.
Similarly, Shuker and West (2004) argue that the constraints on the
egg laying strategy of the parasitic jewel wasp cannot be properly
understood without paying attention to the limits on the detection
mechanisms the wasp uses to determine the presence or absence of
other females, versus other females’ eggs in
each area.
Perhaps the most important analytical tool of the behavioral
ecologist is the optimality model (Maynard Smith, 1978):
however, frequency dependent models, which do not assume population
fixation of a trait, such as evolutionary stable strategy models
(Maynard Smith, 1982) (see also the entry on
 evolutionary game theory)
and dynamic models, such those employed in studying
life history traits (Roff, 1992), are also used. Optimality
models are designed to show which of a set of possible variant
behavioral strategies would maximize a local fitness
 currency[2]
under a range of ecological conditions
and constraints implicitly or explicitly represented in the
mathematical structure of the model. These conditions are
supposed to represent the selection conditions of the trait
(the conditions responsible for driving its evolution by natural
selection – Brandon, 1990); however, they are usually derived by
observing the conditions under which the organism is currently living,
since these are assumed generally to have remained much the same as the
conditions under which the organism evolved (Turke, 1990). Werren
(1980) provided just such a model for the jewel wasp above; the model
suggests that the reason for the change in the ratio of sons to
daughters when a female wasp finds an occupied pupa is due to the
potential opportunity to mate with the daughters of the first wasp. If
only the first wasp lays her eggs on the pupa, then the hatching
daughters mate with their brothers and all their offspring are entirely
descendants of the first wasp. This means the first wasp needs to
produce very few sons—only enough to mate with all the females;
the second generation reproductive success of the first wasp is
maximized by maximizing the number of daughters. However, where
there is a superparasitic wasp, the superparasitic wasp’s sons
can mate with the large numbers of daughters of the first wasp. 
The superparasitic wasp needs to maximize the number of the females in
the pupa that breed with her sons as opposed to their brothers, whilst
at the same time limiting the amount of competition amongst her
sons. So if she has only a few eggs to lay, it makes sense for
her to lay almost all sons; as brood sizes grow larger, it makes sense
to gradually increase the proportion of daughters in the mix. 
Werren calculated the optimal percentages of males and females for each
brood size. His observations of male to female ratios fit the
predictions of this model quite well but not perfectly.
There is some debate among various philosophers and behavioral
ecologists about what exactly optimality models like Werren’s are
being used to demonstrate. Orzack and Sober (1994) claim that
behavioral ecologists like Werren use optimality models to demonstrate
that the traits in question are adaptations, i.e. that the traits have
evolved by natural selection. Furthermore, Orzack and Sober take
optimality models to be censored models, that is, they are
designed to determine the outcome of natural selection in a population
where natural selection is the only important force, and hence show,
given the model correctly predicts the observed features of the trait
being studied, that natural selection was the most important force in
its
 evolution[3].
The idea
then, is that the relative success of Werren’s model is supposed
to demonstrate that natural selection was the most important force in
the evolution of the jewel wasp’s egg-laying strategy—other
forces may have been involved, but they are not as causally
important. However, various other philosophers have argued that
such models do not make such strongly adaptationist assumptions;
Potochnik (2009), for example, argues that optimality models are only
designed to show the general role that natural selection and other
forces (such as developmental constraints) are playing, and are not
designed to test strong adaptationist hypotheses about the behavioral
strategies in question—i.e. in our case above, the success of the
model is intended to show that natural selection was acting on the
jewel wasp’s strategy, and that the way it was acting on
the jewel wasp’s strategy was via the effects of competition
between the male wasps in the pupa, the variations in brood size and
the other conditions and constraints to which Werren’s model
appeals. The success of the model is not intended to
show that natural selection was the only important force involved in
the evolution of the jewel wasp’s strategy. For other criticisms
of the censored model view, see Rice (2012) and Bolduc and Cezilly
(2012).
However, interestingly, some behavioral ecologists have claimed that
they do not use optimality models to test whether or not natural
selection is acting on a trait, but instead assume the operation of
natural selection in order to test hypotheses about the conditions and
constraints acting on the trait (Parker and Maynard Smith, 1990). 
This could be problematic, if it means behavioral ecologists baldly
accept the view that natural selection optimizes most traits and never
properly test this claim. However, one interpretation of Parker
and Maynard Smith (1990) is not that behavioral ecologists have an
unfalsifiable commitment to the idea that natural selection is an
optimizer. Instead, they are claiming that testing hypotheses
about the operation of natural selection itself is not what the
behavioral ecologists are focusing on. The behavioral ecologists are
making the preliminary assumption that a trait is an adaptation in
order to test other hypotheses about it—they “pretend as
if” the trait were an adaptation, and use that assumption to
detect deviations from optimality that might reveal
interesting tradeoffs and constraints—the nature of the deviation
can suggest what might be missing from the model. This of course
has the upshot that when the models initially fail, the scientists do
not look for alternative non-adaptationist hypotheses, but instead
initially look for new constraints, tradeoffs and conditions
under which selection might be operating. For example, Giraldeau
(1997) describes deviations from optimality in the evolution of
photopigments in the rods (as opposed to cones) in the retinas of fish
that live in certain sorts of marine environments where a shift in
photosensitivity would be useful; Giraldeau uses this deviation to
suggest the presence of a molecular constraint on the evolution of the
rod cells. Presumably, repeated failures to find ways to fill in
the gaps in these optimality models could ultimately result in the
scientists concerned considering alternative, non-adaptationist
explanations. So in order for the behavioral ecologists do this
work they do not need to be committed to the strong view that natural
selection is always the most important force in the origin of traits;
this heuristic requires at most the view that natural selection usually
locally optimizes (i.e. optimizes only relative to possibly
severe constraints). 
However, another way to understand how the behavioral ecologists are
using optimality models, one that is not so often considered, is that
they are interested in providing a functional description of
the traits they are studying (Kitcher, 1987; see also Bolduc and
Cezilly, 2012, for a similar view in terms of decision patterns rather
than behavioral strategies). One of the things that may concern a
behavioral ecologist is how exactly to describe the nature of the
behavior that they are considering: what component behavioral
dispositions (from among all of the organism’s behavior) make up
each strategy, and how those dispositions hang together as an
adaptation. They need to give a description of the relationship
between the organism’s behavior and its environment, and how it
contributes to the organism’s fitness. In the jewel wasp case,
the behavioral ecologists have observed the wasps lay different egg
sex ratios on different occasions. The question is how to make sense
of these different sex-ratio laying behaviors: the guess is that these
different behaviors hang together somehow, as manifestations of a
particular egg-sex-ratio adjusting strategy; and that having this
particular strategy, this particular pattern of egg-sex-ratio laying
behavior, does something for the female wasp when considered
as a whole. But why should a behavioral ecologist accept that any
particular such a functional description is true?
An optimality model can allow a behavioral ecologist to find and
test such a functional description in two ways. First, an
optimality model (explicitly or implicitly) includes a strategy
set, which is a set of descriptions of possible behavioral
strategies; the model picks out one of these strategy descriptions as
the one that is maximally adaptive. On Werren’s model, the
strategy set would be an (implicit) set of descriptions of the range of
possible sex-ratio adjusting strategies that a jewel wasp could use
(i.e. each strategy involves a different set of choices about sex
ratios in a full range of relevant conditions like parasitism,
superparasitism and different brood sizes). The idea is that an
optimality model can pick out which member of this set is a description
of the maximally adaptive strategy – on this view of what the
behavioral ecologists are doing, Werren’s model is designed to
pick out the optimal sex ratio egg laying strategy description from the
strategy set. The hypothesis is that this description of the
maximally adaptive strategy will be the correct
description of what the wasp is doing. If it is the correct
description, then Werren can now predict what son/daughter ratios he
should see the wasp lay in cases so far unobserved. These predictions
allow him to test if the description is correct – if these predictions
are true, then on this view, Werren has confirmed that the description
of the particular sex-ratio adjusting strategy derived from his model
is the correct description of what the wasp is doing.
Second, the description of the strategy picked out by the model is
not simply a description of it as a series of behavioral dispositions
(i.e. dispositions to lay different sex ratios under different
conditions), but of the relationships between those dispositions and
various ecological features that determine the fitness of those
dispositions. For example, in the jewel wasp case, the presence
of other female competitors, flexibility in brood size, the capacity of
sons to mate multiple times, the impossibility of migration of sons
between pupae and so on, are features of the environment that determine
whether any potential egg laying strategy of the jewel wasp is
maximally adaptive, and a well confirmed optimality model can show
how. Consequently, contingent on obtaining the appropriate
evidence that this is the correct model, the description of the
strategy given by a successful model is (implicitly or explicitly) a
functional description of the strategy—a description of
how the behavior contributes to the fitness of the organism. For
a more detailed discussion of the role of optimality modeling in
biology, see the entry on
 adaptationism.
The second way that “sociobiology” has come to be
understood is as a particular approach to understanding specifically
human behavior which Philip Kitcher (1985) calls “Pop
Sociobiology” (as opposed to his description of 
“narrow sociobiology” which is roughly equivalent to
“behavioral ecology” above). Pop Sociobiology is
so-called because it is a view about how to study human behavior
described in a variety of literature written by Wilson
and
 others[4]
for a general, rather
than an academic audience. In this literature, Wilson and the
other “Pop sociobiologists” present some speculative
and
 preliminary[5]
sketches of how an
evolutionary science of human behavior might proceed: Wilson’s
main focus in On Human Nature (Wilson, 1978) and to a lesser
extent the last chapter of Sociobiology (Wilson, 1975) 
is to show that such a science is possible, to describe some of the
techniques that might be used in pursuing it, and to sketch some
possible evolutionary analyses for certain particular human
behaviors. Because of its presentation in the popular press,
“Pop Sociobiology” was probably important in shaping
popular perceptions of the nature of sociobiology (for example, the
Time article, “Why you do what you do” 1977, 
110 (Aug 1), 54) and consequently
drew the ire of the critics. Unfortunately, the intensity of this
debate may have led to a certain amount of mischaracterization of the
sociobiologists’ views. This section will address the main
concerns that the critics raised about Wilson’s early
“Pop” sociobiology, and discuss whether and how far these
are fair descriptions of his views.
Genetic determinism. In a variety of articles major
critics of sociobiology such as Stephen J. Gould (1977, 251–259; 1978)
and the so-called “Sociobiology Study Group” (hereafter
SSG) (Allen et al., 1975; Sociobiology Study Group of Science for the
People, 1976) claim that sociobiologists are strong genetic
determinists. For example, according to the SSG Wilson believes
that there are particular genes “for” behavioral traits,
including indoctrinability, territoriality, warfare and reciprocal
altruism, and that these genes are subject to natural selection in a
relatively straightforward way. Indeed, the SSG (1976) argue that
claiming that traits have a selective origin requires that there are
genes “for” them; Wilson’s apparent acceptance that
traits may often have a strong cultural component is said to be an
error, since if this is true then evolutionary theory tells us nothing
about the origin of such traits. Gould (1977) similarly claims
that sociobiologists do not realize that genes only produce traits with
a contribution from the environment.
Both of these claims are believed, even by other critics, to be
unfair analyses of the views of the sociobiologists, and especially
Wilson—for example, Kitcher, one of the strongest critics of
sociobiology, takes Gould and the SSG to task on this point (Kitcher,
1985, 22–23). In On Human Nature Wilson describes genes as,
essentially, difference makers—he explicitly claims that
differences in genes, even for heritable traits, only explain the
variance in traits across a population; they are by no means
independent causes for any trait in individuals and variation in the
environment also accounts for part of the variation in any trait
(Wilson, 1978, 19). In at least one paper responding to the SSG
Wilson says that, on the question of the relative contributions to the
variation in human behavior from variation in genes vs. variation in
the environment, his “own views lie closer to the
environmentalist than the genetic pole” (Wilson, 1976, 183).
Wilson also does seem to be trying to support his claim that there are
some human behaviors which are probably highly heritable: he describes a
variety of different sorts of evidence that might identify them. 
This evidence includes cross cultural appearance (e.g. Wilson, 1975,
550; Wilson, 1978, 20, 129); plausible homology with other closely
related species (especially chimpanzees) (e.g. 1978, 20, 27, 151);
early development of the trait in question (e.g. 1975, 551; 1978, 129);
differences between individuals that arise without differences in their
developmental environment (e.g. 1978, 128–130); genetic syndromes that
cause behavioral differences (e.g. 1978, 43–45); and twin studies (e.g.
1978, 145). Finally, Wilson claims that trying to change human
behavior from its heritable form usually fails or causes misery
(Wilson, 1978,
 20)[6];
he
describes the failures of certain attempts to change the features of
normal human behavior by massively changing the social environment,
such as the persistence of family ties under slavery (Wilson, 1978,
136) and in the Israeli kibbutzim (1978, 134). Of course, whether
or not all of the above is good evidence for his claims is very much up
for debate (Kitcher, 1985; Sociobiology Study Group of Science for the
People, 1976). It is worth bearing in mind that while Wilson thinks the
evidence that some human behaviors are heritable is overwhelming
(Wilson, 1978, 19) he does see many of his specific proposed
evolutionary explanations as preliminary and speculative rather than
fully formed (for example, Wilson is explicit that his discussion of
homosexuality is preliminary: 1978, 146). For more discussion of the
problems relating to heritability when studying the evolution of 
behavior, see section 4.2. below and the entry on
 heritability.
Ignoring learning and culture. As a concomitant of the
objection that Pop Sociobiology was committed to genetic determinism,
its central players are also often accused of being insensitive to the
problem of learning and culture, i.e. to the problem that many traits
in which they are interested are simply not subject to natural
selection at all, and that this state of affairs may indeed be common
in humans (Kitcher, 1985; Sociobiology Study Group of Science for the
People, 1976). However, Wilson, for example, clearly recognized
the important role of culture in many behavioral traits (Wilson, 1976);
indeed, he thought that even minor genetic differences that made a
difference in behavior could be exaggerated by acquired
culture—this is the so-called “multiplier effect”
(although it is seriously in question whether the multiplier effect
works – Maynard Smith and Warren, 1982). Furthermore, partly in
response to these concerns on the part of his critics Wilson eventually
went on to publish Genes, Minds and Culture with Charles
Lumsden (Lumsden and Wilson, 1981), which was an attempt to consider
the effects of cultural transmission on the nature and spread of
behavioral traits, and of the interaction between genes and
culture. The book, however, was subject to heavy criticism (see,
for example, Kitcher, 1985; Lewontin, 1981; Maynard Smith and Warren,
1982). The main concern raised was that there was little
substance in the models the book provided—the most interesting
features of these simply followed from the assumptions built into them,
in particular, assumptions about the degree to which genes kept culture
“on a leash” (Lumsden and Wilson, 1981, 13; Wilson, 1978,
167). 
Strong adaptationism. The third problematic feature
ascribed to Pop Sociobiology was its reliance on an overly strong form
of adaptationism. In both papers by the SSG (1976) and by Gould
and Lewontin in their famous “Spandrels of San Marco” paper
(Gould and Lewontin, 1979), the critics of sociobiology argue that
sociobiologists are committed to a “Panglossian”
adaptationism. While the “Spandrels” paper is
directed at “adaptationists” generally, sociobiologists
were some of its clear targets (for example, David Barash’s
(1976) work on jealousy in male bluebirds). 
The central accusations of the “Spandrels” paper were as
follows: that adaptationists treat all traits as adaptations; that when
“atomizing” individuals into traits to study they take no
care to establish that the traits so atomized could actually
independently evolve by natural selection; that they ignore
developmental constraints on evolution; that they fail to identify
traits that are prevalent due to causes other than natural selection;
that they fail to distinguish between current adaptiveness and a past
history of natural selection; that they generate adaptationist
hypotheses, fail to test them properly and replace one such hypothesis
with another, ignoring other interesting kinds of evolutionary and
non-evolutionary explanation. Instead, according to Gould and
Lewontin, adaptationists tell purely speculative, untestable
“just so” stories and present them as science fact.
Again, insofar as Wilson and the other sociobiologists are being
purely speculative this criticism may be warranted: quite a lot of the
evolutionary explanations of particular human behaviors Wilson
describes in the first and last chapters of Sociobiology and
in On Human Nature are speculation on his part
(although not entirely speculation). Perhaps the speculative
adaptationist stories are appropriately described as “just so
stories”; the question is whether such stories, treated
as preliminary hypotheses, are problematic in themselves. 
Furthermore, while Wilson made no attempt to test any of his
speculative hypotheses, behavioral ecologists do try to test
adaptationist hypotheses about humans and other animals. Again,
the proper question is whether these tests are appropriate or
sufficient to establish the truth of the hypotheses in question. 
Gould and Lewontin do, however, make some more sophisticated objections
to adaptationist methods; some of these will be discussed in Section
4.
Human behavioral ecology (HBE), or human evolutionary ecology, is
the current evolutionary social science most closely related to the
original sociobiological project; it is the project that is sometimes
still referred to as “sociobiology” by some philosophers of
science (Griffiths, 2008; Sterelny and Griffiths, 1999). 
“Sociobiology” is most often used this way as a term of
contrast with “evolutionary psychology”, another current
evolutionary social science project inspired by early sociobiologists,
and also much developed from how early sociobiology was conceived: see
the entry on
 evolutionary psychology
for a discussion. Other common names for HBE are
“evolutionary anthropology” (Smith, 2000) or 
“Darwinian ecological anthropology” (Vayda, 1995) (due to
most of its practitioners having a background in, or being based in
anthropology departments, and using anthropological fieldwork as the
main means of testing their hypotheses about human behavior). The
different names tend to be used when the researchers concerned are
emphasizing the connections of their field with anthropology or with
non-human behavioral ecology. HBE has a great deal in common with
the non-human behavioral ecology described above. In particular,
it shares its focus on behavior, rather than the psychological
mechanisms described in evolutionary psychology. Unlike non-human
behavioral ecology it has continued to use Grafen’s (1984)
phenotypic gambit, in that its practitioners usually do not attempt to
discover or describe the genetic or other resources employed in the
development of the behavior in which they are interested; nor, for that
matter, do they usually attempt to discover the underlying
psychology. There are, however, some differences of emphasis, in
that the questions about human behavior addressed by the human
behavioral ecologists (HBEs) are sometimes different from those
addressed by the non-human behavioral ecologists.
The central purpose of the HBE approach is to use the assumption
that human behavioral strategies are adaptations as a heuristic to
identify the evolutionary and current local ecological causes of
variation in human behavior. Once nice standard example of HBE
reasoning is Hillard Kaplan and Kim Hill’s (1992) work on prey
choice strategies amongst the Ache foragers of Paraguay. The idea
here is that the Ache’s prey choice strategy is a local
manifestation of a larger human behavioral adaptation for prey choice:
by making this assumption, Kaplan and Hill can use the Ache prey choice
behavior as a way of both determining which conditions led to the
evolution of the larger prey choice strategy and determining
what causes the Ache to choose the prey they do in their local
environment.
Just as in non-human behavioral ecology, behavioral strategies in
HBE are usually described as complex behavioral dispositions. 
Behavioral dispositions involve behavioral responses to local stimuli;
behavioral strategies then involve producing a set of different
responses to a set of different stimuli (we might call this set of
stimuli the response conditions of the strategy). 
According to Kaplan and Hill, the Ache prey choice strategy involves
choosing a variety of different potential prey items from the
environment; whether or not a prey item is taken depends on a number of
circumstances acting as the response conditions: for example, the
presence of prey with certain specific features, such as the caloric
return of the prey given the time necessary to process it (known as the
profitability); the rate at which that prey occurs in the environment;
whether or not the prey is encountered on their search; and the search
time available on a foraging trip. HBEs usually describe
behavioral strategies in terms of an “epigenetic” or
decision rule, which is usually given as a mathematical function
mapping values for the response conditions onto the appropriate
values for the parameters of the behavioral output. Kaplan and
Hill’s work also provides such an epigenetic rule (see Kaplan and
Hill, 1992, 170), which describes the relationships between search
time, profitability and so on, to decide which prey will be taken on
encounter when the Ache are out foraging. 
The prey choice strategy as a whole (i.e. not, for example, the
Ache’s specific, locally appropriate set of prey
choices, but the general human prey choice strategy of which they are a
manifestation) is also presumed for heuristic purposes to be an
adaptation to conditions in the past that led to that strategy being
selected for; these are the selection conditions for the
strategy. Supposing that it is reasonable to take behavioral
strategies as such to be able to be adaptations (see the later
discussion in section 4) the selection conditions of a given behavioral
strategy will usually include the response conditions (because
presumably it takes the production of overt behavior in order for
selection to act on a behavioral strategy) but possibly also features
of the larger context which made it highly adaptive to respond in that
way to those response conditions. In other words, in the prey
choice case, profitabilities, prey densities and search time
availability would presumably have been among the selection conditions
of a prey choice strategy (presuming it is an adaptation). But so
would larger details about the environment not explicitly included in
these models, such as the limits on human capacity which determine
which prey are accessible in that environment, the ecology which
determines which prey are in the environment, and so on. HBEs are
interested, therefore, in identifying the selection conditions of human
behavioral strategies generally.
However, HBEs are anthropologists, and hence also want to describe
the local causes of the highly various overt behaviors that humans
engage in; this can be done by identifying the local manifestations of
the response conditions of the strategies those humans are using. 
Identifying these response conditions is a matter of identifying the
correct functional description of those strategies (Kitcher,
1987). So how might such strategies he described? It is
worth pointing out that this is quite difficult to do: what HBEs
observe in the field is sets of overt behaviors in a context of a
variety of ecological conditions any of which could be the response
conditions. It may be far from obvious exactly why those
behaviors are occurring, and which local conditions are the stimuli to
which the behavior is a response. Indeed, it may not even be
obvious which overt behaviors are manifestations of the same
strategy. In the Ache case, what Kaplan and Hill observed is not
a complete prey choice strategy, but a variety of occasions on which
individuals or groups of Ache people took or did not take prey they
encountered whilst out foraging, among many other sorts of foraging and
other types of behaviors. The question is which, if any, of the
overt behaviors on these occasions manifested a single prey choice
strategy, and how these overt behaviors are related to each other and
to the environmental conditions in which they occur.
The idea seems to be this: if human behavioral strategies are
adaptations, then the relationships between behavioral responses and
local ecological conditions that resemble those of the human
evolutionary past can be expected to be locally optimal, ceteris
paribus; this means that the response conditions of the strategy
will (allegedly) be those (along with additional plausible selection
conditions) that made the behavior fitness maximizing in the
environment in which it evolved, and in any environment that is
relevantly similar (Irons, 1998). HBEs, like behavioral
ecologists studying non-human animals, tend to use optimality modeling
to determine which strategy would be maximally (if locally) fitness
maximizing in the conditions under which it evolved. Just as in
non-human behavioral ecology, the model will identify a strategy,
including the response conditions and the various overt behavioral
responses to them, which would maximize fitness under a set of proposed
selection conditions in the evolutionary past. These selection
conditions may be either explicit or implicit in the model or the
model’s assumptions.
This raises the question of how to choose the right model. In
cases where the structure of the problem might be unique to the human
case and where the current environment is expected to be different from
the situation under which the strategy originally evolved, the model
HBEs choose will often be unique and at least some of the proposed
selection conditions identified by appealing to information about the
fossil record. A nice example might be human life history, where
the human situation is relatively unique: for example, compared to
other primates humans have unusually long lives and childhoods, and
long life after menopause. As a consequence, the human behavioral
ecologists have to appeal to the fossil record in detail to determine
what sorts of evolutionary transitions might have been involved
(Hawkes, 2003; Kaplan et al., 2000). Where the structure of the
adaptive problem humans face and the conditions acting on their
behavior is expected to mirror those in non-human animals and to be
very similar to those humans encountered in their evolutionary past,
the choice of model is often a standard one from non-human behavioral
ecology; the proposed selection conditions can be based on the current
conditions observed in foraging societies. In the Ache foraging
case, this is exactly what happens: the prey choice models used by
Kaplan and Hill are those used to understand similar sorts of
strategies in non-human animals. This is because Kaplan and Hill expect
the relevant conditions acting on human prey choice to mirror very
closely those acting on non-human animals. The primary issue for
prey choice strategies is whether, when encountering a potential prey
item when out foraging, to take and capture or collect that prey item
or whether your caloric return on time invested would be maximized by
ignoring it and continuing to search for something else with a higher
profitability. In cases where other potential foods have much
higher profitabilities or sufficiently high rates of encounter, this
can be the case. The strategy is then a matter of constructing a
“diet”—those prey items that are always taken when
encountered. This is done by ordering prey items in order of
profitability. Then the most profitable prey should be added to
the diet. The next step is to calculate the average foraging return
rate (in calories per hour) obtained by just searching for the most
profitable item, given its profitability, how often it is encountered,
and the caloric cost of the search itself. If the foraging return
rate (in calories per hour) with just that item is less than the
profitability (in calories per hour) of the second highest
profitability item, then the second highest item should be added to the
diet; the new average foraging return rate with both the first and
second highest profitability items should then be calculated. 
Then that new average foraging return rate should be compared with the
profitability of the third highest profitability item—and so on
until all remaining potential prey have lower profitabilities than the
average foraging return rate with all the items currently in the
diet. The idea is that a forager maximizes caloric return per
hour by taking only those items on encounter that are in the diet and
ignoring everything else. 
Finally, therefore, the HBEs will seek to test their optimality
model. The description of that strategy picked out by the model
will usually include descriptions of potential behavioral responses to
conditions (or values for parameters of those responses) that go beyond
what has already been observed; this means the model predicts that
these responses should also occur if the description of the strategy is
correct. For example, in Kaplan and Hill’s prey choice case, the
model predicts patterns of Ache prey choice that the observers had not
yet seen, such as which prey the Ache should and should not take on
encounter and under what circumstances. The model, therefore, can be
tested by looking for a situation in which the response conditions of
the strategy obtain and observing whether the behavior in response to
those conditions is as the model suggests. This is partly why
such rules are tested in foraging societies—because many of these
strategies have response conditions which reflect conditions presumed
to be present in the human evolutionary past, and which may obtain in
foraging societies but not in modern societies. For example,
obviously in Kaplan and Hill’s foraging case, few if any modern
or even small scale agricultural societies routinely engage in foraging
that is a primary source of nutrition, and hence don’t present an
opportunity for individuals to do prey choice of the right
type. The other reason for performing these tests in foraging
societies is because the HBEs want to understand the local causes of
overt behavior in these societies in particular. 
If the strategy is as described, the HBEs take the model to be
confirmed, and thereby also the trait description the HBEs are
using. Consequently (since these are given by the trait
description) so will the nature of the local causes of the
local overt behavior the behavioral ecologists are interested
in explaining (in the Kaplan and Hill case, the causes of the
Ache’s prey choice behavior); and so will the proposed
explanation for the origin of the behavioral strategy in terms of the
past selection conditions the model employs (in the Kaplan and Hill
case, the adaptationist explanation of prey choice in terms
of profitabilities, prey distribution and so on). 
Differences between the predicted and described behavioral
strategies require scientists to build new models, or suggest
additional conditions or constraints to add to the original models;
there must be independent evidence that these conditions or constraints
obtain. Kaplan and Hill’s observations do depart from what
their model predicts: the Ache engage in a number of prey choice
decisions that are not obviously fitness maximizing. In
particular, men often seem to ignore many calorie rich food sources
from plants and sometimes smaller animals, and women do not pursue
larger game. The question then is how to proceed: HBEs often
suggest changes to the model that might account for these failures of
prediction; often, they do give some independent evidence for their
suggestions. For example, one of Hawkes’ proposed
explanations for why male hunting behavior often fails to meet prey
choice expectations (similar failures are found in many societies
besides the Ache) is that men pursue large game for reasons other than
merely collecting calories—they are also interested in showing
off in order to get other fitness rewards, such as additional sexual
partners or better alliances with other men. Hawkes was able to
show that men’s prey choice decisions were consistent with this
view (Hawkes, 1991).
There are a number of philosophical criticisms of behavioral ecology
and its methods; this section will address some of these
criticisms. 
Perhaps the most important of all of the criticisms of “Pop
Sociobiology” was that it was excessively adaptationist; similar
sorts of criticisms are leveled at modern descendants of sociobiology,
such as behavioral ecology. Behavioral ecologists, including
HBEs, are really methodological adaptationists (Godfrey Smith, 2001),
in that they assume that natural selection is optimizing the trait they
are studying as a heuristic, in order to establish other things about
that trait; as such, no strong commitment about the power of natural
selection is necessarily required on their part (as discussed
earlier). This did lead many behavioral ecologists to regard
Gould and Lewontin’s (1979) criticisms as a cautionary tale,
rather than as properly directed at them—see, for example, Gould
and Lewontin’s objection that adaptationist hypotheses were
untestable, which the behavioral ecologists could easily rebut (Mayr,
1983). Similarly, Parker and Maynard Smith (1990) responded to
Gould and Lewontin’s objection that adaptationists do not
properly account for phylogenetic and developmental constraints; Parker
and Maynard Smith argued that they are taken into account—even
where developmental constraints and tradeoffs are not explicitly
represented in optimality models, they are often built into the
strategy set or are otherwise implicit in those models. However,
it is reasonable to point out that Parker and Maynard Smith’s
paper did not fully respond to Gould and Lewontin’s objection:
Gould and Lewontin recognized that adaptationist models appeal to
constraints; their worry was that such constraints are appealed to
ad hoc to fill in gaps in models, and are not subjected to any
external test. 
Another objection to adaptationist methods from Gould and Lewontin
that has persisted as a criticism of behavioral ecology is that these
methods do not allow scientists to consider non-adaptationist
explanations for the traits to which they are applied, such as whether
those traits were fixed by drift or are simply side effects of other
traits (i.e. whether they are “spandrels”). In
principle, correctly pursued, adaptationist methods can help identify
cases where a trait is a non-adaptation: drift, for example, can be
identified by comparing the distribution of traits expected under
selection and under drift with actual population distributions (Sober,
2005); the question is whether the types of methods used in behavioral ecology
are the most efficient at detecting these cases (Lewens, 2009). 
Some philosophers have argued that methodological adaptationism is more
pernicious in practice than it looks in principle, because real
evolutionary social scientists are not good at dropping adaptationist
hypotheses for a trait even when there is a strong case to be made that
they should (see, for example, Lloyd, 2005, esp. Chapter
8). For further discussion of all these problems, see the entry
on
 adaptationism. 
While it seems that the accusation that the early “Pop”
sociobiologists were genetic determinists was probably unfair, there is
a related objection that can be raised to both “Pop”
sociobiology and to the later forms of human and non-human behavioral
ecology, i.e. that any trait’s being an adaptation requires that
that trait be heritable, and most human behaviors are not
heritable. To say a trait is heritable in the simplest sense is
just to say that if the parent has that trait, then the trait tends
also to appear in the offspring (i.e. to say the trait is heritable
simply means that the trait is inherited reliably). The
more demanding population genetic definition of heritability is that a
heritable trait T is one where variation in T can be accounted for
primarily by variation in genes as opposed to variation in the
environment (see also the entry on
 heritability). 
Heritability in this sense is supposed to be required for natural
selection because in order for natural selection to spread a variant T
in a population, when T increases the average number of offspring of
its possessors, those offspring have to reliably also have T if T is to
spread at the expense of the other variants. The problem,
however, is that many human behavioral traits do not seem likely to be
heritable in this way: they tend to vary greatly across and even within
cultures and environments, whereas human genetic variation is much too
low to account for such differences (Buller, 2005; Cosmides and Tooby,
1987). 
However, HBEs can get around this problem, by pointing out that
local patterns of overt behavior are manifestations of more general
strategies; differences in the environment cause the manifestations of
different elements of these complex behavioral dispositions humans
possess. For example, the patterns of foraging behavior of the
Ache people in the Paraguay rain forest (Hill and Hurtado, 1996) and
the Inuit in the Arctic (Smith, 1991) are very different, and the
genetic differences between these groups are insufficient to explain
them. However, both could be simply local manifestations of a
larger and more general foraging strategy (or strategies) which humans
possess, which could be heritable and an adaptation. A behavioral
strategy is, after all, simply a complex behavioral disposition, which
involves responding in a variety of specific ways to a set of
environmental cues, most of which would be achieved by having an
appropriate psychological mechanism or mechanisms underlying the set of
dispositions. In which case, heritability of a behavioral
strategy only depends on there being a psychological mechanism or
mechanisms that produces that strategy reliably, and that
mechanism’s itself being heritable. Of course, whether
there are such heritable mechanisms for the behavioral strategies in
which the HBEs are interested is likely to be a matter of some
controversy.
What’s more, some philosophers have argued that it is possible
for traits to be adaptations in the standard sense even when they
are not heritable according to the population genetic 
definition[7].
Despite the claim above that heritability in
the population genetic sense is required as a condition of the action
of natural selection, technically all that is required for natural
selection to occur on a trait T is for T to be heritable in the weaker
sense, i.e. that it be robustly transmitted, such that the trait
variant in a parent tends to turn up reliably in the
offspring. The reason heritability in the population
genetic sense was believed to also be necessary for natural selection
was that genes were believed to be the only developmental resource
transmitted to offspring, so only if variation in traits followed
variation in genes would traits be subject to natural selection for the
reasons described above. However, recently a variety of
philosophers and scientists have argued (Odling-Smee et al., 2003;
Sterelny, 2003, 2007, 2012) that natural selection can occur on traits
even if traits vary most with the environment rather than genes, so
long as environments can themselves be transmitted down lineages;
Sterelny’s suggestion is that this might be achieved by robust
niche construction. This has an interesting consequence: if
highly reliably transmitted cultural traits could be subject to natural
selection, standard evolutionary methods and models of the sorts used
in behavioral ecology could be used to understand the evolution of such
traits.
This is the not the end of the problem, however. Some
philosophers have argued that not all traits that are culturally
transmitted or learnt can be properly understood using adaptationist
methods, because many of these traits are not heritable even in 
this weaker sense, and hence cannot be adaptations (Driscoll, 2009; 
Driscoll and Stich, 2008; Kitcher, 1990). Worse, such traits could appear highly
adaptive on evolutionary models. For example, traits which
are subject to highly adaptive individual learning or adaptive social
transmission processes in populations (Henrich and Boyd, 1998; Henrich
and Gil-White, 2001) are nevertheless not adaptations because they are
not shaped by natural
 selection[8].
This is because in many of these cases, the
features of the environment that make the trait appear adaptive may not
actually have featured as selection conditions in the causal history of
the trait (or perhaps as causes in any sense). In such cases,
evolutionary methods popular in sociobiology and the current
evolutionary social sciences (such as optimality modeling) will make
traits appear to be adaptations to those conditions when they are
not. For a more detailed discussion of dual inheritance theory,
gene culture co-evolution and the associated theory, see the entry
on
 cultural evolution.
Another problem for behavioral ecology and sociobiology is their
focus on trying to understand the biological basis of behavior
as such. The behavioral focus made sense to those behavioral
ecologists influenced by Lorenz and Tinbergen’s ethology, but
once cognitive psychologists became interested in applying evolutionary
thinking to their work, the effects of the cognitive revolution in
psychology began to have an effect on some of the
“sociobiological” thinkers, and they transformed
sociobiology into evolutionary psychology (Cosmides and Tooby, 1987;
Tooby and Cosmides, 1990). The result of the cognitive revolution
in psychology was that many psychologists came to regard the proper
target of explanation in psychology to be genuinely psychological
states or mechanisms rather than behavioral dispositions (as in
Skinnerian Behaviorism) (Chomsky, 1959). In cognitive science
since the middle of the twentieth century, psychological states and
mechanisms have largely been understood in computational and
materialist terms, that is, that the mind is the brain, and that brain
states and mechanisms are essentially computational states and
computers respectively (though almost certainly not serial
computers). Psychological descriptions, then, are simply
descriptions of these brain systems in computational or
information-processing terms; generally they appeal to representations,
decision rules and algorithms that brain systems process. The
shift in methodology and theory represented by this change in approach
was extremely significant. But it also appears to have made
cognitive psychologists interested in evolution averse to thinking of
behavioral dispositions as proper targets of evolutionary explanation,
just as they were averse to thinking of them as the proper targets of
psychological explanation (Cosmides and Tooby, 1987). This issue
never seems to have arisen for the human behavioral ecologists; indeed, not
only is behavior treated as the only proper target of evolutionary
explanation, but psychology is explicitly ignored in favor of behavior
for methodological reasons—the focus on behavior is part of the
“phenotypic gambit” (Grafen, 1984) which (as described
above) simplifies evolutionary modeling and the process of deriving
explanations from it in human behavioral ecology. 
The importance of the issue to the evolutionary psychologists has
led to a series of arguments traded between the human behavioral
ecologists and evolutionary psychologists for preferring behavior over
psychology and vice versa. Two main arguments have been raised in
favor of considering behavior the proper target of explanation, both
from. The first is purely practical: behavior is relatively
straightforwardly observable whereas psychological mechanisms are not,
to the extent that the nature of only a few psychological mechanisms
has been uncontroversially demonstrated (one of the few examples might
be the mechanisms for learning language) (Alexander, 1990). The
second is that only behavior can be an adaptation because only behavior
is the actual causal nexus between the organism and its environment
(Alexander, 1990; see the same idea in early form in Skinner,
1984). 
The central problem with both of these arguments is that, while they
are true of overt behavior, they are not true of the behavioral
dispositions or strategies (complex behavioral dispositions) which are
the actual targets of explanation in behavioral ecology—or at
least, no more true than of psychological mechanisms. Behavioral
dispositions do not causally interact with the environment except
insofar as they lead to the actual manifestation of overt behavior;
they are also no more “straightforwardly observable” than
psychological mechanisms since they cannot be observed until overt
behavior in manifested, and even then distinguishing between different
strategies with overlapping component behavioral dispositions is also
difficult.
Arguments for the claim that only psychological mechanisms should be
considered to be adaptations rest on the idea that behavior is really
only ever a manifestation of the underlying psychology. Behavior
is not an adaptation so much as it is the effect of an
adaptation. Cosmides and Tooby (1987) also argue that the really
interesting evolutionary generalizations emerge at the level of
psychology, not behavior. Again, however, this argument depends
on understanding “behavior” as “overt
behavior”, individual chunks of physical activity that
are not necessarily reproduced over time and which do not occur in evolutionary
social science generalizations, verses understanding
“behavior” as “complex behavioral strategies”,
which do seem potentially transmissible (via the psychological
mechanisms that support them). It is also notable that such
strategies are the subject of a significant evolutionary
literature—such as evolutionary game theory, on which Cosmides
and Tooby themselves depend: the argument for expecting their famous
“Cheater Detection” module (Cosmides, 1989; Cosmides and
Tooby, 1992) is derived from Axelrod and Hamilton (1981) and
Trivers’ (1971) work showing that TIT FOR TAT, which requires its
players to be able to detect cheaters on reciprocally altruistic
interactions, is an evolutionary stable
 strategy[9]. 
More recently, philosophers have also presented some arguments for
one side or the other of this issue. Buller (2005, 50–52), for
example, argues that behaviors cannot be adaptations because they are
not heritable, whereas psychological mechanisms are. However,
Buller’s discussion does not make the distinction between overt
behaviors and behavioral strategies described above. Buller
argues that behaviors could disappear from the population for
generations if the necessary response conditions never arose, but yet
still emerge again if the stimulus reappeared, and this suggests that
these behaviors are not inherited as such rather than the underlying
psychological mechanism. In this he is right as long as he means
the overt behaviors; behavioral dispositions or strategies could also
remain present and be inherited in the absence of the response
conditions. Moreover, Buller’s description of a
“psychological mechanism” in this context sounds rather
like a behavioral disposition (2005, 52–53). 
Another argument in the philosophical literature for thinking that
behaviors are not the proper targets of natural selection explanations
is that behaviors are not quasi-independent (Lewontin, 1978)
in the way they need to be to evolve by selection in their own right
(Sterelny, 1992; Sterelny and Fitness, 2003; Sterelny and Griffiths,
1999). This is because many behavioral strategies will depend on
multi-purpose mechanisms that cannot change during evolution without
those changes ramifying to the other strategies those mechanisms
produce. However, Driscoll (2004) argues that this is not
necessarily the case; multi-purpose mechanisms, in order to be able to
produce more than one strategy, would have to have branching
algorithms; variation in any of these mechanisms necessary to generate
variation in any one strategy need only occur on the branch relevant to
the strategy in question and need have little or no effect on the other
branches. Instead, whether an evolutionary explanation is
properly directed at the behavioral or psychological level depends on
the case.
Sociobiology, despite its complicated history, remains of interest to
philosophers and has some import for certain important philosophical
debates. One such question is whether human beings should be
understood to have a nature, a set of traits which for Wilson
are those heritable traits that have been fixed in the population by
natural selection (Wilson, 1978). Consequently, this
‘nature’ can be discovered and understood using the
standard adaptationist methods used in other areas of biology. Most
importantly, Wilson suggests that some of the characteristics that
make up human nature are specifically behavioral. 
Quite apart from the fundamental interest of the question of whether
there is a human nature, the issue is important because it might have
a significant moral or social upshot: what society we can have, and
indeed what society we should have might depend on what human nature
is like (Wilson, 1978). It was this concern that ignited the
“sociobiology wars” in the early days after the
publication of Sociobiology. The “Sociobiology Study
Group” was concerned that Wilson was trying to argue that many
problematic or harmful features of current societies, such as
oppressive gender roles, negative race relations and interpersonal
aggression might be unchangeable (Sociobiology Study Group of Science
for the People, 1976). Philosophers of biology have strongly resisted
the idea that humans have a ‘nature’ in anything like the
traditional sense of a fixed essence (Hull, 1986; Lewens, 2012; Lloyd
and Crowley, 2002) but there is also some debate about whether humans
could be said to have a nature in the sense of a set of evolved traits
in much the way that Wilson suggests (e.g. see Machery, 2008, 2012;
for a critique see Powell, 2012). Philosophers in this area are
instead focusing on notions of human nature that take into account the
flexibility of human development and the capacity of human beings to
construct their own development and hence their own
‘nature’ (Griffiths, 2009; Ramsey, 2013; Stotz, 2012).
Another hope on the part of philosophers is that understanding the
evolution of cognition might give us some insight into the nature of
certain human psychological traits that have particular philosophical
interest. One such trait is our moral psychology. Moral psychology is
of interest to philosophers who hold naturalistic views of ethics
because they believe moral values depend in part on features of that
psychology; understanding that psychology and how it evolved would
give us insight into what the correct moral values are. Understanding
the origins of human moral psychology might also help answer certain
metaethical questions (Street, 2006). As Wilson hoped, scientists
working in disciplines which are the modern descendants of
sociobiology have contributed to our understanding of the way that
norms, including moral norms, might have become established in human
evolution (see, for example, Henrich and Boyd, 2001; Sripada,
2005). Philosophers still strongly disagree, however, on how the
evolution of moral psychology, especially for the acquisition of
norms, should be understood (Dwyer, 2006; Sripada and Stich, 2006;
Sterelny, 2010).
Other debates surrounding sociobiology are still ongoing. For
example, while methodological adaptationism has become and remained the
standard approach in behavioral ecology, not all philosophers are
convinced that this is an entirely benign practice – there are
still concerns about the assumptions that this methodology requires
(see, for example, Lewens, 2009; Lloyd, 2005). Similarly, there
has been an increasing interest in the role of culture in the nature
and history of human behavior; work studying the evolution of culture
has increased since Lumsden and Wilson (1981) published their
book. Philosophers and scientists are still addressing questions
about how and how far cultural traits can be said to evolve; and, as
discussed above, whether traits that have evolved in this way can be
considered adaptations in any sense (Driscoll, 2011; Fracchia and
Lewontin, 1999, 2005; Henrich et al., 2008; Sperber, 2006; Sterelny,
2006).