Before discussing the theory of attributes in the Ethics,
it will be helpful to keep in mind a rudimentary sketch of the general
structure of Spinoza’s
ontology:[2]
There is only an infinite substance (1P14), that is, there are no
created substances. The infinite substance consists of infinite
attributes (1D6). Every mode, be it finite or infinite, must be
conceived through an attribute (1D5, 1P10Schol, 2P6 and 2P6Dem).
Finally, what other philosophers consider to be “created
substances,” such as my mind (as well as my body), are finite
modes for Spinoza
(1P11).[3]
Spinoza is not the first to furnish his metaphysics with attributes
and in that he is following a very long tradition. He is, though,
mostly influenced by Descartes, and in some ways is trying to keep with
Descartes’ notion of “attribute.” It therefore will
be useful to look back and get a sense of what Descartes had in mind
and thus get a preliminary grasp (which will be revised) of what
Spinoza means by “attribute.” Descartes states in the
Principles of Philosophy that attributes are the essence of a
thing, so the essence of mind is thought or thinking, and the
essence of body is to be extended (Principles, I, §53,
CSM, I, p. 210, AT 25). To see why this is so, it is worth revisiting
the first and second Meditations, even if very briefly. Let us
begin with body and Extension. To understand the essence of body, we
can look to the famous wax example in Meditation Two
(CSM, II, p. 20–21, AT 30–32). While sitting by the
fireplace, Descartes inspects a piece of wax and asks himself what he
knows of the wax. He begins by listing all the sensory properties of
the wax: it is white, has a certain smell, makes a certain sound when
one raps it with one’s finger, is hard, and has a certain taste.
After listing all its sensory properties, he then places the piece of
wax by the fire and sees how it loses all those properties: it
changes color, smell, texture, taste, etc. Descartes concludes, among
other things, that the essence of the wax, insofar as it is a body, is
that it is extended in length, breadth, and depth since that
is the only thing that remains constant about the wax. In this respect,
the piece of wax is no different from any other body—that is, its
essence is to be extended. Extension, then, according to Descartes, is
the essence of body. In the Meditations we also, famously,
come to recognize our own essence as thinking things. We realize this
by recognizing that we cannot doubt that we are doubting while
doubting. Furthermore, we realize that doubting in this sense is no
different from understanding, affirming, denying, willing, unwilling,
imagining, and having sense perceptions (seeming to see, etc.) (CSM,
II, p. 19, AT 28). Descartes then reaches the conclusion that the
essence of the mind is Thought. For these reasons, Descartes claims
that Thought and Extension are the principal attributes of mind and
body and that they are “really distinct”, that is, they
exist independently one from the
other.[4]
 It is important to note
that for Descartes, any created substance has only one
principal attribute, as opposed to God who has infinite attributes.
Spinoza adopts some aspects of the Cartesian set up while rejecting
others. He agrees that Thought and Extension are attributes (2P1, 2P2)
and are related to essences (1D4). He agrees they are “really
distinct” from each other
(1P10Schol).[5]
 Furthermore, he agrees
that “mind” has to be conceived through Thought, and
“body” through Extension. (2P5 and its demonstration make
the case with regard to ideas and Thought; 2D1 establishes it for
bodies and Extension. This is also made very clear in 3P2 and its
demonstration.) However, he does not agree that they are attributes of
created substances, since he rejects the possibility of
created substances altogether (1P6Cor., 1P8Schol1, 1P14). One way to
understand Spinoza is to see how he can hold both Thought and Extension
(and other attributes, if there are others) to be divine attributes or
attributes of one and the same (infinite)
substance.[6]
Spinoza defines the term “attribute” thus:
“By attribute I understand what the intellect perceives
of substance as constituting its essence” (1D4). This definition
is reminiscent of Descartes’ notion of attributes as it appears
in the Principle of Philosophy insofar as attributes are
related to the essence (or essences) of substance. However, as many
have noticed, it is not clear from the definition alone what exactly
Spinoza means. There are several, by now famous, ambiguities in
the
 definition.[7]
 These, together with the different
interpretative options, are discussed in
 Section 1.8.
Spinoza makes a very important claim about attributes in the
Scholium to Proposition 10 of Part One: “…although two
attributes may be conceived to be really distinct (i.e., one may be
conceived without the aid of the other), we still cannot infer from
that that they constitute two beings, or two different
substances.” Spinoza here is explaining something about the
relationship among attributes—one may be conceived without the
aid of the other—and about the relation of the attributes to the
substance, namely, that conceiving attributes independently is not
evidence of the existence of independent substances.
To understand why this scholium is so important, it is helpful to
recall Descartes’ definition of a “real distinction.”
In the Principles of Philosophy, Descartes says:
“Strictly speaking, a real distinction exists only
between two or more substances; and we can perceive that two substances
are really distinct simply from the fact that we can clearly and
distinctly understand one apart from the other”
(Principles, I, §60, CSM, I, p. 213, AT 28). For
Descartes, this anchors the strict epistemological and ontological separation between mind and
body. One of the things we learn from going through the
Meditations is that we are capable of clearly and distinctly
perceiving ourselves without a body—the cogito in the
Second Meditation, and we clearly and distinctly perceive body
without thinking in the Fifth Meditation. (Of course, in
retrospect, we realize that we already did this in a sense with the wax as
well). Descartes thus concludes that mind and body are really distinct,
that is, one can exist without the other.
One important implication of this distinction is that it allows for
a fully mechanistic explanation of the physical world. To explain the
interaction between two bodies requires alluding only to their physical
properties (size, shape and motion) without the need to take recourse
to any Aristotelian explanation involving
 final causes.
Making room for mechanistic explanations, that is, for the
New Science, was one of Descartes’ chief motivations for writing
the Meditations. Spinoza preserves this aspect of
Cartesian doctrine (cf. appendix to Part One of the Ethics and
discussion in
 Section 1.3.1).
Having separated the mind so sharply from the body, Descartes is
left with having to explain their evident unity. More specifically, he
is burdened with trying to explain how two really distinct substances
seem to interact causally. Their causal interaction seems
problematic because, according to Descartes, each substance is
independent; the infinite substance depends on nothing but itself
(Principles, I, §51, CSM, I, p. 210, AT 24), while
created substances depend on nothing but God for their
existence (Principles, I, §52, CSM I, p. 210, AT 25). If
distinct substances interact causally then they seem to depend on one
another, and this would go against their nature qua
substances. This is why the union of the mind and body is a
thorny issue for Descartes, and was and continues to be a source of
much debate (Cf. for example, Hoffman, 1986). For some, a version of
this problem translates into Spinoza’s metaphysics (cf.
Section
 1.9.4).
The issue of the nature of the
“real distinction” for Spinoza is discussed in the
subsequent section.
For Descartes, then, there is the epistemological claim that
perceiving Thought does not involve perceiving Extension and vice
versa. Each is explanatorily independent from the other, (although not
from God). Spinoza adopts this aspect of Cartesian philosophy and
holds, as well, that there is what Della Rocca calls, “a
conceptual barrier” between Thought and Extension as Spinoza
states in the scholium “i.e., one may be conceived without the
aid of the other” (Della Rocca, 1996, 9–17). Spinoza holds
Thought and Extension to be explanatorily self-contained. Physical
changes are to be understood in terms of other physical items, and
ideas are to be understood in terms of other ideas. What is ruled out
is what can be called “cross attribute explanations.” For
example, explaining the movement of my hand by my desire to move my
hand. According to Spinoza, the movement of my hand is to be explained
purely physically by alluding to other bodies and their motions, while
my desire is to be explained by other desires and ideas. Spinoza makes
this very clear in 3P2, its demonstration and scholium:
3P2: The body cannot determine the mind to thinking, and the mind
cannot determine the body to motion, to rest, or to anything else (if
there is anything else).
Dem.: All modes of thinking have God for a cause, insofar as he is a
thinking thing, and not insofar as he is explained by another attribute
(by 2P6). So what determines the mind to thinking is a mode of thinking
and not of extension, that is (by 2D1), it is not the body. This was
the first thing.
Next, the motion and rest of a body must arise from another
body…whatever arises in the body must have arisen from God
insofar as he is considered to be affected by some mode of extension,
and not insofar as he is considered to be affected by some mode of
thinking (also 2P6), that is, it cannot arise from the mind, which (by
2P11) is a mode of thinking. This was the second point. Therefore, the
body cannot determine the mind, and so on, q.e.d.
Although this is reminiscent of Descartes in some respects, there
is, of course, one crucial difference. For Descartes the fact that one
can conceive Thought distinctly from Extension is evidence for the
existence of two substances—mind and body. For Spinoza, this is
not the case, and this is the point he is making in this central
proposition (1P10), namely, that although two attributes may be
conceived independently—one without the other—this does
not imply that there are two substances existing separately.
For Spinoza there is only one substance with infinite attributes, and
although each attribute is conceived independently from the other/s
they still are, nonetheless, all attributes of one and the same
substance. It is possible then to conceive, think, or completely
explain the entire universe, or everything that exists, under each one
of the attributes. That is, we can give a complete physical description
of everything that exists, or alternatively explain, describe, or
conceive everything as ideas or thought. Being able to explain the
entire universe under the attribute of Extension is what allows Spinoza
to preserve Descartes’ effort of providing room for progress in
the New Science (Cf. Appendix to Part One).
Spinoza and Descartes agree about the epistemological separation
between Thought and Extension, but not about the ontological one.
Descartes calls the distinction between attributes of the same
substance, and between a given attribute and its substance a
“rational distinction,” (Principles, I, §62,
CSM, I, p. 214, AT 30) and so, insofar as Thought and Extension belong
to the same substance for Spinoza, they would be, in Descartes’
terminology, rationally
 distinct.[8]
 Spinoza however, says
that they are “really distinct.” How exactly to
understand the “reality” of the distinction among the
attributes is a crucial interpretative matter and is discussed in
Sections 1.8.1–1.8.2.
Another claim that has to be taken into account in an analysis of
Spinoza’s view on attributes is that God is his
attributes: 1P4: “Therefore, there is nothing outside the
intellect through which a number of things can be distinguished from
one another except substance, or what is the same (by 1D4),
their attributes, and their affections” (italics added), 1P19:
“God is eternal, or [sive] all God’s
attributes are eternal,” 1P20Cor.: “It follows second, that
God, or [sive] all of God’s attributes, are
immutable.” Some might consider 1P29Schol to be making an
identity claim as well: “But by Natura Naturata I
understand whatever follows from the necessity of God’s nature,
or [sive] from any of God’s
attributes…” Spinoza in these places seems to be claiming
that there is an identification of the substance with its attributes.
However, this identification can be understood in several ways and in
various degrees of strictness. How one reads this claim depends on
other considerations discussed in
 Section 1.9.3.
One of the important things that Spinoza does in the first two parts
of the Ethics is to establish Extension as a divine attribute
(elements of this view are evident already in KV I/25). Although
Spinoza adopts many important aspects of Cartesian metaphysics, he
collapses
the divide between the infinite and created substances. This
means that principal attributes that were at the “created
substance” level in the Cartesian set-up are “moved
up”, so to speak, to the infinite substance level for Spinoza.
One of these attributes is, of course, Extension. Spinoza has to
explain to a resistant audience how Extension can be considered a
divine attribute.
The important steps that will allow Spinoza to claim that Extension
can be an attribute of God are the following. He defines God as a
substance consisting of infinite attributes
 (1D6).[9]
 He shows that
substances cannot share attributes (1P5), that every substance is
infinite (1D8), that a single substance can have several attributes
(1P10schol), and that an infinite substance exists (1P11). With an eye
towards specifically establishing Extension as a divine attribute, he
claims in 1P12: “No attribute of a substance can be truly
conceived from which it follows that the substance can be
divided.” In 1P13, he states: “A substance which is
absolutely infinite is indivisible,” and in the corollary, he
makes the point especially clear with respect to Extension: “From
these propositions it follows that no substance, and consequently
no corporeal substance, insofar as it is a substance, is
divisible.” In 1P14, he establishes that there is only one
substance (or rather, that there are no created substances). Finally in
1P15 he claims: “Whatever is, is in God, and nothing can be or be
conceived without God.” With this, the stage is set for Extension
being a divine attribute or applicable to God, if in fact it is a
genuine attribute (which is established only in Part Two).
Spinoza is aware that this will be received with great resistance.
The possible objection he imagines is that since Extension is divisible
by its very nature then, if Extension were an attribute of God, God
would be divisible. God, of course, cannot be divisible, for then he
would not be infinite. In the Scholium to 1P15 he shows the ensuing
contradictions if one holds Extension to be by its very nature
divisible. It is important for him to show that Extension cannot imply
divisibility in answer to possible objectors holding traditional
views. Moreover, he has just shown that there is only one
substance, which is indivisible (1P12 and 1P13), and so whatever
attributes it has, none of them can imply divisibility in the only
substance. Spinoza then shows that if Extension is an attribute, it is
applicable to God, and there is no danger of that implying any real
division in the substance. One important result of this is that what
appear to be individuated bodies cannot be really individuated in the
Cartesian sense of implying real distinction and the existence of
multiple substances. Rather, what appear to be individuated bodies are
only modes of substance under the attribute of
 Extension.[10]
 Only in
Part Two does Spinoza show that Extension (as well as Thought) are in
fact attributes of God: “Thought is an attribute of God,
or [sive] God is a thinking thing” (2P1) and
“Extension is an attribute of God, or [sive]
God is an extended thing” (2P2).
A very important characteristic regarding attributes is established
in 2P7 and its scholium, which is sometimes referred to in the
literature as the “parallelism doctrine.” However, as will
be discussed in
 Section 1.9.2,
this
nomenclature is laden with a significant amount of interpretative bias
and the term is nowhere to be found in the Ethics itself. It
is thus advisable to stay clear of it and simply refer to it
as “the 2P7 Doctrine.” 2P7 states: “The order and
connection of ideas is the same as the order and connection of
things,” (“ordo, & connexio idearum idem est, ac
ordo & connexio rerum”). Spinoza explains this
proposition in the scholium:
Spinoza is claiming here that a mode X under the attribute of
Thought is one and the same as mode X under
Attributey. A good way to get some intuitive sense
of this is to see how this works with respect to ourselves. Under the
attribute of Thought, I am a finite mode—an idea or mind. Under
the attribute of Extension, I am a finite mode, that is, a body. The
claim in 2P7 and its scholium is that my mind (a mode of Thought) and
my body (a mode of Extension) are one and the same. This is the case
for all modes. Furthermore, whatever causal relation my body, say,
bears to other modes of Extension, my mind will bear to the other
modes of Thought. The understanding of this doctrine and its
implications in more depth depends, probably more than any other
doctrine, on how one construes other central elements of Spinoza’s
theory of attributes (e.g. the number of attributes).  In Section
1.9.2 different directions of interpretation are considered regarding
2P7 and its scholium.
Spinoza famously claims that we, human minds, only know two
attributes—Thought and Extension. This can be seen as arising
from the axioms in Part Two: 2A2: “Man thinks,” 2A4:
“We feel a certain body is affected in many ways,” 2A5:
“We neither feel nor perceive any singular things, except bodies
and modes of thinking,” as well as 2P13: “The object of the
idea constituting the human mind is the body, or [sive] a
certain mode of extension which actually exists, and nothing
else” [italics added] (this is true already in KV, 1/27). In
Letter 64 Spinoza tries to explain why we can only perceive these two
attributes, and he does so by referring back to 2P13 and claims in the
letter: “Therefore, the mind’s power of understanding
extends only as far as that which this idea of the body contains within
itself, or which follows therefrom. Now this idea of the body involves
and expresses no other attributes of God than extension and
thought.” Although some have found this line of argumentation
unsatisfying (e.g. Bennett, 1984, 78–79) it is worth noting that
Spinoza here is relying on axioms.
The attempt to understand Spinoza’s doctrine regarding the attributes
has traditionally led interpreters in two main directions, although
others have been proposed (e.g. Lennon, 2005. 12–30; Shein,
 2009).[11]
 The first is what is known as the “subjective”
interpretation which follows Hegel, and is given its paradigmatic
expression by Wolfson. More recently, Michael Della Rocca as been
advocating a more idealistic interpretation of the attributes, which
shares certain important features with the subjectivist camp. The
other, which has become the standard, is the “objective”
interpretation. These two principal avenues stem from some important
ambiguities in the definition of “attribute”: “By
attribute I understand what the intellect perceives of substance as
constituting its essence”
 (1D4).[12] 
The first term that is ambiguous is
“intellect,” since it can refer either to the finite
intellect or the infinite one (cf. diagram in Section 1).  The second
important ambiguity lies in the Latin term tanquam, since it
can mean either “as if, but not in fact,” or “as in
fact.” The definition can therefore be read, either as stating
that attributes are what the intellect perceives of substance as
constituting its actual essence, or that attributes are what the
intellect perceives only as if they are what constitute the
essence but are not what in fact constitutes it or them. The
subjectivists accordingly claim that attributes are what the finite
intellect perceives of substance as if constituting its
essence. The objectivists, by and large, instead claim that it is the
infinite intellect that perceives the attribute as in fact
constituting the essence of substance. In the following sections the
different interpretative options are explained a grosso
modo. The ways in which the different interpretative avenues
affect other Spinozistic doctrines are discussed in Sections
1.9.1–1.9.4.
As is well known, Hegel, in various respects, considered himself to
be modifying Spinoza’s doctrine (“to be a follower of
Spinoza is the essential commencement of all philosophy”) and his
interpretation of Spinoza was extremely
 influential.[13]
 In his Lectures on
the History of Philosophy, Hegel says that what has utmost reality
for Spinoza is the absolute (or the infinite substance) and that
anything else (finite modes, in particular) are ways of negating this
absolute. He goes on to explain that the understanding [or
“intellect”] grasps the reality of substance through
attributes, but “it is only reality in view of the
understanding.” He stresses that understanding in terms of
attributes is due to the nature of the understanding and not because of
the nature of the absolute (or the infinite substance) as such. It is
clear that he considers the understanding to be the understanding of
finite minds, because he goes on to explain that Spinoza’s claim
that there are “infinite attributes” has to be interpreted
as “infinite in character” and not in number and that there
are only the two attributes known to finite minds—Thought and
Extension.
What is referred to in the literature as the subjectivist reading,
following Hegel, holds that the intellect perceiving the attributes is
the finite intellect and that the attributes are projections of the
finite mind onto the infinite substance which it cannot fully
comprehend. In other words, according to the subjectivist
interpretation, the definition of attribute states that attributes are
what the finite intellect perceives of substance as if (but not in
fact) constituting its essence. In contrast, the objectivist
reading takes the intellect in question to be the infinite one, and the
tanquam to mean “as in fact,” and so it read the
definition as claiming that attributes are what the infinite intellect
perceives of substance as (in fact) constituting its essence.
Wolfson summarizes the difference between the two positions thus:
One of the motivations behind Wolfson’s view is that he
considers Spinoza to be the last of the medieval Jewish rationalists,
and in following with that tradition, Spinoza locates all multiplicity
not in the infinite substance (God), but rather in the human mind. That
is, the fact that God has multiple attributes is explained not by his
having multiple essences, natures, or aspects, but rather because of
the nature of the human mind. This is based on the conviction that
God’s true nature is simple and any multiplicity is merely
apparent but not real. It is because of the limitations of the finite
mind that it attributes multiplicity to the infinite substance, when in
reality the infinite substance is simple. In this view there is a gap
between the attributes and the infinite substance. The infinite
substance as it is in itself, so to speak, is unknowable to the finite
mind. With respect to the “real distinction,” the
distinction between the attributes in this view is grounded in the
different ways the finite mind has of conceiving the infinite
substance. That is, the distinction between the attributes is not based
on the nature of the infinite substance itself, but it reveals, in a
way, something about the nature of finite perception. It is in these
terms that the “reality” of the distinction is to be
understood, i.e., as if but not in fact.
Two main objections have been brought forth against the subjectivist
interpretation. These are considered by most commentators to be
forceful enough for rejecting subjectivism as a serious contender for
a satisfying interpretation of Spinoza’s theory of attributes. The
first objection to subjectivism is that, finite minds can never have
true knowledge of God, but only knowledge “as if.” All
knowledge is rendered illusory. The reason for this is quite clear. In
the subjectivist interpretation the attributes are projections of the
finite mind, therefore the finite mind can never come to know the
infinite substance as it is in itself. This seems to contradict
Spinoza’s claim that the finite mind can have adequate, that is,
perfect knowledge of God’s essence (2P47). The second objection is
that this interpretation seems irreconcilable with those places in the
text where Spinoza identifies the attributes and God (cf. 1P4, 1P19
and 1P20Cor.). Again, as projections of the finite intellect, the
attributes do not properly pertain to the substance, and therefore
cannot be identical to it. For these reasons, among others, the
subjective interpretation (understood in these terms) has fallen out
of favor.[14]
Michael Della Rocca, however, has been advocating more recently that
attributes (and diversity more generally), are mind-dependent yet not
illusory. Thus he aims to overcome some of the traditional objections
to subjectivism (primarily “illusory knowledge” objections)
while insisting on the mind-dependent status of attributes. He takes
the mind-dependant nature of diversity (be it of attribute or modes)
to be an inevitable consequence of Spinoza’s adoption of the Principle
of Sufficient Reason (cf. Della Rocca, 2012).
In light of these kinds of criticisms to the subjectivist
interpretation, commentators have turned towards what are known as
“objectivist” accounts. Although the details of these
accounts are quite diverse, there are a few key elements they
share—all related to the fact that they do not wish to be
subjectivist. The first of these characteristics is that they hold that
knowledge in the system cannot be illusory. That is, knowledge through
attributes must yield true, or adequate, knowledge. One way to do this
is to claim that it is the infinite intellect that perceives the
attributes, and so knowledge through attributes is the kind of
knowledge the infinite intellect has, and therefore is not illusory
(e.g. Bennett, 1984, 147; Delahunty, 1985, 116; Della Rocca 1996, 157;
Haserot, 1972, 32–35). Therefore, the tanquam in the
definition is to be read “as in fact” and not “as
if.”
As opposed to subjectivism, which does not emphasize the
“reality” of the distinction between the attributes, or
rather, does not ground the distinction in the nature of the infinite
substance, objectivist interpretations place ontological weight on the
“real distinction” between the attributes. In other words,
for the multiplicity to have a certain reality and not be illusory, it
must somehow be grounded not in the perceiver but in the thing
perceived, namely, the infinite substance. The danger of this kind of
interpretation is that if the distinction is stressed too strongly, the
unity of the substance is lost. If the infinite substance has
“really distinct” attributes, and this distinction is
grounded in, say, distinct natures or essences of the infinite
substance, then there has to be an explanation of how a multiplicity of
natures or essences can be united to form one substance. (This issue is
addressed in further detail in
 Section 1.9.4
as it emerges in the discussion of the nature of the union of
mind and body).
Any interpretation of Spinoza must characterize the relation between
any given attribute and the substance. As mentioned, in the
subjectivist account there is a problematic gap between the substance
and any given attribute. The alternative is to deny this gap. For
example, Bennett claims the following:
Although Bennett claims there is an emptiness about the distinction
between the two, he does not consider it an absolute identity either.
He finds an identity claim to be irreconcilable with the claim that
attributes are really distinct. Della Rocca has suggested
intentionality as a way of denying the gap and treats “…
is extended” and “… is thinking” as
referentially opaque. In other words, what is being picked out by the
infinite intellect in either instance is the same, but the way in which
it is picked out is different. Yet another way of denying the gap is to
claim, along with Descartes, that the distinction between an attribute
and the substance is only a rational distinction. That is, in
reality there is no distinction, but in the finite mind we can
separate, contra natura, the attribute from the substance. Or
in other words, the finite mind can abstract the attribute from the
substance, but in reality they are not separated. This type of
view must be supplemented by an account, then, of what is meant by the
“real distinction” among the attributes.
Although Spinoza claims that there are infinite attributes, a
question arises as to how many there are, because
“infinity” may not necessarily refer to numeric
 infinity.[15]
 Bennett, among others, has made the case that infinity in early modern
philosophy means totality (Bennett, 1984, 75–79). Spinoza’s
claims, then, that the infinite substance has infinite attributes can
be understood as the claim that the infinite substance has all the
attributes there are to be
 had.[16]
 This is consistent with
there being, say, only the two known attributes. There are sections in
the text, on the other hand, that seem to suggest that infinity means a
numerical infinity, and thus the infinite substance has as attributes
Thought and Extension, as well as infinitely many other unknown
attributes. The places used as evidence for those wishing to claim
there are more than two attributes are the following:
1D6: By God I understand a being absolutely infinite, that is, a
substance consisting of an infinity of attributes, of which each one
expresses an eternal and infinite essence.
Exp.: I say absolutely infinite, not infinite in its own kind; for
if something is only infinite in its own kind, we can deny infinite
attributes of it; but if something is absolutely infinite, whatever
expresses essence and involves no negation pertains to its
essence.
2P7Schol: Therefore whether we conceive Nature under the attribute
of Extension, or the attribute of Thought, or any other attribute, we
shall find one and the same order, or one and the same connection of
causes, that is the same things follow one another.
Letter 56: To your [Hugo Boxel] question as to whether I have as
clear an idea of God as of a triangle, I reply in the affirmative. But
if you ask me whether I have as clear a mental image of God as of a
triangle, I reply in the negative. We cannot imagine God, but we can
apprehend him by the intellect. Here it should also be observed that I
do not claim to have complete knowledge of God, but that I do
understand some of his attributes—not indeed all of them, or the
greater part—and it is certain that my ignorance of very many
attributes does not prevent me from having knowledge of some of them.
When I was studying Euclid’s Elements, I understood
early on that the three angles of a triangle are equal to two right
angles, and I clearly perceived this property of a triangle although I
was ignorant of many others.
This issue can be linked to the previous discussion regarding the
ambiguities in the definition of attribute, although this is not always
done. If one holds that it is the infinite intellect that is doing the
relevant perceiving, there seems to be no reason to limit the number of
attributes it perceives. Conversely, it might be claimed that if the
infinite intellect perceives only two attributes, there must be a
sufficient reason why there are only two, and why they are Thought and
Extension and not other attributes. If, on the other hand, one holds
that it is the finite intellect that conceives the attributes, and it
only conceives Thought and Extension, then these are the only two
attributes there are. In the literature, however, this line of
reasoning is not always followed, and examples can be found of
interpreters who hold that it is the infinite intellect that does the
perceiving, but that there need not be more than two attributes
(Bennett, 1984, 75–76). At the same time, there are interpreters
who claim it is the finite intellect that perceives the attributes
while there are infinitely many attributes (Wolfson, 1934, 226). How
many attributes there are affects how one reads another central
doctrine in Spinoza’s metaphysics, such as 2P7 and 2P7Schol, to
which we turn next.
A crucial role in Spinoza’s system is played by 2P7 and its
scholium, since they lay the ground for solving, or rather dissolving,
the mind–body problem. Therefore, the understanding of the nature
of the union of mind and body depends on one’s interpretation of
Spinoza’s theory of attributes and 2P7 and its scholium in
particular. (For a discussion of the issues regarding the union of Mind
and Body, see
 Section 1.9.4).
The
interpretation of the metaphysical structure of what is expressed in
2P7 and its scholium is affected greatly by the number of attributes
one believes there are in Spinoza’s system and how one
understands the relation between the attributes and the substance. The
general description of 2P7 and its scholium is discussed above in
 Section 1.6.
2P7 and its scholium can be understood in very different ways. In
what follows three types of interpretive directions are described. This
is not meant to be exhaustive by any means, but it will provide a sense
of the kinds of options that have been offered by commentators. Let us
begin with the simplest option first. If one holds that there are only
two attributes, Thought and Extension, the metaphysical structure of
2P7 and its scholium is quite straightforward. Every mode under the
attribute of Thought is associated with a mode in Extension, and
vice versa and the relations between modes in one attribute
are mirrored in the other. Those that hold this kind of view must, of
course, provide a convincing argument to the effect that there are only
two attributes.
However, if one takes there to be more than two attributes, the
structure gets quite a bit more complex. One option that has been
advanced is that Thought is a special attribute and encompasses ideas
of all the modes in all the other attributes (Cf. for example Curley,
1969, 146; and more recently, Melamed, 2009, Chapters 1–2).
Thought turns out to be “special” in this kind of
interpretation because there are many more modes (ideas) or facets of modes in Thought
than there are under any other attribute. Another way of expressing
this is by saying that 2P7 is not a biconditional. The requirement of
an associated mode goes only in one direction from any mode in any
attribute to a mode in Thought. The burden on this type of view is that
it must account for the favoring of Thought over the other attributes,
and perhaps also for the relation between all the non-Thought modes in
the other attributes.
Another option (or class of options) that is available is to claim
that attributes come in pairs: an object-like attribute coupled with a
thought-like attribute (Curley entertains this option as well; Curley,
1969, 146). Under this type of interpretation we would get Thought and
Extension following the structure of the first alternative, that is,
each idea in Thought is associated with (one and the same) a mode in
Extension. Taking there to be more than just two attributes, we also
get Thoughtx coupled with Extensionx in which
each ideax is one and the same as bodyx under
Extensionx, and Thoughty coupled with
Extensiony, and so on. Letter 66 provides some support for
this view. This kind of account has to be supplemented, of course, with
an account of the relations among these Thought-like / Extension-like
pairs of attributes.
As mentioned earlier, Spinoza identifies God, or the infinite
substance with the attributes (1P4, 1P19 and 1P20Cor.). The nature of
this identification is also affected by one’s interpretative
stance regarding the attributes. The traditional subjectivist view,
since it claims that the attributes are a projection of the finite mind
onto the substance, cannot hold this identification to be strict.
Objectivist views, which stress the distinctness of attributes, also
cannot accept these claims literally (E.g., Bennett, 1984, 64; Curley,
1988, 13; Gueroult, 1968, 50). The reason for this is as follows: if
the substance is strictly identical to any one of its attributes, then
attributes will be identical to each other (by transitivity), and
therefore no longer distinct, as Spinoza claims. Different objectivist
interpretations address this issue differently. Curley, for example,
holds that the identity is not one that holds between any given
attribute and the substance, but rather between the totality of the
attributes and the substance (Curley, 1988, 30). Bennett, on the other
hand, believes Spinoza is simply overstating the case (Bennett, 1984,
64).
This identity can be understood strictly if the distinction between
the attributes and the substance is taken to be only rationally
distinct, that is identical in reality, and at the same time
taking the distinction between attributes to be only epistemological
and not ontological.
Another doctrine that is heavily affected by how one understands the
attributes is the union of mind and body. For Descartes, the issue was
how to unite two really distinct created substances—uniting minds
with bodies. Descartes’ reply is that God unites these two
substances, and we have tools by which to recognize that we are united
in this way, i.e., sensory experience (Meditation Six).
Spinoza, of course, cannot allude to God as creator to unite minds and
bodies, since what is being united are not created substances
but finite modes. The possible problem can be
articulated as follows: How can Spinoza claim, on the one hand, that
there are modes of really distinct attributes, e.g., my mind and my
body, and therefore there is a real distinction between my mind and my
body, and, on the other, claim in the Scholium to 2P7 that my mind and
body are one and the same?
This problem which arises for the objectivist interpretations has been
addressed in a variety of ways. It is worth noting that this problem
does not arise for subjectivist views. This possible tension in
Spinoza does not present itself for the subjectivists, since they do
not claim that the “real distinction” between the
attributes has ontological weight. That is, there are no two things
that have to be united. Commentators wishing to stress the
“distinctness” of the attributes find themselves having to
explain the sense in which Spinoza can mean that the mind and the body
are “one and the same.” A common strategy among
commentators has been to appeal to a structure that is
attribute-neutral in order to account for the unity. To better
understand this issue it is useful to consider a few examples.
One important example is Bennett, who claims that the unity is to be
understood as a unity of properties, but not of the modes
themselves:
That is, Bennett thinks that there is some trans-attribute feature
(what he calls “differentia F”) such that it can
be added to Extension to get extended-F, and added it to
Thought to get thinking-F. Bennett admits that nothing like
this is found anywhere in the text, but he believes that this way we
can make sense of Spinoza’s holding that the attributes are
“really distinct” from each other and, at the same time,
that thinking-F and extended-F are one and the
same.
Della Rocca, while holding a view different from that of Bennett
regarding Spinoza’s theory of attributes, also finds himself
having to account in some way for the unity of mind and body, and so he
suggests that modes are said to be numerically identical when they
share all of their neutral properties, where “neutral
properties” are those properties which do not involve being
thought under any particular attributes. This is contrasted with
“intentional properties” which are attribute-dependent such
as “being of a certain volume.” As an example of a neutral
property, Della Rocca offers “having five immediate
effects.” He then claims that if modes share all of their neutral
properties, they are identical (that is, one and the same). Therefore,
since my mind and my body share all of their neutral properties, they
are identical (Della Rocca, 1996, 133–38).
The final example that shall be considered is Gueroult’s
interpretation. Gueroult, in order to account for the professed
identity between modes of different attributes in 2P7 and its scholium,
considers 1P28 which states:
To explain this proposition, Gueroult draws a distinction between
“modes of substance” and “modes of attributes.”
The claim is that 1P28 treats only modes of substance and not
attributes, and is therefore unique. In other words, the identity is
then understood in reference to “modes of substance” and
not “modes of attributes” (Gueroult, 1968, 338–39).
Again, we see an attribute-independent structure—the chain of
modes of substance—that is meant to account for the “one
and the sameness” of modes of different attributes.
It has been pointed out, however, that this type of solution is not
without serious problems (Shein, 2009). Briefly, the issue is as
follows: The main reason for rejecting the subjectivist view is that in
that type of interpretation, God, as he is in himself, remains
unknowable, and this conflicts with Spinoza’s view that adequate
knowledge is possible. However, as Spinoza makes clear in 1P10Schol,
nature must be conceived under attributes. In light of this, an
attribute-independent structure, by its very nature as
“attribute-independent,” is unknowable as well. Therefore,
in this view, knowledge of the union or the nature of the identity
between mind and body, is in principle unknowable, and, in that
respect, does not provide any advantage over subjectivist views.
An alternative mentioned above that has been suggested is to deny
the gap between the attributes and the substance by claiming that,
along with Descartes, Spinoza holds there to be a rational distinction
between them, that is, in reality they are identical (Shein,
2009). This avoids the kind of problems that are raised for the
subjectivist view, since, in this interpretation to know the attributes
is to know the substance. Since in this view the attributes are only
rationally distinct from the substance, the “real
distinction” between the attributes, that Spinoza states in
1P10Schol, is understood as being only an epistemological claim, as he
states in the text—“i.e., one may be conceived without the
other” (1P10Schol). That is, it does not carry additional
ontological weight as the objectivists hold. This avoids having to
impose onto the Spinozistic system an attribute-independent structure
to account for the unity which does not seem to fit with his
epistemology.
In the Short Treatise Spinoza develops ideas that will come
to a full articulation later on in the Ethics, such as the
idea that, strictly speaking, there are only two attributes through
which we can properly come to have knowledge of God—Thought and
Extension. However, unlike in the Ethics, he does not simply
dismiss the more traditional attributes such as omnipotence,
eternality, immutability, and infinity. To maintain some sense of these
traditional divine attributes, Spinoza explains that they are not
attributes strictly speaking, but rather propria of God. This
is stated first clearly in the first footnote to Chapter III
(“How God is the Cause of All Things”):
Spinoza then, is distinguishing between that which gives us
knowledge of God, or better yet, through which God can be
known—Thought and Extension—and things that can be said of
God, that is, adjectival, but give us no knowledge—what he terms
propria. This is explained most explicitly in Chapter VII of
the Short Treatise. The difference Spinoza wishes to draw
between these is that although these traditional divine attributes can
be said of God, they do not teach us anything about what God is really
like. An analysis of these traditional attributes (propria)
shows them either to be said of God when considering all of the
attributes or to be only modes of attributes. For example, Spinoza
claims that when statements such as that “God is one,”
“eternal” and “immutable” are said of God, they
are said “in consideration of all his attributes.” On the
other hand, something like “omniscience” is only a mode of
an attribute, since it is only said of God when he is conceived
through, or considered under, the attribute of Thought. That is, only
when God is thought of as a thinking thing, can he be said to be
omniscient. Similarly, when God is said to be
“omnipresent,” it is only when he is conceived of through
Extension. In the Ethics though, Spinoza does away with the
talk of propria and does not accord them really any status as
such.
With the collapse of the divide between created substances and the
infinite substance, attributes play a new role for Spinoza; traditional
divine attributes are eliminated while attributes traditionally
associated with created substances (Extension in particular) are
attributed to the infinite substance. Furthermore, with the elimination
of this divide and the establishment of the infinite substance as the
only substance, Spinoza hopes that attributes account for variety in
the substance without jeopardizing its unity. All interpreters and
readers of Spinoza are forced to wrestle with making sense of this
double role since it sits at the very core of his metaphysics. It is
vital to realize that this endeavor is necessarily and beautifully
linked to other fundamental aspects of Spinoza’s metaphysics such
as the “real distinction” between the attributes, the
proclaimed identity of the substance and its attributes, the nature of
the conceiving intellect in the definition of ‘attribute’,
the nature of this intellect’s conceptions (illusory or not), the
number of attributes, the structure of 2P7 and its scholium, and
finally the nature of the union of mind and body. These
inter-connections are a reflection of the fully systematic nature of
Spinoza’s metaphysics.