Spinoza’s list of the basic types of existing things is
 exceedingly short: substances and modes
 (Ip4d).[2]
Spinoza gives two extremely different, but equally striking accounts of
how many tokens exist under each of these two basic types. There is
only one existing substance, God, and there are infinitely many modes.
Without yet unpacking these claims, we might ask Spinoza, “But
could there have been more substances or fewer modes
than there in fact are?” Or, keeping the number of tokens fixed,
“Could there have been a different substance or
different modes than the ones that in fact exist?”
Surprisingly, Spinoza seems inclined to answer no to these questions.
If so, then Spinoza thinks the actual world is the only possible world.
This is the position of necessitarianism, a belief that few in
the history of Western philosophy have explicitly embraced. And for
good reason — on the face of it, necessaritianism is highly
counterintuitive. Surely the world could have gone slightly differently
than it has gone. Couldn’t the Allies have lost WWII? Couldn’t a leaf
have landed an eighth of a centimeter farther to the right than it in
fact landed? Similarly, surely the world could have contained different
individuals in different numbers than it in fact contains. Couldn’t
Leibniz have had a sister or not been born at all?
Spinoza was aware of how deeply against the grain of common sense
the truth of necessitarianism would run. If he nonetheless believed in
its truth, he must have thought he had very compelling reasons for
doing so. What might such reasons be? We will begin with substance
necessitarianism (2.1) and then turn to the necessity of modes (2.2).
Although the case for interpreting Spinoza as a mode necessitarian is
strong, there are also Spinoza-friendly reasons for resisting such a
reading. Seeing this tension will lead us into the middle of an
interpretive controversy that has ramifications for understanding many
of Spinoza’s other central metaphysical views. (In section 2, we will
undercover one possible way of reconciling Spinoza’s drive towards
necessitarianism with what might have been equally important reasons
for avoiding it.)
In the case of substances, Spinoza claims that every existing
substance necessarily exists (Ip7d). No existing substance could have
failed to exist. He also claims that only one substance, namely God,
actually exists and that only this one substance could have
existed (Ip14). Putting these claims together, Spinoza believes that
every possible substance necessarily exists. Since God is the only
possible substance, it is impossible for any other substance besides
God to exist.
Spinoza’s argument for these conclusions can be divided into two
major stages:
Let us consider Spinoza’s reasoning for each of these steps in turn,
as doing so will help us understand some of Spinoza’s most important
and basic metaphysical commitments.
In arguing for (1), Spinoza relies on two implicit and related
premises. One is the
 principle of sufficient reason
(PSR) and the other involves his account of
causation. Put roughly, the PSR states that every fact has a reason for
obtaining; in slogan form, there are no brute facts. Most
relevantly for our purposes, if something existed for no reason at all,
the fact that it exists would be inexplicable, a violation for the PSR.
And for parallel reasons, if something did not exist and there was no
reason for its non-existence, the fact of its non-existence would also
be a violation of the PSR. As Spinoza puts it, “For each thing
there must be assigned a cause or reason, both for its existence [if it
exists] and for its non-existence [if it does not exist]. For example,
if a triangle exists, there must be a reason or cause why it exists;
but if it does not exist, there must also be a reason or cause which
prevents it from existing, or which takes its existence away”
(Ip11d). Thus, according to the PSR, there must be reasons why each
existing substance exists and also reasons why non-existing substances
do not exist.
The second implicit premise of Spinoza’s argument for the claim that
all possible substances necessarily exist is that causes
provide (or just are) necessary and sufficient explanatory reasons. This
idea appears in the previously quoted passage in which Spinoza claims
that citing a “cause or reason” suffices for explaining
facts about the existence and non-existence of a triangular object.
Applied to the case of substance, the sufficient reason for why a
substance exists is supplied by the causes of that substance.
Why does Spinoza think that an account of an object’s causes
explains that object’s existence? His most revealing answer traces back
to the PSR as well. Because facts about the nature of causation are
themselves facts, by the PSR, facts about causation require
explanation. In a case in which x causes y, the PSR
demands an explanation of what it is in virtue of which the causal
relation between x and y obtains. Although one may
try to answer this question by appealing to other causes (say,
z’s causing x to cause y), the PSR
also demands an account of what it is in virtue of which x and
y are causally related, as opposed to being merely
sequentially ordered (or an account of why mere sequential ordering is
sufficient for causal relatedness). That is, the PSR applies not only
to facts about existence, but also to facts about relations between
existents. (This point will be extremely important for correctly
understanding Spinoza’s modal theory in section 2 below.) The PSR asks
not only for an explanation of the fact that x causes
y in terms of prior first-order causes, but also for an
explanation of why there is a causal relation of dependence
between x and y and why it is not some other kind of
relation. As it would not get us very far to answer by appealing to yet
further first-order causal relations, the PSR is really asking us to
give an account of causation itself. Causation, if the PSR is true,
cannot be a primitive metaphysical relation. So, to echo a question
that lingers today, just what is causation? (For more on the
contemporary discussion, see the entry on the
 metaphysics of causation.
For more on the PSR and causation, see Della Rocca (2010)).
Unsurprisingly, Spinoza does not treat causation as a metaphysical
primitive. Instead, he provides an account of causation in terms of
something else. In Id1, Spinoza defines self-causation (causa
sui) as “that whose essence involves existence or
[sive] that whose nature cannot be conceived except as
existing.” (Spinoza’s sive should not be read in a
disjunctive sense, nor is it usually stating a mere equivalence. What
follows the “or” is often a fuller account of what precedes
it. Think of it as an “or better yet…”) Expanding
his definition to cover causation in general, Spinoza’s idea is that
causation is a matter of “involvement” or conceptual
connection. If x causes y, this fact obtains in
virtue of a conceptual connection between the concept of x and
the concept of
 y.[3]
Spinoza frequently suggests that the conceiving through
relation is the paradigm of explanation (e.g., Iax5, IIp5, IIp7s). If
so, then we can understand why Spinoza thinks causes serve as
sufficient explanatory reasons for facts about existence. If causal
relations are conceptual relations, and if conceptual relations are
paradigms of explanation, then to give an account of an object’s
existence in terms of its causes is to explain the fact that it exists
in just the way the PSR demands.
Let us apply this point to the case of substances. Spinoza reasons
that existing substances exist in virtue of having causes that bring
about and explain their existence, and non-existing substances do not
exist in virtue of causes that prevent their existence and explain
their non-existence (Ip14). According to Spinoza’s account of
causation, this means that existing substances exist in virtue of
conceptual relations to whatever explains their existence, and,
similarly, conceptual relations explain the non-existence of
non-existing substances. What causes or explains the existence or
non-existence of a substance?
Spinoza argues that substances are conceptually, and hence causally,
isolated from one another (Ip2–Ip5). He infers from this that
substances cannot be caused to exist or be prevented from existing by
any other substance (Ip6). But since all existing substances must
nonetheless have causes and reasons for their existence, the fact that
a substance exists must be explained entirely by the substance itself.
That is, all existing substances must be self-caused and hence
self-explained (Ip7). For parallel reasons, the non-existence of a
non-existing substance must be explained solely through facts about the
non-existing substance. Spinoza infers that the concepts of
non-existing substances must include the explanation for their own
non-existence. What about the concept of a non-existing substance could
explain that substance’s non-existence? Spinoza’s answer: a
self-contradiction. Non-existing substances do not exist for the same
reason that squared circles do not exist in Euclidean space: they are
conceptually impossible (Ip11d). From the fact of non-existence plus
the PSR, Spinoza concludes that non-existing substances do not exist
because it is impossible for them to exist. They cannot cause
themselves to exist because their very concepts contain a
contradiction, and facts about causation track facts about conceptual
involvement and explanation.
So, returning to our opening questions, could there have been more
substances than there in fact are? Spinoza’s answer is no, which means
that there are no merely possible substances. A substance
either exists or its existence is impossible. Could an existing
substance have failed to exist? Again, Spinoza’s answer is no, since
the only available explanatory basis for its possible non-existence
would be facts about the substance itself. But if an existing substance
is completely causally isolated, what could bring about its
non-existence? Only itself, Spinoza answers, which would again amount
to the concept of that substance containing an internal contradiction
that would prevent such a substance from existing in the first place
(Ip7). Could an existing substance exist for a certain length of time
and then go out of existence? Spinoza’s answer is again no, since that
would mean that an existing substance causes its own self-destruction,
a violation of Spinoza’s doctrine that “No thing can be destroyed
except through an external cause” (IIIp4). In reaching all of
these conclusions, Spinoza relies on the self-explaining or
self-causing nature of substances and the explanatory demands of the
PSR. Spinoza concludes that for any existing substance, it could not
have failed to exist nor can it cease to exist. Hence, if a substance
exists, it necessarily exists (Ip7d). On the other hand, if a substance
does not exist, its existence is impossible. Combining these
conclusions, we reach (1): every possible substance necessarily
exists.
Here is a sketch of the main steps of this argument:
The second major stage of Spinoza’s argument is to prove that God is
the only possible substance. I will not here rehearse all the details
of Spinoza’s argument to this conclusion (for two recent discussions,
see Lin 2007 and Della Rocca 2001). Like his argument for (1),
Spinoza’s argument for (2) relies on the PSR. Here is one possible
sketch of Spinoza’s overall argument for (2):
Of these steps, premise (16) is the one for which Spinoza offers the
least explicit justification:
The absurdity Spinoza points to is actually the putative
absurdity of the non-existence of a being according to whose
concept it is infinite and supremely perfect. But why accept that the concept of Spinoza’s God is internally
consistent? If Spinoza fails to justify this assumption, his
ontological argument would fall victim to Leibniz’s complaint that even
if otherwise successful, (pre-Leibnizian) ontological arguments prove only a hypothetical truth: if God is a
possible substance, then God necessarily exists. Spinoza’s argument,
absent a justification of (16), fails to establish the possibility of
God before asserting the necessity of God’s existence.
Even worse, Spinoza faces an especially thorny problem in justifying
(16). For his account of the concept of God in (15) relies on
commitments that even those friendly to theism, such as Descartes,
would surely reject. Spinoza defines God in Id6 as “a substance
consisting of an infinity of attributes, of which each one expresses an
eternal and infinite essence.” Spinoza claims in Ip9, without any
explicit argument, “The more reality or being each thing
[unaquaeque res] has, the more attributes belong to it.”
This definition of God and the supporting principle in Ip9 were
controversial even in Spinoza’s own day. According to Descartes, a
substance cannot have more than one (principal)
attribute.[5]
To say that the concept of God is the concept of a substance with
multiple (principal) attributes is, in fact, to appeal to an internally
inconsistent concept. So, the objection runs, not only has Spinoza
failed to justify (16), but (15) is outright false.
Spinoza’s defense of (15) would likely be to appeal to the
self-containment of each attribute (Della Rocca 2001). Like substance,
each attribute is a wholly self-contained and self-sufficient way of
conceiving substance (Ip10). Given such rigid containment, Spinoza
would press, how could the fact that a substance has one attribute
preclude that substance from having additional attributes? If there are
no explanatory or conceptual relations between the attribute of thought
and the attribute of extension, the fact that a substance is thinking
cannot explain why that substance could not also be extended. The lack
of a reason for excluding an attribute is part of Spinoza’s
reason for including all possible attributes as attributes of
God. However, even if he can defend the rigid self-containment of
attributes, he will also need a positive reason for including them all
together as attributes of a single substance.
This brings us back to Ip9 and the other objectionable aspect of
(16). Why should perfection or reality and strength of reason to exist
correspond to possessing a greater number of attributes? Spinoza does
not offer any explicit defense of this correlation. The demonstration
of Ip9 simply refers readers back to the definition of an attribute
(see also Ep9). Here is one possible way Spinoza might motivate the
correlation between number of attributes and perfection / reality for
existing. The principle in Ip9 may be that to the extent to which a
single thing [unaquaeque res] can be expressed by a
greater number of attributes, to that extent it is more perfect, and
hence is more real (IId6) and has greater reason for existing (Ip11s).
Spinoza’s emphatic “unaquaeque” may point to the idea that
perfection involves both unity and diversity. To the degree to
which one and the same thing can sustain a greater variety of
expressions of it, to that extent it is more perfect. The maximal
perfection and reality of God, on this account, is partly constituted
by the fact that God’s self-identity is compatible with a plentitude of
incommensurable expressions – infinitely many attributes –
of it. This view of metaphysical perfection, one which tries to
maximize both identity and diversity, is very similar to Leibniz’s
account of perfection as harmony, a principle that Leibniz
explains as “diversity compensated by
identity.”[6]
On this reading, God’s metaphysical perfection for Spinoza is the
perfection of Leibniz’s most harmonious world, the perfection of
maintaining both the one and the many (Newlands 2010a).
Whether or not Spinoza fully succeeds defending the consistency of
his concept of God, the striking modal conclusion he draws from it is
clear: “Except God, no substance can be or be conceived”
(Ip14). This statement captures Spinoza’s substance monism and his
substance necessitarianism: there is only one possible substance, God,
and that substance necessarily exists.
Immediately after wrapping up his proof for substance monism in
Ip14, Spinoza claims in the next proposition that “Whatever is,
is in God, and nothing can be or be conceived without God”
(Ip15). By the definition of a mode in Id5, Ip15 implies that
everything that exists other than God is a mode or affection of God. To
understand the import of this claim, it is important to understand what
a mode is and what is it for a mode to be in a substance, for
Spinoza.
A natural way to think about modes is as a certain kind of property.
The circular shape of the coin on the desk is a mode of that
coin. On this reading, being circular is a state of the coin, a
particularized way that the coin is. Spinoza’s claim that modes
are “in” their substances also suggests that modes
inhere in substances akin to the way that properties inhere in
things, and that modes are therefore predicable of substances as
subjects of predication. Circularity, we might say, inheres in the coin
and the coin is circular. Of course, there is an extremely
wide range of views about properties and property-bearers (see the
entry on
 properties),
so claiming that modes are akin to properties that
inhere in substances will not answer all questions. But even putting
aside questions about inherence, property instantiation, and
predication relations, it may seem like Spinoza has made a colossal
blunder in Ip15. After all, how can a table or human being be anything
like a property? How can I inhere in something else? What
sense would it make to say of something — a substance —
that it is Sam Newlandsish in the same sense in which I say of
it that it is round? If there is such a thing as a “category
mistake,” this may seem like an especially clear case of
 one.[7]
It would be disappointing if this objection simply assumed from the
outset that (a) objects like tables and human beings are substances and
(b) substances neither inhere in nor are predicable of other
substances. Spinoza agrees with (b), but he has already argued
pace (a) that there can be only one substance. It would be
unfair to grant him that conclusion in Ip14 and then insist upon
reading Ip15 that other things still ought to have all the features of
substances. (Of course, these intuitive concerns may well provide
reasons to reconsider Spinoza’s arguments for Ip14.)
Interpreters have tried to make sense of Spinoza’s identification of
everyday objects with modes without presupposing the denial of his
substance monism. One strategy would be to deny that Spinoza intends
anything like property, inherence and predication by his identification
of everyday objects with modes of God. On this interpretation,
Spinoza’s claims about modes and “in” in Ip15 are really
just claims about the causal dependence of all things on God
(Curley 1969). Everyday objects inhere in God in the sense that they
depend causally on God. When Spinoza claims, “Whatever is, is in
God,” he really means only that everything is causally dependent
on God, a fantastically unremarkable claim in the 17th
century. Indeed, as others have objected (Bennett 1991, Carriero 1995,
Melamed 2009), this proposal makes Spinoza’s claim in Ip15 so
unremarkable that it is hard to see why Spinoza went to such
obfuscating lengths to phrase his ontology in terms of modes and
inherence in the first place, since he had the categories of efficient
causation and dependent beings at his disposal. Why did Spinoza bother
to talk about inherence and immanent causation at all?
A different strategy (Carriero 1995) preserves the inherence link
between modes and properties, but understands Spinoza’s modes as
particularized accidents or, in contemporary terms, tropes
(see the entry on 
 tropes).
According to this reading, collections of particularized
properties constitute everyday objects for Spinoza. However, although
such bundles of tropes inhere in substance, they are not predicable of
substance. Hence, although I inhere in substance, it is not the case
that substance is Sam Newlandsish, whatever that may mean.
Whereas the first interpretation explained inherence as nothing but
efficient causation, this reading tries to keep causation and inherence
intensionally (though perhaps not extensionally) distinct metaphysical
dependence relations.
Another, more circuitous option begins with a functional account of
modes in Spinoza’s ontology. The function of modes, according to
passages like Ip25c, is to provide ways of expressing or conceiving the
power of substance. Perhaps Spinoza actually provides an
analysis of inherence in terms of this expressive or
conceptual relation, similar to the way in which he provides an
analysis of causation in terms of conceptual connection. Consider, for
instance, Id3, in which Spinoza defines substance as that which is
“[a] in itself and [b] is conceived through itself, that is, [c]
that whose concept does not require the concept of another thing from which
it must be formed” (the brackets are mine). Instead of leaving
inherence as an unprincipled primitive relation of metaphysical
dependence (pace the PSR), one could read [c] as providing an
analysis of both [a] and [b]. One thing inheres in another in
virtue of being conceived through it, which, like causation, is a
matter of conceptual involvement. That everyday objects are modes
inhering in and predicated of substance is extensionally and
intensionally equivalent to everyday objects being conceived through
substance. Whereas Curley’s interpretation took
causation to be Spinoza’s underlying account of
inherence, this interpretation takes conceptual involvement to
be Spinoza’s underlying account of both inherence and causation
(for a recent defense, see Newlands 2010a; for dissents, see DiPoppa 2013, Melamed
2012 and Laerke 2011).
Although I will not try to settle this debate here, different
interpretations of Spinoza’s ontology of modes will yield
alternative accounts of his views on the necessity of modes. For
purposes of ease and neutrality, I will frequently refer to modes as
“objects,” which I intend to be a neutral placeholder for
“whatever else exists besides substance.”
Earlier, I noted that Spinoza thinks infinitely many non-substantial
objects exist: “From the necessity of the divine nature there
must follow infinitely many things in infinitely many ways, i.e.,
everything which can fall under an infinite intellect” (Ip16).
Although Spinoza means more by “infinite” than simply
“exhaustive,” he clearly intends “exhaustive”
as well. How many objects are there? “As many as there can be
together” is Spinoza’s reply. That is, Spinoza endorses a
principle of ontological plenitude (POP), according to which the
greatest number of compossible non-substantial objects actually exists.
Part of Spinoza’s motivation for POP may derive from the PSR itself,
since if the actual world were sub-maximal, non-existing but
intrinsically possible objects would have no reason for not existing,
which would be a brute fact. Perhaps it would also be an undesirable
brute fact if (per impossibile) a maximal world with fewer
objects than the actual world existed; what would explain God’s
realization of a smaller maximal collection when a larger maximal
collection is possible (see Ip33s2)? In any case, Spinoza’s POP
implies that the number of existing objects is necessarily fixed.
Although this is already quite a strong conclusion, it does not yet
rise to the level of full-blown necessitarianism with respect to modes.
There are still at least three possible sources of contingency for the maximally
full world of modes, each of which would be compatible with POP. Alternative possibility 1 (AP1): There could have
been a different collection of modes, equal in size to the actually
existing collection, but with entirely different members.
Alternative possibility 2 (AP2): For some proper subset of
the collection of actually existing modes, there could have been 
a different, equinumerous proper subset of modes instead. Alternative possibility 3 (AP3):
One or more of the actual modes could have had different
characteristics than it in fact has.
To illustrate, let the collection of shirts hanging in my closet stand for the collection of modes. Suppose that my closet could not
contain more or fewer shirts than it currently contains— my
closet is as full as it can get and I’m the sort of person who could
never have fewer shirts than the most that can all fit in there
together. Still, couldn’t I have had an entirely different but
equinumerous collection of shirts (AP1)? Or, keeping some of the shirts fixed, couldn’t I have had a modest blue shirt instead of the
orange plaid shirt sitting there in the middle (AP2)? Or, keeping all the shirts in the closet fixed, couldn’t the orange plaid shirt have had
a single pocket instead of having the two pockets that it actually has
(AP3)?
If any of these alternatives are genuine possibilities for Spinoza,
then he will not be committed to full-blown necessitarianism with
respect to modes. Necessitarianism requires not only the necessity of
the number of existents; it demands the necessity of each
member and the necessity of all of its characteristics. Hence, even
given POP and Ip16, it remains an open question whether Spinoza wants
to deny that there are any alternative possibilities for modes. Am I
really stuck with the exact shirts I’ve got, double-pocketed orange
plaid and all?
To understand why Spinoza might be attracted to mode
necessitarianism, we need to consider a few additional details of his
ontology of modes. I have been lumping modes together into a single
ontological category: everything that is not a substance. But Spinoza
sometimes distinguishes between two types of modes, infinite modes and
finite modes. Unfortunately, Spinoza gives only a very sparse account
of infinite modes in the Ethics, and he makes very few
explicit textual references to them outside the
 Ethics.[8]
 When Georg Schuller wrote to Spinoza to ask him for examples of
these curious entities, Spinoza replied with obscure gems like
“the face of the whole universe” and “absolutely infinite intellect” (Ep64). If
the best elucidation of an elaborate philosophical doctrine makes
reference to “the face of the whole universe,” that may be a
good sign that the doctrine needs further development. Unfortunately
for Spinoza’s readers, infinite modes appear to do some
significant work in his metaphysics, so they cannot simply be ignored
if one wants to understand Spinoza’s modal commitments.
The most salient feature of infinite modes is that they are more
directly related to substance than finite modes are. Spinoza claims
that infinite modes follow more or less directly from “the
absolute nature of any of God’s attributes,” whereas finite modes
do not follow from the absolute nature of God’s attributes
(see Ip21–22 and Ip28d). According to some interpreters, understanding
this distinction is the key to understanding whether or not Spinoza was
a full-blown necessitarian.
At first glance, Spinoza’s picture seems clear enough. (I will
continue to ignore the complicating role of attributes.) Some modes
follow directly from the absolute nature of substance. Interpreters
frequently call these immediate infinite modes (Ip21). Other
modes follow directly from those immediate infinite modes. These are
commonly called mediate infinite modes (Ip22). There is then a
gap of some kind, and on the other side of the gap is the maximally
full collection of finite modes. Unlike the infinite modes, particular
finite modes do not follow, either directly or indirectly, from the
absolute nature of substance.
The distinction between infinite and finite modes is relevant for
Spinoza’s views on modality because of what he says about the
modal status of infinite modes. Spinoza reasons that if an object
necessarily follows from something that necessarily exists, then that
object also necessarily exists (Ip21). This sounds similar to a
familiar and widely accepted modal axiom: (□p & □(p
→ q)) → □q. According to this reasoning, if
God necessarily exists, and if the existence of a mode follows
necessarily from the existence and nature of God, then that mode
necessarily exists too. Of course, we need not and should not interpret
Spinoza’s following-from relation as the strict logical entailment of
contemporary modal logic. The main point is that necessity transfers
down the following-from chain, according to Spinoza. If x
necessarily exists and if y necessarily follows from
x, then y necessarily exists too. For ease, I will
call this the modal transfer principle. (Later, we will try to
gain a better understanding of exactly why Spinoza thinks the modal
transfer principle works.)
Notice that both conjuncts of the modal transfer principle
must be satisfied for it to apply. That is, for the modal
transfer principle to apply to some y, it must be the case that both (i)
y follows necessarily from x and (ii) x
exists necessarily. Hence, if God exists necessarily and if the existence of Bruce Springsteen follows necessarily from God’s existence, then Springsteen exists necessarily too. Whatever differences there may be between a thing that exists necessarily in virtue of its own nature and a thing that exists necessarily in virtue of following from something else that exists necessarily, that distinction is wholly internal to necessity. Differences between external and
internal sources of necessity, a difference to which Spinoza sometimes
draws attention (Ip33s), does not entail differences in type
of necessity or even strength of necessity, and Spinoza
nowhere says that it does. 
Spinoza’s modal transfer principle appeals to the relation of
following-from. To a contemporary reader, this might sound like a
relation of logical entailment, but Spinoza clearly understands it to
be some kind of causal relation (e.g., Ip16c, Ip28d). This means that
Spinoza’s following-from relation shares the features of his
causal relations, including the fact that causal relations involve
necessary connections between relata (Iax3). That is, if y
follows from x, then y necessarily
follows from x. Furthermore, Spinoza claims that
every mode follows from something else (Ip16 and Ip36). Therefore, every mode necessarily follows from something else, in which case condition (i) of the modal transfer principle is satisfied for every mode. This does not yet entail necessitarianism, however, for we still need to determine whether condition (ii) is universally satisfied as well. Each mode necessarily follows from something else, but does what it follows from exist necessarily? 
In the case of existing infinite modes, Spinoza’s
answer is clearly yes. In Ip22, Spinoza claims that so-called “immediate” infinite
modes follow from something that exists necessarily, namely substance. Therefore, by the modal transfer
principle, every existing immediate infinite mode exists necessarily. Furthermore, Spinoza claims that every so-called “mediate” infinite mode follows from something that exists necessarily (namely, an immediate infinite mode), so every mediate infinite mode exists necessarily as well (Ip23). In short, because there is a chain of necessary
dependence stretching from substance to every existing infinite mode, every existing infinite mode exists necessarily.
Once again, even this strong modal conclusion is not equivalent to
full-blown necessitarianism regarding infinite modes. Even if every
existing infinite mode necessarily exists, could there have
been other infinite modes as well? I am not aware of any texts in which
Spinoza explicitly rules this out, but it is easy to imagine what he
would say. Non-actual infinite modes do not exist necessarily, or
else they would actually exist, on the plausible assumption that necessity entails actuality (□p → p). So,
for reductio, consider a non-actual possible world, w*, that contains
Sophia, one of these extra, non-actual infinite modes. What is the manner
of Sophia’s dependence on substance? Spinoza’s discussion of
infinite modes suggests that Sophia must, by definition, follow from
God’s absolute nature (either immediately or mediately). If so, then
Sophia follows from the absolute nature of God in w*, on the assumption
that true definitions express necessary truths. But in that case, the
modal transfer principle will apply to Sophia in w*, in which
case Sophia’s existence is necessary. However, again assuming that necessity entails actuality, Sophia would not be a non-actual infinite mode after all, pace our initial assumption. QED.
Of course, that reasoning relies on possible world semantics and
some loaded (though plausible) theses about relations between
possible worlds. Perhaps Spinoza could reach a similar conclusion
without recourse to all that. Spinoza could instead appeal back to his
plentitude principle and its basis in the PSR. If there could have been
more infinite modes than there in fact are, these non-actual, merely possible modes must
be compossible with the collection of necessarily existing infinite
modes. (Another plausible assumption, expressed loosely: if something is not compossible
with what necessarily exists, then its existence is not possible.) But
if there were non-actual infinite modes that were compossible with the collection
of necessarily existing infinite modes, what
could explain their non-existence? Unless an answer can be given,
Spinoza will infer falsity from a violation of the PSR. We again reach
the conclusion of necessitarianism with respect to every infinite mode.
Like substance, every possible infinite mode necessarily exists.[9]
Infinite modes exist necessarily because they follow necessarily from something that exists necessarily, namely God. What about finite things like furniture and people? This much seems clear: if a finite
mode follows from an infinite mode or from substance itself, then by the modal transfer principle, it exists necessarily too. But does any finite mode follow from an infinite
mode or from substance? This is where the
aforementioned “gap” between infinite and finite modes
becomes modally significant. Consider what Spinoza says in the lengthy and
important demonstration of Ip28:
Whatever has been determined to exist and produce an effect has been
so determined by God (by Ip26 and Ip24c). But what is finite and has a
determinate existence could not have been produced by the absolute
nature of an attribute of God; for whatever follows from the absolute
nature of an attribute of God is eternal and infinite (Ip21). It had,
therefore, to follow either from God or from an attribute of God
insofar as it is considered to be affected by some mode….But it
also could not follow from God, or from an attribute of God, insofar as
it is affected by a mode which is eternal and infinite (by Ip22). It
had, therefore, to follow from or be determined to exist and produce an
effect by God insofar as it is modified by a mode which is finite and
has a determinate existence…and in turn, this cause or
mode…had also to be determined by another which is also finite
and has a determinate existence; and again…and so always (by the
same reasoning) to infinity.
On a cursory reading of this passage, Spinoza seems to say that no
finite mode follows from either an infinite mode or from “the
absolute nature of an attribute of God,” lest that mode be
“eternal and infinite,” pace the nature of finite
modes. If so, then perhaps Spinoza’s point in this passage is
that particular finite modes, like the desk, follow from only
other particular finite modes, such as a pile of wood, which themselves
follow from only other finite modes, such as some trees, and so
 on.[10]
If so, then it appears that finite modes do not follow from anything that exists necessarily, in which case the modal transfer principle will not apply. Absent some other source of necessity for finite modes, it follows that Spinoza is not a necessitarian.
Suppose, however, that the causal history of the desk is
traced all the way back to the very beginning of the world. Surely the starting
point of the universe — that from which all the subsequent objects and events necessarily follow — surely that initial mode
follows from God’s nature or from one of God’s infinite modes. Where else could it come from? If so, then by the modal transfer principle, the first finite mode will exist necessarily, and so everything that follows from it, including the desk, will exist necessarily too.
Spinoza rejects this reasoning. In the quotation from Ip28
above, Spinoza explicitly denies that the series of finite modes has
an initial starting point. Spinoza thinks that the series of finite objects extends backwards in time in an infinitely long causal chain that contains no
initial state. For every finite cause of
the desk, there will always be a temporally prior finite cause of that cause. And a prior
cause of the cause of that cause. And so on, ad infinitum.
Ad nauseam as well? Spinoza has little sympathy with the
traditional monotheistic idea that God created the world ex
nihilo. There is no true “in the beginning” style
cosmogony, according to Spinoza. If our present universe can be traced
back to the Big Bang, there had to be a state prior to
the Big Bang that caused the Big Bang, and a state prior to that, and
so on. Is this infinite chain of finite causes intelligible? Prima facie,
there is no PSR violation. For every particular finite object, there is
a sufficient reason for its existence and characteristics in
terms of its prior finite causes. Each finite object follows from and
is thus explained by the prior state of the world, whose constituents
are explained by a yet prior state, and so on. If that is all Spinoza
intended to say about the modal status of finite things, then one could read
his fiery denials of contingency as defenses of
mere causal determinism and not full-blown necessitarianism.
An important lesson from the previous section is that if there is a causal gap between finite modes and infinite modes, then Spinoza’s modal
transfer principle will not apply to finite modes, since condition (ii) will remain unsatisfied in each case. Finite things will be causally determined solely by other finite things, none of which exist necessarily.
However tempting, this picture has trouble making sense of Spinoza’s
repeated claims that everything is caused by God (Ip25–26), a
claim Spinoza repeats in the very first sentence of Ip28d itself.
Spinoza frequently emphasizes that God’s power or essence is the cause
and explanation of everything that exists (Ip16, 17, 29s, 33,
IAppendix). But how can everything follow from God’s power, if
finite modes follow only from other finite modes? Won’t the alleged gap
between finite and infinite modes mean that finite things do not, after
all, follow from God or substance? And won’t that violate one of the most
basic features of modes, namely their dependence, qua modes, on
substance (Id5)?
This is a notoriously difficult question facing Spinoza’s
metaphysics, one that was raised by Leibniz just a year after Spinoza’s
death (Leibniz 1969, 203). Sometimes this worry was historically expressed as whether
Spinoza can “derive” the finite from the infinite, but it
is not really a question of logical deduction (Hübner 2014). How can Spinoza believe
both that God is the cause of all things and that finite things follow
only from other finite things?
One possible response would appeal to the close relationship between
finite modes and the power of God. Finite modes have only other finite
modes for causes, but being caused by other finite modes is a way of
being determined by God’s power, since finite modes just are limited
expressions of God’s power (Ip36d). The success of this response
depends on the relationship between God and God’s modes for
Spinoza, an interpretive point that is heavily disputed. This reply
would not work, for instance, if the fundamental connection between
substance and modes is purely causal.
Curley has proposed a more elaborate and elegant solution for reconciling Ip28 and the claim that all modes follow from
substance without positing any closer relationship between God and
finite modes. (This is understandable since Curley is the leading
advocate of the “causal only” interpretation of how modes
depend on substance.) Curley suggests that Spinoza’s finite modes are
only partially determined by other finite modes (Curley 1969).
They are also partially determined by infinite modes, which Curley
understands to be general features of the world described by the laws
of nature. The desk follows partly from infinite modes and partly from
other particular finite modes.
In more contemporary terms, Curley’s proposal is that every state of
the world is determined by the laws of nature plus the prior state of
the world. The laws of nature and the antecedent state each contribute
to bringing about the desk, but neither is sufficient on its own. This division of labor would allow Spinoza to overcome
the problem of the gap without violating Ip28. Particular finite modes
do follow partly from God’s nature, in virtue of following partly from
infinite modes – but only partly. They also follow partly from
other finite modes. Admittedly, Spinoza does not say in Ip28 that
finite modes follow only partially from other finite modes, but
neither does he explicitly say that finite modes follow
entirely from other finite modes.
If Curley is correct, then because finite modes are only
partially determined by infinite modes, the modal transfer
principle will not apply to finite modes. (One assumption here is that condition (i) requires following from entirely.) This blocks necessitarianism,
since no finite mode would follow entirely from something that exists necessarily. Thus, Curley’s interpretation concludes, particular
finite modes do not exist necessarily, despite (partly) following from God’s nature. Hence full-blown necessitarianism with respect to
finite modes is false and AP1, AP2, and AP3 represent genuine alternative
possibilities for Spinoza. This finds support in passages like IIax1: 
 Although the first half of that statement is thoroughly traditional, Spinoza’s claim that the order of Nature leaves the existence or non-existence of particular finite things undetermined seems to posit  genuine contingency in the world. (In IIp10d, Spinoza cites IIax1 and claims that it would be “absurd” to conclude that a particular person exists necessarily, though it is unclear whether the absurdity lies in the modal conclusion itself or in the reasoning about finite essences that would lead to the modal conclusion.)
As for those passages in which Spinoza
seems to profess full-blown necessitarianism (i.e., Ip16, 17, 29, 33,
IAppendix), his appeals to necessity could be ambiguous between a strong form of determinism and full-blown necessitarianism. Yes, everything finite necessarily follows from something else, ad infinitum, and so is “necessary” in the sense of “being fully determined,” but nothing finite follows entirely from something that necessarily exists, and so no finite mode exists necessarily in the full-blown sense of that term.[11]
Importantly, Curley defends Spinoza’s rejection of necessitarianism without positing
a complete causal gap between finite modes and God’s nature; finite modes do partly follow from God and God’s infinite modes.
However, consider AP1 again, the possibility of an entirely
different collection of finite modes. According to Curley, because no member of the collection exists necessarily, the collection
itself is not necessary. That is, God could have brought about
an entirely different series of finite modes. If so, what explains why
this series of finite modes exists as opposed to one of the
alternative possible series? (The question is not why God chose to
create this series of modes rather than another possible series, a
question that animated Leibniz. Spinoza denies that God has a will in
the traditional sense, and so talk about choosing one possible
world over another has no place in Spinoza’s system (Ip17s and IIp49c).
Nonetheless, the PSR demands a reason in virtue of which God realizes
this series of finite modes rather than another possible series.)
Earlier, I suggested one possible answer: perhaps the PSR itself
favors maximal series over less-than-maximal
series. However, as Leibniz worried mightily, if the PSR itself favors
one series of things over all others, in what sense are the
alternatives genuinely possible? Alternatively, if the PSR does not
favor one possible series over any other – suppose more than one
maximal series of Spinoza’s finite modes is possible – then
what explains why this series rather than the others actually exists?
I noted that Spinoza could explain why a particular finite mode exists by appealing
(in part) to other particular finite modes, namely its actual causes. But Spinoza could not explain why this series, as opposed to some other series, exists by appealing to
other particular existing modes. This would be akin to explaining why
an entire series of causes exists by appealing to one of those very
causes. We aren’t asking why any particular mode exists, but why this
whole series, and not some other series, exists. Appealing to yet
another contingent fact appears to get us nowhere towards accounting for the
 entire set of contingent 
 facts.[12]
Nor could Spinoza appeal to substance or infinite modes to
explain the entire series of finite modes, for two reasons. First, according to Curley’s own account, substance and its
infinite modes do not fully explain or cause any particular finite mode
(by Ip28). But as there seems to be
nothing to the collection of finite modes above and beyond the
individual members themselves, it is unclear how substance and its infinite modes could  fully explain or cause the entire series without
fully causing or explaining any individual member.
Second, if the entire series of finite modes were caused by
God or something that necessarily followed from God, then the entire series
would exist necessarily after all (pace AP1). Remember that
causation, necessary connection, and following-from track each other,
according to Spinoza. So if the entire series of finite modes followed from something
that exists necessarily, then by the modal transfer principle,
the series itself would also exist necessarily. If so, then there would not 
really be any alternative possible series to the series of actual finite
modes. Furthermore, it is hard to see how Spinoza could block the
transfer of necessity from the series of finite modes to
the individual members of that series, in which case both AP2 and AP3 would be ruled
out as well.
This leaves us with an interpretive dilemma. On the one hand,
Curley’s account respects both the demonstration of Ip28 and Spinoza’s frequent
claims that all modes follow from God’s nature. A consequence of his
account is that Spinoza is not a full-blown necessitarian. On the other
hand, Curley’s Spinoza must reject very natural-sounding demands
of the PSR. Spinoza would have to accept that there is no explanation
why this entire series of finite modes exists rather than another
possible series, a point Curley concedes (Curley and Walski, 1999).
That concession might seem like too high an interpretive price to pay,
especially since there is no independent reason to think
Spinoza rejects the demands of the PSR when applied to the entire series
of finite modes. It would be nice if Spinoza could accept an unrestricted version of the PSR and still preserve the claim in Ip28d that
particular finite modes do not follow from infinite modes or the
absolute nature of God without recreating the problematic gap. In the
next section, we’ll consider an attempt to do just that. A
consequence of this alternative reading will be that Spinoza endorses
full-blown necessitarianism.
Let us return to Spinoza’s crucial claim about finite modes in
Ip28. He states that particular finite modes (a) do not follow from
“the absolute nature of an attribute of God,” even though (b)
they follow from an attribute of God “insofar as it is
considered to be affected by some mode.” (As a reminder: I will
continue to drop the reference to attributes for ease of expression.)
Two questions immediately arise: 
According to one prominent interpretation (Garrett 1991), to follow
from the absolute nature of God is to follow in an
unqualified, pervasive and permanent manner, as infinite modes do
(Ip21–23). Spinoza denies that finite modes follow in that way.
However, following from God’s nature in a more qualified way does
not imply that finite modes do not follow from God at all – to infer that
would be to reintroduce the problem of the gap. Rather, Garrett
contends, in Ip28 Spinoza denies only that any particular finite mode
follows from God’s absolute nature independently of its
relations to other finite objects. This leaves open the
possibility that although no particular finite mode follows from the
absolute nature of God, the entire collection of finite modes as a
whole follows from the absolute nature of God or from an infinite mode
of God.
Garrett’s account presents a five-fold division of Spinoza’s
expression “following from God’s nature”:
If we apply Spinoza’s modal transfer principle to this division, the
objects described in [i] and [ii] exist necessarily. Similarly, the necessity of God’s nature in [iii] trickles down the
following-from relation, and so even though the series as a whole
follows only indirectly from God, its existence would nonetheless be necessary, as with mediate infinite modes. That is, the modal transfer principle ignores the more
fine-grained distinction between direct and indirect following-from
([i] vs. [ii]-[iii]).
What about particular finite modes described in [iv]? On Garrett’s
proposal, their existence too will be necessary, which commits Spinoza to full-blown necessitarianism. To see why, notice that the
difference between [iii] and [iv] is not a function of the presence or
absence of the following-from relation itself. The difference is
between following from God’s absolute vs. non-absolute nature, whatever
that distinction amounts to. Once again, Spinoza’s modal transfer principle is indifferent to the difference between [iii] and [iv]. The principle is too coarse-grained to track the
absolute/non-absolute distinction; it just tracks the
following-from relation from a necessarily existing source. Since
both conditions of the principle are satisfied in [iv], necessity is transferred
from the entire collection of finite modes to the individual members themselves. Thus,
the desk exists necessarily. If this is correct, Spinoza can consistently
claim that every finite mode exists necessarily and follows
from God’s nature in some way, while still
maintaining that no particular modes follows directly or indirectly
from the absolute nature of God.
The objects described in [v] do not follow from God’s
nature at all, in which case the modal transfer principle will not be satisfied. Insofar as that is the only available source for their necessity, it follows that they do not exist necessarily. But what is
the difference between the objects described in [iv] and the objects
described in [v]? In one sense, nothing: they are the same finite
modes! That cannot be the full story, however, lest there be no
explanation why the modes in [iv] follow from the nature of God whereas
those very same modes in [v] do not. The only difference
between [iv] and [v] is how a mode is considered
 in each case. (Although Garrett himself uses this “considered” claim, he does not say whether he thinks there are any true ways of considering objects corresponding to [v].)
Hence, if the desk is considered in relation to the entire series of
finite modes, it follows from God’s nature and exists necessarily. Considered independently of
that relation — if such can be done — the desk does not follow
from God’s nature and does not exist necessarily. This gives rise to a more precise version of our earlier question: 
And, since that difference
also generates a modal difference, we should also ask:
Answering these questions in the next section will drive us yet deeper into
Spinoza’s modal metaphysics. First, however,
Garrett’s account faces an independent worry (Curley and Walski
1999, Huenemann 1999). Return to the relationship between [iii] and
[iv]. There is supposed to be a significant difference between the
manner in which the collection of finite modes follows from God as
a whole and the manner by which any particular member of that
collection follows from God. However, if the entire collection of
finite modes follows indirectly from God’s absolute nature, won’t that
entail that each individual member of the series also follows from
God’s absolute nature? Imagine trying to cover the collection of objects on my desk in coffee without making it the
case that each object on my desk is covered in coffee. This seems impossible, as there is
nothing more to the collection of things on my desk being covered in
coffee than each and every thing on my desk being covered in coffee.
Even worse, it is hard to see how the entire series of finite
modes could have the property following from God’s absolute
nature if no member of the series has that property.
The most promising line of response denies that the series of finite
modes is nothing above and beyond its individual members.
Following others, I have been describing the entirety of finite modes
as a “series” or “collection,” a label that
naturally suggests that the properties of the entire collection will be
posterior to and derivative from the properties of its individual
members. Spinoza himself rarely refers to just the collection
of finite modes with a single expression, though he sometimes includes
them in his locution “the order of nature” and he describes them as a “series” twice, both outside the Ethics (C I/41 and C I/307). Regardless of the terminology,
one might argue in a holist vein that the whole series is more than
just the sum of its the members. Spinoza does sometimes suggest that
wholes can be prior to their parts (Ep32, IIp13le7s), though other
times he suggests that parts are always prior to wholes (Ip15). Whether
the series of finite modes is more holist or atomistic, and
whether, on a holist mereological account, one of the non-supervening properties
of the whole series is following from God’s absolute nature, are
still open interpretive questions. The soundness of this reply will
likely turn on whether or not the collection of finite modes is itself
an infinite mode, a point about which interpreters continue to
disagree.
We have now seen two competing accounts of Spinoza’s views about the
modal status of finite objects. Some argue that Spinoza endorses a strong form of determinism (since
the infinite modes or laws of nature are themselves necessary) that falls short of full-blown necessitarianism. On this reading, finite modes do not exist necessarily and there are alternative possibilities to the series of actual finite modes that God did not bring about.  Others have argued that
Spinoza’s account of the relationship between God and finite modes
readily accommodates full-blown necessitarianism and that, given the large number of passages in which Spinoza appears to affirm
necessitarianism without qualification, there is strong evidence
that Spinoza intentionally endorsed full-blown necessitarianism.
Like almost all discussions of Spinoza’s modal commitments,
this dispute focus on the distribution of modal
properties: which things exist necessarily? Far less attention has been
given to Spinoza’s account of the nature of modality. In
this section, I will discuss whether Spinoza has an account of
modality itself, and if so, what light that account sheds on the dispute over his alleged necessitarianism.
Spinoza is emphatic that modal ascriptions have reasons behind them:
“A thing is called necessary either by reason of its essence or
by reason of its cause” (Ip33s1). But we can raise a higher-order
question: for what reason(s) do modal ascriptions work in the way that
Spinoza claims they do? For ease, let us focus on modal
properties instead of modal ascriptions. The question is
similar to the one raised earlier about causation. What explains
causation itself? Arguably, Spinoza’s answer is that causal
relations obtain in virtue of conceptual connections between causal
relata. A parallel question can be raised about modality itself. Do
basic modal properties obtain in virtue of other, non-modal properties or is
modality primitive for Spinoza?
Given Spinoza’s embrace of the PSR and his efforts to explain other
dependence relations (such as causation and, perhaps, inherence), it
would be surprising and disappointing if modality got a free
explanatory pass. Of course, we probably should not expect Spinoza to
have anything like a full-blown theory of modality in the forms that
contemporary metaphysicians now provide (for an example, see the entry
on
 actualism).
Only in recent decades have philosophers come to
appreciate how complex and rich the metaphysics of modality is, and
Spinoza would be in good company if he says things that seem, by
today’s standards, mostly underdeveloped. Nonetheless, he may have the
beginnings of an account that helps illuminate his other modal
commitments.
A promising place to start is the modal status of God’s existence.
In Ip11, Spinoza claims that God necessarily exists. But what is it in
virtue of which God necessarily exists? This might sound like an odd
question. Once explanations reach a necessarily existing object, are
there further in virtue of questions to be asked about that
object’s existence? More generally, when we reach necessity, haven’t we
 reached the end of 
 explanations?[14]
Not always: mathematics is full of
asymmetrical dependence relations among necessarily true propositions.
Similarly, Spinoza thinks that substance causes and asymmetrically
explains necessarily existing infinite modes. Hence Spinoza must
believe that dependence and explanation are more fine-grained relations
than modern logical entailment, since according to the
latter, every necessary proposition entails and is entailed by every
other necessary proposition.
Spinoza explains the necessity of God’s existence by appealing
to God’s nature. This may sound like a non-answer, but it is not.
Spinoza is not claiming that there are no explanatory grounds for God’s
existence; he is claiming that facts about God’s nature explain
the modality of God’s existence. What about God’s nature
explains God’s existence? In Ip7 and Ip11, Spinoza appeals to an
involvement relation between the concept of God’s essence and the
concept of God’s existence. That is, God exists in virtue of the fact
that the concept of God involves the concept of existence. Spinoza also
thinks that the conceptual involvement relation between God and
existence explains the fact that God necessarily exists. In
Ip19d, Spinoza writes,
In Ip7, Spinoza equates “pertaining to its nature to
exist” with “essence necessarily involving existence”
and “causing itself.” Self-causation in turn is explained
in Id1 as a “nature that cannot be conceived except as
existing.” That is, what explains the necessity of God’s
existence is the fact that the very concept of God involves the concept
of existence. He repeats these connections in Ip24d, “For that
whose nature involves existence (considered in itself) is its own
cause, and exists only from the necessity of its nature.” In
other words, Spinoza explains necessity in terms of conceptual
connections. Although Spinoza does not develop a richer account of
conceptual relations that Leibniz will later achieve, his general idea
seems to be that conceptual relations are the relations that explain
and ground necessary connections.
Spinoza makes similar appeals to conceptual relations when he
invokes geometrical examples to describe the necessity with which other
things follow from God:
Spinoza later identifies this same geometrical relationship with the
conceptual involvement relation (IIp49). What it is for things to
follow from God necessarily is for those things to be (asymmetrically)
conceived through God, whose concept involves (the concept of)
existence. The necessity of God and the necessity of existing things
are both explained by and grounded in conceptual relations. Spinoza
makes this connection emphatic in Ip35, “Whatever we conceive to
be in God’s power, necessarily exists.”
Conversely, contingency obtains in virtue of the lack of certain conceptual
connections. In the case of contingent existence, an object exists
contingently just in case its concept is neither connected to the
concept of existence nor to something else whose concept is connected
to (the concept of) existence. Hence if a mode is conceived in such a
way that it is not conceived in relation to something involving
existence, it will exist contingently and not necessarily (as per
Iax7). The point isn’t just that it would be conceived as
contingent. On this account, how a thing is conceived partly fixes its modal status. In explaining modal features in terms of an
involvement relation between concepts, Spinoza provides an answer to (3) from the previous section and thereby identifies
himself with a long and distinguished tradition of philosophers who
explain modal facts by appeal to conceptual relations.
This account also explains why Spinoza is attracted to his modal
transfer principle in the first place. Recall that the modal transfer
principle states that necessity transfers along following-from
chains whose nodes include at least one necessarily existing thing. We saw earlier that Spinoza’s following-from relation is a causal relation and that causal relations are conceptual relations for Spinoza. But we just saw that necessity is also partly a function of conceptual relations.
Thus necessity transfers along following-from chains because both necessity and following-from are
grounded in the same relations of conceptual involvement. The underlying conceptual nature of modality, causation, and following-from explains why Spinoza’s modal transfer principle works.
Another upshot of all this is that modality is not a wholly extensional
affair for Spinoza. The ways in which objects are conceived partly
determines a thing’s modal status. In particular, whether a
finite mode exists necessarily or not depends in part on whether it
is conceived through something whose concept involves existence. (For
further discussion, see Newlands 2010b and Newlands 2017.)
With this analysis in hand, let us return to Garrett’s proposed
account of Spinoza’s necessitarianism. Garrett claims in [iv] that each particular mode, conceived in relation to all the other
particular modes, follows from God’s nature, and he concludes that therefore every finite mode exists necessarily. However, according to [v], the same finite mode conceived
independently of the relation to every other finite modes fails to
follow from God and so fails to exist necessarily. Spinoza’s conceptual account of modality explains why he thought modality works in this particular way.
Suppose the entire collection of finite modes, considered as a
whole, follows from a necessarily existing infinite mode. Hence, the
entire collection as a whole exists necessarily. In order for a
particular finite mode in that collection to exist necessarily, it
must be conceived as following from something
that exists necessarily. How can a finite mode be
conceived as following from something that exists necessarily? The answer is clear: by being conceived in
relation to the whole collection. That is, when finite modes are
considered in relation to all the other finite modes, the
right conceptual connection obtains and Spinoza’s modal transfer
principle is satisfied. This provides an answer to (2′) from the previous section. Whether a mode is considered in relation to the rest of the
series is relevant to its modal status because (a) modal facts are sensitive to the conceptual relations that the considering relation picks up on and (b) considering a particular finite mode in relation to the whole series of finite modes tracks the relevant conceptual connection that satisfies the modal transfer principle.
Of course, not just any way of considering a finite mode will be
relevant for its modal status. Considered as “the largest piece
of furniture in the office,” the desk does not exist necessarily. By Spinoza’s lights, the way of conceiving the desk needs to involve something
that follows from God’s nature if the desk is to exist necessarily.
This is why, if Garrett is correct, considering the desk in relation to the rest of the entire
series of finite objects is relevant for its modal
status, whereas considering the desk in other, less causally relevant or
more isolated ways, is not.[15]
If particular finite things exist necessarily in virtue of being
considered in relation to the whole series of finite things, two
lingering questions remain: 
That is, if modality is
sensitive to ways of conceiving objects, does Spinoza think there are
multiple ways of conceiving finite modes, such that objects can have
different modal profiles depending on how they are conceived?
With the respect to (4), Spinoza’s answer is
unfortunately negative. Spinoza sometimes describes the mental
corollary of these very inclusive and complete ways of conceiving objects in terms of
adequacy, and he is very pessimistic about our ability to have
adequate ideas of particular things (see especially IIp24–31, though he
holds out more hope in Part Five). Spinoza even links our natural
tendencies to represent objects independent of their infinitely extensive
causal networks with their contingency (IIp31c), just as the above
interpretation predicts. So while we can understand the metaphysical
principles which guarantee the necessary existence of a finite thing insofar as it is conceived in relation to every other finite thing, we tend to adopt far more limited concepts of finite things, in virtue of which necessitarianism is false. Spinoza remains confident that there is a complete way of conceiving a particular finite object in relation to all others, but it is unlikely that we will ever
be able to psychologically grasp such complete and
necessitating concepts. Spinoza’s metaphysics here meets his psychology, and psychology wins. 
This is an unfortunately negative answer in the light of
Spinoza’s ethical theory. As a systematic thinker, Spinoza thinks
metaphysical conclusions about modality have consequences for ethics.
Although pursuing the relations between Spinoza’s metaphysics and
ethics are beyond the scope of this entry, Spinoza clearly thinks
that ethically relevant conclusions follow from his metaphysics of modality. For example, he writes in Vp6: 
 Spinoza thinks we morally improve by gaining power over our passive affects and
becoming more active (Vp4), so our inability to conceive finite things as related to everything else (and so as existing necessarily) means our prospects for moral perfection are quite dim.
With respect to (5), Spinoza suggests that there are
more and less complete ways of genuinely conceiving objects (see, for
instance, Ip24d and IVd3–4). Indeed, on the functional account of
Spinoza’s ontology mentioned in section 2 above, finite modes just are incomplete ways of expressing or conceiving God. So unless
Spinoza thinks there are no finite modes, he had better not think that expressive or conceptual incompleteness by itself entails falsity.
 [16]
If there are true but incomplete ways of conceiving objects, Spinoza
will occupy the interesting position of consistently affirming both
necessitarianism and its denial, relative to these different ways of
conceiving objects. This pairing sounds like a contradiction until we
appreciate the force of Spinoza’s conceptualist account of modality. If
the truth-value of modal predications is sensitive to ways of
conceiving objects (as a modern day anti-essentialist might agree),
and if Spinoza endorses a variety of modally salient ways of
conceiving objects, then he can consistently affirm both the truth and
falsity of full-blown necessitarianism relative to different ways of
conceiving finite objects.
If this is all correct (a very big “if”!), then Garrett
and Curley’s modal conclusions are both right, though neither
tells the complete modal story. Something less than full-blown
necessitarianism will be true in virtue of ways of conceiving objects
that do not include their relations to the entire, infinitely large and
complex range of other particular things. At the same time, full-blown necessitarianism will  also be true in virtue of ways of conceiving finite things
that are maximally inclusive with respect to relations to the rest of
the world. This middle ground provides an answer to Curley’s otherwise
worrisome objection to the necessitarian interpretation: “If each
particular feature of the universe, considered in itself, is
contingent, then their totality is also contingent” (Curley 1988,
 49).[17]
This expansion of
contingency from the part to the whole would be true only if the shift
in the ways finite things are conceived did not sometimes entail a shift in their modal status. Although this is a very widespread essentialist assumption
today, it is a false one according to this reading of
Spinoza’s modal theory. Just as necessitarianism at the most expansive
conceptual level does not jeopardize contingency at narrower levels,
so too contingency at narrower levels need not bleed into
the modal status of things conceived in the most expansive way.
A final and underexplored topic in Spinoza’s modal metaphysics
concerns what we might call the ground of modality. There was
a lively dispute in the 17th century about the relationship
between God and modality. Although there was a general consensus that
modal facts – like so much else – depend on God in some
way or other, there was considerable disagreement over exactly how to
understand that dependence. Monotheistic metaphysicians disagreed over
both (a) on what in God modal truths and modal truth-makers depend and
(b) by what manner of dependence modal truths and modal-truth makers
depend on God. The first set of issues concerns the divine
ground of modality and the second concerns the grounding
relation that modality bears to its ground (for some recent
discussions, see Chignell 2012 and Newlands 2013).
Spinoza cannot accept two of the most prominent accounts proposed by
his contemporaries. According to Descartes, (a) modal truths and modal truth-makers depend on God’s
volitions and (b) the form of dependence is efficient causation. 
According to Leibniz, (a) modal truths and modal truth-makers depend
on God’s ideas and intellectual activities and (b) the form of
dependence is ontological and does not involve efficient causation.
However, Spinoza denies that God’s nature contains a will and
intellect in the sense required for these accounts (Ip17s).
Nonetheless, Spinoza does think that all things depend on God
(Ip15), and he points to an alternative account of how possibilities and
possibilia might depend on God. He claims that non-existing modes are grounded in God’s actual attributes. “The ideas of
singular things, or of modes, that do not exist must be comprehended
God’s infinite idea in the same way as the formal essences of
singular things, or modes, are contained in God’s
attributes” (IIp8). He unpacks the “comprehension” or containment
of non-divine formal essences in conceptual terms: “Essences [of
non-existing things] are comprehended in another in such a way that
they can be conceived through it” (Ip8s2). This suggests that the
essences of all things, including non-existing things, are conceptually
contained in God’s attributes.
In more general terms, Spinoza’s idea is that possibilities
are grounded in God by being actually exemplified by God, a view that
fits nicely with interpretations of Spinoza’s modes as things
that inhere in God (see section 1.3 above). Thus, it is possible for
something to be thinking because God is actually a thinking thing
(IIp1d). The grounding of possibility in actuality is a very attractive
metaphysical thesis in its own right, and Spinoza’s God has a
sufficiently rich nature to ground all possibilities by actually
exemplifying them all (Ip15 and Ip16).
Spinoza’s account of the grounds of modality also presents an
interesting challenge to anyone attracted to the thesis that God grounds
possibilities, but who wants to deny that God directly
exemplifies every possibility (Newlands 2016). Those unhappy with Spinoza’s
expansive divine nature would need to explain how it is that God
grounds some possibilities, such as being extended, without actually
being extended. One could follow Descartes in harkening back to the
Scholastic notion of “eminent” containment, but Spinoza
reads that appeal as the name of the problem, not its solution. Leibniz
was sometimes attracted to the idea that every basic creaturely
possibility is formed from God’s non-mental perfections, but he
has a very hard time explaining how every creaturely possibility can be
constructed out of the sparse set of traditional divine
perfections.
Without reducing creaturely possibilities to God’s actual perfections (as idealists do with extension), Spinoza
presents an alternative grounding thesis and a challenge. Let every
possibility be grounded in God via actual exemplification, even if this
requires expanding the divine nature beyond its traditional boundaries.
For those unwilling to follow Spinoza on this expansion,
Spinoza’s challenge is for proponents of nearby
alternatives to provide a non-metaphorical explanation of how God
grounds certain basic possibilities without actually and directly exemplifying them.
Until such an account is given, Spinoza’s biting conclusion
offers an unmet challenge: “But by what divine power could
[extension or any property not exemplified by God] be created? They are
completely ignorant of that. And this shows that they do not understand
what they themselves say” (Ip15s). At the very least,
Spinoza’s challenge highlights how his modal metaphysics extends
beyond the topic of necessitarianism and continues to invite wider
investigation.