Since the Stoics stress the systematic nature of their philosophy, the
ideal way to evaluate the Stoics’ distinctive ethical views
would be to study them within the context of a full exposition of
their philosophy. Here, however, we meet with the problem about the
sources of our knowledge about Stoicism. We do not possess a single
complete work by any of the first three heads of the Stoic school: the
‘founder,’ Zeno of Citium in Cyprus (344–262 BCE),
Cleanthes (d. 232 BCE) or Chrysippus (d. ca. 206 BCE). Chrysippus was
particularly prolific, composing over 165 works, but we have only
fragments of his works. The only complete works by Stoic philosophers
that we possess are those by writers of Imperial times, Seneca (4
BCE–65 CE), Epictetus (c. 55–135) and the Emperor Marcus
Aurelius (121–180) and these works are principally focused on
ethics. They tend to be long on moral exhortation but give only clues
to the theoretical bases of the moral system. For detailed information
about the Old Stoa (i.e. the first three heads of the school and their
pupils and associates) we have to depend on either doxographies, like
pseudo-Plutarch Philosophers’ Opinions on Nature,
Diogenes Laertius’ Lives of Eminent Philosophers (3rd
c. CE), and Stobaeus’ Excerpts (5th c. CE) – and
their sources Aetius (ca. 1st c. CE) and Arius Didymus (1st c.
BCE–CE) – or other philosophers (or Christian apologists) who
discuss the Stoics for their own purposes. Nearly all of the latter
group are hostile witnesses. Among them are the Aristotelian
commentator Alexander of Aphrodisias (late 2nd c. CE) who criticises
the Stoics in On Mixture and On Fate, among other
works; the Platonist Plutarch of Chaeronea (1st-2nd c. CE) who
authored works such as On Stoic Self-Contradictions and
Against the Stoics on Common Conceptions; the medical writer
Galen (2nd c. CE), whose outlook is roughly Platonist; the Pyrrhonian
skeptic, Sextus Empiricus (2nd c. CE); Plotinus (3rd c. CE); the
Christian bishops Eusebius (3rd–4th c. CE) and Nemesius (ca. 400
CE); and the sixth-century neoplatonist commentator on Aristotle,
Simplicius. Another important source is Cicero (1st c. BCE). Though
his own philosophical position derives from that of his teacher Philo
of Larissa and the New Academy, he is not without sympathy for what he
sees as the high moral tone of Stoicism. In works like his
Academic Books, On the Nature of the Gods, and
On Ends he provides summaries in Latin, with critical
discussion, of the views of the major Hellenistic schools of thought.
From these sources, scholars have attempted to piece together a
picture of the content, and in some cases, the development of Stoic
doctrine. In some areas, there is a fair bit of consensus about what
the Stoics thought and we can even attach names to some particular
innovations. However, in other areas the proper interpretation of our
meagre evidence is hotly contested. Until recently, non-specialists
have been largely excluded from the debate because many important
sources were not translated into modern languages. Fragments of Stoic
works and testimonia in their original Greek and Latin were collected
into a three-volume set in 1903–5 by H. von Arnim, Stoicorum
Veterum Fragmenta. In writings on the ‘old’ Stoics,
fragments and testimonia are often referred to by von Arnim’s
volume numbers and text numeration; e.g. SVF I.345=Diogenes Laertius,
Lives 4.40. In 1987, A. A. Long and David Sedley brought out
The Hellenistic Philosophers (LS) which contains in
its first volume English translations and commentary of many important
texts on Stoics, Epicureans and Skeptics. In 1988 Long and Sedley was
followed by a collection of primary texts edited by B. Inwood and L.
P. Gerson entitled Hellenistic Philosophy. Unless otherwise
specifically noted, I refer in what follows to texts by or about
Stoics using the author’s name followed by Long and
Sedley’s notation for the text. For example, ‘Aetius,
26A’ refers to section 26 of Aetius’s work, text A (unless
otherwise noted, I use their translation, sometimes slightly
altered). The Inwood and Gerson collection translates many of the same
texts, but unlike LS does not chop them up into smaller bits
classified by topic. Each approach has its merits, but the LS
collection better serves the needs of an encyclopedia entry. For
French translation of Chrysippus, see Dufour (2004). For German
translation of the early Stoa, see Nickel (2009).
For additional information, see also the entry on
 doxography of ancient philosophy.
When considering the doctrines of the Stoics, it is important to
remember that they think of philosophy not as an interesting pastime
or even a particular body of knowledge, but as a way of life. They
define philosophy as a kind of practice or exercise
(askêsis) in the expertise concerning what is
beneficial (Aetius, 26A). Once we come to know what we and the world
around us are really like, and especially the nature of value, we will
be utterly transformed. This therapeutic aspect is common to their
main competitors, the Epicureans, and perhaps helps to explain why
both were eventually eclipsed by Christianity. The
Meditations of Marcus Aurelius provide a fascinating picture
of a would-be Stoic sage at work on himself. The book, also called
To Himself, is the emperor’s diary. In it, he not only
reminds himself of the content of important Stoic teaching but also
reproaches himself when he realises that he has failed to incorporate
this teaching into his life in some particular instance. Today many
people still turn to Stoicism as a form of psychological discipline.
Stoicism has never been ‘purely academic’ and modern
adaptations of Stoic thought seek to carry on this tradition of
self-transformation. One of the most influential modern
interpretations of means through which the Stoic philosophizing
accomplished such a transformation introduces the notion of spiritual
exercises. Hadot (1998) provides a reading of Marcus Aurelius’
Meditations as a set of such exercises. For a more general
treatment covering Stoic philosophy as a whole, see Sellars (2013).
For a recent discussion of the entire question of philosophy as a way
– or rather as many ways – of life in antiquity, see Cooper 2102.
An examination of Stoic ontology might profitably begin with a passage
from Plato’s Sophist (cf. Brunschwig 1994). There
(247d-e), Plato asks for a mark or indication of what is real or what
has being. One answer which is mooted is that the capacity to act or
be acted upon is the distinctive mark of real existence or ‘that
which is.’ The Stoics accept this criterion and add the rider
that only bodies can act or be acted upon. Thus, only bodies exist. So
there is a sense in which the Stoics are materialists or –
perhaps more accurately, given their understanding of matter as the
passive principle (see below) –
‘corporealists’. However, they also hold that there are
other ways of appearing in the complete inventory of the world than by
virtue of existing. Incorporeal things like time, place or sayables
(lekta, see below) are ‘subsistent’
(huphestos, Galen 27G) – as are imaginary things like
centaurs. The distinction between the subsistent and the existent
somewhat complicates the easy assimilation of Stoicism to modern
materialism.  It’s not wrong to say that all existent things are
corporeal according to the Stoics, but one needs to add that existent
things don’t exhaust their ontology. All existent things are, in
addition, particulars. The Stoics call universals
‘figments of the mind’. Platonic Forms, in particular, are
rejected as ‘not somethings’ which lack even the
subsistent status of incorporeals like time, place or sayables
(Alexander, 30D). The Stoics’ positive nominalist alternative is
harder to interpret. Some texts suggest that they offered a
conceptualist treatment akin to Locke’s, treating an apparent
predication like “man is a rational, mortal animal” as the
disguised conditional, “if something is a man, then it is a
rational mortal animal” (Sextus Empiricus, 30I). But there may
well have been development within the school from this conceptualist
view toward a form of predicate nominalism. See Caston (1999).
In accord with this ontology, the Stoics, like the Epicureans, make
God a corporeal entity, though not (as with the Epicureans) one made
of everyday matter. But while the Epicureans think the gods are too
busy being blessed and happy to be bothered with the governance of the
universe (Epicurus, Letter to Menoeceus 123–4), the Stoic God is
immanent throughout the whole of creation and directs its development
down to the smallest detail. The governing metaphor for Stoic
cosmology is biological, in contrast to the fundamentally
mechanical conception of the Epicureans. The entire cosmos is a
living thing and God stands to the cosmos as an animal’s life
force stands to the animal’s body, enlivening, moving and
directing it by its presence throughout. The Stoics insistence that
only bodies are capable of causing anything, however, guarantees that
this cosmic life force must be conceived of as somehow corporeal. 
More specifically, God is identical with one of the two ungenerated
and indestructible first principles (archai) of the universe.
One principle is matter which they regard as utterly unqualified and
inert. It is that which is acted upon. God is identified with an
eternal reason (logos, Diog. Laert. 44B ) or intelligent
designing fire or a breath (pneuma) which structures matter in
accordance with Its plan (Aetius, 46A). The designing fire is likened
to sperm or seed which contains the first principles or directions of
all the things which will subsequently develop (Aristocles in
Eusebius, 46G). The biological conception of God as a kind of living
heat or seed from which things grow seems to be fully intended. The
further identification of God with pneuma or breath may have its
origins in medical theories of the Hellenistic period. See Baltzly
(2003). On the entire issue of God and its relation to the cosmos in
Stoicism, see the essays in Salles (2009).
Just as living things have a life-cycle that is witnessed in parents
and then again in their off-spring, so too the universe has a life
cycle that is repeated. This life cycle is guided by, or equivalent
to, a developmental plan that is identified with God. There is a cycle
of endless recurrence, beginning from a state in which all is fire,
through the generation of the elements, to the creation of the world
we are familiar with, and eventually back to the state of pure
designing fire called ‘the conflagration’ (Nemesius, 52C).
This idea of world-cycles punctuated by conflagrations raised a number
of questions. Will there be another you reading this encyclopedia
entry in the next world cycle? Or merely someone exactly similar to
you? Different sources attribute different answers to the Stoics on
these questions. (For sameness of person, see Alexander (52F). For
someone indistinguishable, but not not identical, see Origen (52G).)
The doctrine of eternal recurrence also raises interesting questions
about the Stoic view of time. Did they suppose that the moment in the
next world cycle at which you (or someone indistinguishable from you)
reads this entry is a moment in the future (so time is linear) or the
very same moment (with some notion of circular time)? The Stoic
definition of time as the ‘dimension (diastêma) of
motion’ or ‘of the world’s motion’
(Simplicius, 51A) hardly seems to settle the question. For a clear
exchange on the issue, see Long (1985) and Hudson (1990).
The first things to develop from the conflagration are the
elements. Of the four elements, the Stoics identify two as active
(fire and air) and two as passive (water and earth). The active
elements, or at least the principles of hot and cold, combine to form
breath or pneuma.  Pneuma, in turn, is the ‘sustaining
cause’ (causa continens, synektikon aition) of
all existing bodies and guides the growth and development of animate
bodies. What is a sustaining cause? The Stoics think that the universe
is a plenum. Like Aristotle, they reject the existence of empty space
or void (except that the universe as a whole is surrounded by
it). Thus, one might reasonably ask, ‘What marks any one object
off from others surrounding it?’ or, ‘What keeps an object
from constantly falling apart as it rubs elbows with other things in
the crowd?’.  The answer is: pneuma. Pneuma, by its nature, has
a simultaneous movement inward and outward which constitutes its
inherent ‘tensility.’ (Perhaps this was suggested by the
expansion and contraction associated with heat and cold.) Pneuma
passes through all (other) bodies; in its outward motion it gives them
the qualities that they have, and in its inward motion makes them
unified objects (Nemesius, 47J). In this latter respect, pneuma plays
something like one of the roles of substantial form in Aristotle for this too
makes the thing of which it is the form ‘some this,’
i.e. an individual (Metaph.
VII, 17). Because pneuma acts, it must be a body and it appears that
the Stoics stressed the fact that its blending with the passive elements is
‘through and through’ (Galen 47H, Alex. Aph. 48C). Perhaps
as a result of this, they developed a theory of mixture which allowed
for two bodies to be in the same place at the same time. It should be
noted, however, that some scholars (e.g. Sorabji, 1988) think that the
claim that pneuma is blended through the totality of matter is a
conclusion that the Stoics’ critics adversely drew about what
some of their statements committed them to. Perhaps instead they
proposed merely that pneuma is the matter of a body at a different
level of description.
Pneuma comes in gradations and endows the bodies which it pervades
with different qualities as a result. The pneuma which sustains an
inanimate object is (LS) a ‘tenor’
(hexis, lit. a holding). Pneuma in plants is, in addition,
(LS) physique (phusis, lit. ‘nature’).
In animals, pneuma is soul (psychê) and
in rational animals pneuma is, besides, the commanding faculty
(hêgemonikon) (Diog. Laert. 47O, Philo 47P) – that
is responsible for thinking, planning, deciding. The Stoics assign to
‘physique’ or ‘nature’ all the purely
physiological life functions of a human animal (such as digestion,
breathing, growth etc.) – self-movement from place to place is due
to soul.
Their account of the human soul (mind) is strongly monistic.
Though they speak of the soul’s faculties, these are parts of
the commanding faculty associated with the physical sense organs
(Aetius, 53H). Unlike the Platonic tri-partite soul, all impulses or
desires are direct functions of the rational, commanding faculty. This
strongly monistic conception of the human soul has serious
implications for Stoic epistemology and ethics. In the first case, our
impressions of sense are affections of the commanding faculty. In
mature rational animals, these impressions are thoughts, or
representations with propositional content. Though a person may have
no choice about whether she has a particular rational impression,
there is another power of the commanding faculty which the Stoics call
‘assent’ and whether one assents to a rational impression
is a matter of volition. To assent to an impression is to take its
content as true. To withhold assent is to suspend judgement about
whether it is true. Because both impression and assent are part of one
and the same commanding faculty, there can be no conflict between
separate and distinct rational and nonrational elements within
oneself – a fight which reason might lose. Compare this situation
with Plato’s description of the conflict between the inferior
soul within us which is taken in by sensory illusions and the
calculating part which is not (Rep. X, 602e). There is no
reason to think that the calculating part can always win the
epistemological civil war which Plato imagines to take place within
us. But because the impression and assent are both aspects of one and
the same commanding faculty according to the Stoics, they think that
we can always avoid falling into error if only our reason is
sufficiently disciplined. In a similar fashion, impulses or desires
are movements of the soul toward something. In a rational creature,
these are exercises of the rational faculty which do not arise without
assent. Thus, a movement of the soul toward X is not automatically
consequent upon the impression that X is desirable. This is what the
Stoics’ opponents, the Academic Skeptics, argue against them is
possible (Plutarch, 69A.) The Stoics, however, claim that there will
be no impulse toward X – much less an action – unless one
assents to the impression (Plutarch, 53S). The upshot of this is that
all desires are not only (at least potentially) under the
control of reason, they are acts of reason. Thus there
could be no gap between forming the decisive judgement that one ought
to do X and an effective impulse to do X.
Since pneuma is corporeal, there is a sense in which the Stoics have a
theory of mind that would be called ‘materialist’ in the
modern sense (cf. Annas 2009). The pneuma which is a person’s
soul is subject to generation and destruction (Plutarch 53 C, Eusebius
53W). Unlike for the Epicureans, however, it does not follow from this
that my soul will be utterly destroyed at the time at which my body
dies. Chrysippus alleged that the souls of the wise would not perish
until the next conflagration (Diog. Laert. 7.157=SVF 2.811, not in
LS). Is this simply a failure of nerve on the part of an
otherwise thorough-going materialist? Recall that the distinctive
movement of pneuma is its simultaneous inward and outward motion. It
is this which makes it tensile and capable of preserving, organising
and, in some cases, animating the bodies which it interpenetrates. The
Stoics equate virtue with wisdom and both with a kind of firmness or
tensile strength within the commanding faculty of the soul (Arius
Didymus 41H, Plutarch 61B, Galen 65T). Perhaps the thought was that
the souls of the wise had a sufficient tensile strength that they
could continue to exist as a distinct body on their own.  Later Stoics
like Panaetius (2nd c. BCE) and Posidonius (first half 1st c. BCE) may
have abandoned this view of Chrysippus’.
Let us conclude this survey of the physical part of Stoic philosophy
with the question of causal determinism, though this is an issue that
will emerge again in the following section on logic. The clear first
impression of Stoic philosophy is that they are determinists about
causation, who regard the present as fully determined by past events,
but who nonetheless want to preserve scope for moral responsibility by
defending a version of compatibilism. That characterisation is not
wrong exactly, but it makes the matter sound far simpler than it in
fact is since it effaces some important differences between our
framework for discussing these matters and that of ancient
philosophers. One key difference is that most contemporary thinking
about causation treats it as a relation between events. But
ancient discussions of causation take place in a context that has no
ready vocabulary for events. That doesn’t mean they denied the
existence of events or failed to notice that things happen. It just
means that there is no specific piece of philosophical terminology for
contrasting what happens with the things that it happens to or with
truths about what happened. When we speak of events, we speak of
things that helpfully fill the gap between things and statements.
Since they take place at a particular time and involve some objects
and not others, events are somewhat thing-like. (Even theories of
events that don’t treat them as concrete particulars must in
some way do justice to this aspect of event talk.) On the other hand,
they also have a propositional structure of sorts. The event of Seneca
sitting in a bathtub contemplating a book involves such objects as
Seneca, his book and his tub, but it involves them in a way that has a
kind of structure. Though it involves the same objects, the event of
Seneca sitting on his book and contemplating his bathtub is very
different from the first event. Absent a robust concept of causation
as a relation among events, Stoic analyses of causation sound very odd
to the modern ear.
The propositional event-like structure of the effect in the Stoic
account of causation is given by the insistence that the cause brings
it about that a body has a predicate true of it. But if we
think about Sextus’ example, it’s not just the scalpel
that is the cause of the flesh being cut, for it did not cause this
when it was stored safely in a drawer. So there’s event-like
structure (the flesh’s being cut) on the effect side of the
causal interaction in the Stoic analysis, but not on the cause side.
There we have just the body, the scalpel. The role of the event-like
structure of the cause in the Stoic scheme is fulfilled by talking
about a whole range of different kinds of causes. The sources on the
Stoic taxonomy of causes are complex and conflicting, so we can
confine our attention to a few of the more important kinds:
preliminary causes, sustaining causes, and proximate causes. In this
respect, the Stoic view is not wholly unlike Aristotle’s account
which famously included ‘the four causes’. It would be
more accurate to say that Aristotle’s four causes are four kinds
of explanatory factors. What Aristotle does not say, however, is that
the presence of these explanatory factors necessitates that
which they explain. Causal processes involve a kind of generality for
Aristotle. They bring about these things ‘always or for the most
part’ but that is very different from the Stoic insistence that
causes necessitate. The working out of the divine plan by God or the
world’s pneuma they call ‘fate’ and describe it as a
sequence of causes that is ‘inescapable’
(aparabatos Aetius, 55J; cf. Gellius, 55K). In On Fate
Cicero sought to explain how Chrysippus attempted to avoid the conclusion
that, since our actions come about by prior causes, they are not in
our power. Chrysippus’ answer turns on the different kinds of
causes the Stoics sought to identify and it is worth quoting at
length:
A full understanding of Chrysippus’ attempted resolution of the
problem of how anything can be up to us when the history of the world
is such that the present chapter of the narrative is inescapable given
what has come before is rendered difficult by the lack of clarity
around the various kinds of causes. It is clear enough, at least in
general terms, what outcome Chrysippus was aiming with respect to
human action. In a famous analogy, he treats a person’s
character as analogous to the shape of a cylinder. It is true that the
world gives us things to react to, just as a person might give the
cylinder a shove. But the cylinder rolls, rather than slides, because
of its specific shape (i.e. its nature). So too your decisions are
your decisions in as much as the kind of person you are makes a
difference to what you decide to do. Sure – you are the kind of
person that you are in no small part because of what has happened to
you previously. But when your decisions play a role in bringing about
what you do, the Stoics say that what comes about through fate comes
about through you and those actions are ‘up to you’
in some sense appropriate to the notion of responsibility.  That sense
is allegedly supplied by the distinction among the kinds of causes
introduced above. Detailed scholarly work on the question of free will
and determinism in Stoicism seeks to engage with our various sources
and attempts to position this very different framework for thinking
about causes and causation in relation to our own. A good guide to the
terrain is provided by Hankinson, chapters 14 and 15 in Algra, Barnes,
Mansfeld & Schofield (1999). Bobzien (1998) is longer and perhaps
more difficult for the beginning philosopher, but very
authoritative.
The Stoics also discuss a notion of freedom that is rather more moral
than metaphysical. This sense of freedom involves ‘the power to
live as you will’ (Cicero, Stoic Paradoxes 5, 34). It
turns out, for reasons that will be discussed below in the section on
ethics, that only the Stoic wise man is truly free. All others are
slaves. This notion of freedom and its relation to Kantian autonomy is
discussed in Cooper (2004).
The scope of what the Stoics called ‘logic’
(logikê, i.e. knowledge of the functions of
logos or reason) was very wide, including not only the
analysis of argument forms, but also rhetoric, grammar, the theories
of concepts, propositions, perception, and thought. Thus Stoic
logikê included not only what we would call logic, but
also philosophy of language and epistemology. 
In philosophy of language, their most noted innovation was their
theory of ‘sayables’ or lekta. The Stoics
distinguish between the signification, the signifier and the
name-bearer. Two of these are bodies: the signifier which is the
utterance and the name-bearer which is what gets signified. The
signification, however, is an incorporeal thing called a
lekton, or ‘sayable,’ and it, and neither of the
other two, is what is true or false (Sextus Empiricus, 33B). They
define a sayable as “that which subsists in accordance with a
rational impression.” Rational impressions are those alterations
of the commanding faculty or rational mind whose content can be
exhibited in language. Presumably ‘graphei
Sôkratês’ and ‘Socrates writes’
exhibit the contents of one and the same rational impression in
different languages.
At first glance, this looks very like a modern theory of propositions
and indeed propositions (axiômata) are one subspecies
of Stoic sayables. But it would be a mistake to assimilate this
sub-class of sayables too closely to modern theories of propositions.
Modern theories tend to treat propositions as untensed and
time-indexed. When I utter the words “It’s warm in Hobart
today” I express the proposition that it is warm in Hobart on 25
February 2018. That’s a different proposition from the one I
would express with the use of those same words tomorrow. If, as is all
too often the case, it is cold tomorrow and what I say by means of the
words “It is warm in Hobart today” is false, then the
proposition did not change its truth value. The tenseless and
time-indexed propositions we express with our words have their truth
values eternally. Stoic axiômata are crucially
different in this respect. The Stoic theory holds invariant the
identity of the sayable corresponding to my utterances on the
different occasions, but allows its truth value to change (Diog.
Laert., 34E). In addition to these axiômata, the class
of so-called ‘complete sayables’ included questions and
commands, as well as syllogisms (Diog. Laert., 33F).
In the category of sayables called ‘incomplete,’ the
Stoics included predicates and, as in the case of propositions, these
are the meanings which we can express through the use of different
languages. So the utterance ‘graphei’ in Greek
presumably corresponds to the same incomplete sayable as ‘___
writes’ in English. Like some modern theories of predicates,
these incomplete lekta are hungry for arguments or what the
Stoics would call a nominative case (ptôsis, Diog.
Laert., 33G). Curiously the Stoics distinguished between examples
where the filling in of the subject that yields a complete sayable
happens by means of a referring term (as in ‘Socrates
writes’ and cases involving ostensive reference like ‘this
one writes’. ‘This one writes’ was called
‘definite’, while ‘Socrates writes’ was
predicative or middle – the latter in order to distinguish it
from an indefinite predication like ‘someone writes’. The
isolation of ostensive reference as a special case gives rise to
another odd feature of the Stoic account of meanings and propositions.
Standing in the presence of Socrates’ corpse, you can utter the
words ‘Socrates is dead’ and your words correspond to a
complete lekton (and one that is true at that time). But point to the
body and say ‘This one is dead’ and the Stoics seem to
have supposed the reference failed in such a way that the sayable
‘is destroyed’ (Alexander, 38F). This odd feature of
sayables looms large in the Stoic response to competing accounts of
modality. 
The examples dealt with so far are examples of simple, complete
sayables or propositions. The Stoics also developed an account of
non-simple propositions. This interest in non-simple
propositions and their logical relations was shared with philosophers
in the Megarian or Dialectical school. It set the philosophers of the
Hellenistic period on the pathway to surpass Aristotle’s
progress in logic. His logic was ‘a logic of terms’. To
put the matter very briefly and far too crudely, Aristotle had
developed an account of a limited range of kinds statements (e.g. All
A are B, or Some A are B, or No A are B). His theory of the syllogism
sought to systematically investigate all the ways of combining pairs
of such statements and to identify the combinations where the first
two (the premises) entail a third statement (the conclusion) of same
sort purely as a result of the form of the premises rather than their
content. Focused on the connections between predicate and subject
terms in such statements, it had little to say about complex
statements that had complete statements as parts. The Stoics, by
contrast, made progress in what we now call propositional logic. They
developed accounts of propositional negation (‘it is not the
case that p’), conjunction (‘p and q’),
disjunction (‘p or q’) and entered the on-going debate
over the correct understanding of conditionals (‘if p, then
q’). Their accounts of the connectives joining simple
propositions into complex ones also led them into questions about
modal concepts (possibility, impossibility, necessity and
contingency). One of the accounts they offer of the validity of
arguments is that an argument is valid if, through the use of certain
ground rules (themata), it is possible to reduce it to one of
the five indemonstrable forms (Diog. Laert., 36A). These five
indemonstrables are argument forms that should be familiar to anyone
who has taken an introductory logic class:
Stoic contributions to logic and philosophy of language, as well as
the backdrop of Aristotelian and Megarian views in the Hellenistic
period, are thoroughly surveyed in a 100 page entry on the subject by
Barnes, Bobzien and Mignucci in The Cambridge History of
Hellenistic Philosophy (Algra et al, 1999). An abbreviated and
more digestible version of this material by Bobzien appears in Inwood
(2003).
Though these and other developments in logic are interesting in their
own right, the Stoic treatment of certain problems about modality and
bivalence are more significant for the shape of Stoicism as a whole.
Chrysippus in particular was convinced that bivalence and the law of
excluded middle apply even to contingent statements about particular
future events or states of affairs. (The law of excluded middle says
that for a proposition, p, and its contradictory,
not-p, ‘(p or not-p)’ is
necessarily true, while bivalence insists that the truth table that
defines a connective like ‘or’ contains only two values,
true and false.) Aristotle’s discussion in chapter 9 of On
Interpretation of a hypothetical sea battle which either will or
will not happen tomorrow has traditionally been taken to deny this.
(The proper interpretation of Aristotle’s position is in fact
disputed by scholars, but that need not concern us here.) Aristotle
had presented an argument that if it is either true or false
now that there will be a sea battle tomorrow (and let us
suppose for the sake of argument that it is false), then our present
deliberation about whether we should go out and fight tomorrow would
be pointless. After all, if it is already true now that there will be
no battle, then whatever we decide, we won’t fight. This kind of
reasoning seems to pose a threat to the meaningfulness of deliberation
and it is reasoning that proceeds simply from considerations about the
nature of propositions and their truth or falsity. The Stoic
Chrysippus seems to have connected this logically-motivated pathway to
fatalism with the question of causal determinism (Cicero, 38G). He
insisted that if there was motion without a cause, it would mean that
some propositions would not be either true or false. But in fact,
every proposition is either true or false. So he concluded that there
is no motion without a cause. 
It is one thing if our planning for tomorrow’s sea battle is
rendered pointless by the fact that, as it turns out, there will be
adverse winds that prevent us from rowing out to fight the enemy. The
rational coherence of planning is not threatened by the fact that
sometimes the pre-conditions for our plans to be set in motion do not
eventuate. That’s just life as a human being. It is quite
another if our deliberations are pointless because it is
impossible that there should be a sea battle tomorrow. People
who waste their breath debating what to do if 2+2=5 tomorrow seem to
be irrational. After all, it is impossible that 2+2 should equal 5 –
tomorrow or any day! So what then would we say if we were persuaded
that all alternatives to what will actually happen in the future are
similarly impossible? This would seem to pose a real threat to the
rational coherence of planning.
The Stoics confronted a theory of modality (i.e. a theory of
possibility and necessity) that claimed precisely this. Diodorus
Cronus of the Dialectical school had argued that what is possible is
limited to what either is or will be true at some point in the future
(Boethius, 38C). So if we in fact don’t ever get around to
rowing out to fight the Megarians in a sea battle, then a sea battle
with the Megarians was always impossible (and of course it made no
more sense to consider how we should go about it than it would be
to consider how what we should do in the event that 2+2=5). The means by
which Diodorus arrived at this most unwelcome account of modality was
called the Master Argument. He endorsed the claim that (1) truths
about the past are necessary: it is not merely that they aren’t
other than they are – they can’t be other than they are, for
nothing has the power to change the past (Epictetus, 38A). He also
claimed that (2) nothing impossible follows from what is possible. In
the so-called Master Argument, he attempted to show that these two
theses were incompatible with the claim that (3) there is something
which is possible, but yet does not happen. The details of the Master
Argument are a matter of much dispute. We know that it was alleged to
show that these three propositions formed an inconsistent triad, but
exactly how it did this remains uncertain. We also know that
Diodorus’ manner of resolving this inconsistency was to reject
(3) and to define the possible as that which is or will be the
case.
The Stoics felt the need to preserve the thesis that there are things
which are possible but which do not happen. The same source that
preserves the allegedly incompatible claims involved in the Master
Argument tells us that the Stoics Cleanthes and Chrysippus did this in
different ways. While Cleanthes rejected (1), the necessity of the
past, Chrysippus rejected (2) that what is impossible does not follow
from what is possible, using the following example: consider the
conditional “if Dion is dead, then this one is dead” when
ostensive reference is being made to Dion. The antecedent is possible,
since Dion will one day be dead. Hence, let us suppose it true. Then,
by modus ponens, it follows that “this one is dead.”
However, the proposition that “this one is dead” is
impossible (necessarily false), since one cannot make the requisite
ostensive reference to a dead man so as to make it true that
“this one [i.e. the (living) thing I’m pointing to] is
dead,” for a dead person isn’t the same thing as what was
there previously (Alex. Aph., 38F). This may appear utterly ad
hoc to us, but it fits nicely with the Stoics’ views on
definite or deictic propositions. It once again illustrates the
systematic character of Stoic philosophy.
Perhaps the most famous topic considered under the Stoic heading of
logic is that of the criterion of truth and the Stoics’ disputes
with the skeptical New Academy about it. According to Chrysippus, the
criterion of truth is the ‘cognitive impression’
(phantasia katalêptikê, lit. an impression that
firmly grasps its object) (Diog. Laert., 40A). A criterion or canon of
truth is an instrument for definitely determining that something is
true, and the Hellenistic schools all provide some view on how it is
that we are to measure or evaluate whether something is true or not.
The Stoics’ cognitive impression is an impression which
(according to Zeno’s definition, cf. Cicero, SVF I.59)
“arises from that which is; is stamped and impressed in
accordance with that very thing; and of such a kind as could not arise
from what is not” (Sextus Empiricus, 40E). Recall that among the
powers of the commanding faculty is the capacity to assent or withhold
assent to impressions. The fact that it is always within our power to
withhold assent means that if we are sufficiently disciplined, we are
capable of avoiding error. In itself, it does not mean that we are
capable of attaining knowledge, for there might not be any impressions
that one can be confident in assenting to. The cognitive impression
was supposed to fill that role: when you experience one of these,
provided that you recognize it as such, you can, on its basis, assert
definitely that the matter in question is true. It was initially
supposed that such an impression commanded one’s assent by its
very nature: it “all but seizes us by the hair” and drags
us to assent. But this optimistic assessment seems to have been
qualified in the face of criticism by members of the Skeptical
Academy – perhaps, even if there are such impressions, it is not
so easy to be sure when one is experiencing one.
However, the Stoics do not maintain that the mere having of a
cognitive impression constitutes knowledge
(epistêmê). Indeed, not even assent to
such an impression amounts to knowledge. Such assent is merely
cognition or grasp (katalêpsis) of some individual
fact. Real knowledge (epistêmê) requires
cognition which is secure, firm and unchangeable by reason (Sextus
Empiricus, 41C) – and, furthermore, worked into a systematic whole
with other such cognitions (Arius Didymus, 41H). Weak and changeable
assent to a cognitive impression is only an act of ignorance. It is
not entirely clear where opinion or belief in general (doxa)
stands in this categorization. Most Stoic sources define it as
‘assent to the incognitive’ (i.e. to an impression that
does not firmly grasp its object) (see Sextus Empiricus, 41E) but some
suggest that changeable assent to a cognitive impression might still
count as opinion. There is a potential for serious confusion when we
try to assimilate the Stoic view to contemporary epistemology. Modern
definitions of knowledge make the agent’s belief that P a
necessary but not sufficient condition for knowing that P. For the
Stoics, doxa (involving ‘weak’ assent) and
knowledge are incompatible. In any event, there is an absolute
distinction between the wise and the ignorant. Only the Stoic
sage’s assent to cognitive impressions clearly counts as
knowledge for only a sage has the proper discipline always to avoid
withdrawing assent, or assenting to things that one shouldn’t.
The Stoics call this epistemic virtue ‘non-precipitancy’
(aproptôsia) and it underlies their claim that the
Stoic sage never makes mistakes (41D).
The Skeptics responded by denying the existence of cognitive
impressions. According to Arcesilaus, “no impression arising
from something true is such that an impression arising from something
false could not also be just like it” (Cicero, 40D). So
Arcesilaus denies that the third conjunct of the Stoic definition of
the cognitive impression is ever satisfied. We can distinguish two
specific tactics for denying this. First, the Skeptics point to cases
of insanity. In his madness, Heracles had the impression that his
children were, in fact, the children of his enemy Eurystheus and
killed them. Since the impression must have been utterly convincing to
him at the time at which he had it (judging by his subsequent action),
it is clear from this that there can be false impressions which are
indistinguishable from ones that are allegedly “stamped and
impressed in accordance with that very thing” (Sextus Empiricus,
41H). Their second line of attack was to draw attention to objects
which are so similar as to be indistinguishable (so that a completely
accurate impression from one would be indistinguishable from one from
the other). The story is related (Diog. Laert., 40F) that the Stoic
philosopher Sphaerus (a student of Zeno’s) was tricked into
thinking that wax pomegranates were real. This was again supposed to
show that there could be impressions arising from what is not [sc. a
pomegranate] which are indistinguishable from a cognitive
impression.
The Stoics met these arguments by first pointing out that
Heracles’ inability to distinguish cognitive from incognitive
impressions in his madness says nothing about the capacities of normal
human beings. It is no part of their thesis that just anyone
can distinguish between cognitive and incognitive impressions. Their
response to the second line of attack was two-fold. The first is a
metaphysically motivated answer: if any two objects really were
indistinguishable, they would be identical. This doctrine has come to
be known as the identity of indiscernibles. They also replied that the
Stoic sage would withhold assent in cases where things are too similar
to be confident that one had it right (Cicero,
40I) – Sphaerus’ response to his predicament was to say that
he only assented to the proposition that it was
‘reasonable’ that what he was presented with were
pomegranates (and that was true!).
In some ways, the Stoics have an easier time with skepticism abut
knowledge than contemporary non-skeptics do. At bottom what the Stoics
are committed to is the two-fold view that it is within our power to
avoid falling into error and that there is a kind of impression which
reveals to us the world as it really is and which is different from
those impressions which might not so reveal the world. They are
manifestly not committed to defending our ordinary intuitions
about the range of knowledge: that most people in fact know most of
the things that they and everyone else thinks that they know. Recall
our observations about the difference between knowledge considered as
a system of assents to cognitive impressions that is secure and
unshakeable by reason and mere opinion – which may get matters right
and may even involve assent to a cognitive impression, but still falls
short of knowledge. In short, the Stoics set the bar for knowledge
very high and were perfectly willing to accept that knowing was the
exception, not the rule, in human affairs. The only person we can be
sure has any knowledge is the Stoic sage and sages are as rare as the
phoenix (Alex. Aph., 61N). Everyone else is equally ignorant. This
absolute distinction between the wise and the ignorant is a
consequence of the Stoic definition of knowledge as the
“cognition which is secure and unchangeable by reason”
(Arius Didymus, 41H). Either one’s cognition is like this or it
is not. By making opinion a kind of ignorance (contrast Plato,
Rep V. 474a ff), they do not allow room for an intermediate
state between the wise man and all the rest of us.
But even if we leave aside the question of whether we in fact
know anything in the incredibly strong sense required for Stoic
epistêmê, there are still some serious puzzles
about the cognitive impression. The Stoics insist that the cognitive
impression not only “arises from what is and is stamped and
impressed in accordance” with the thing from which it arises,
but also that it is “such as could not arise from that which is
not.” But it seems that we can imagine all kinds of situations
in which we might be in a position where the sense impressions that we
have are indistinguishable from ones that misrepresent the world.
Thus, consider Descartes’ evil demon hypothesis or its modern
counterpart, the brain in a vat scenario. In the latter example it is
stipulated that electrical stimulation of your brain by incredibly
clever but unscrupulous scientists produces sense impressions that are
indistinguishable from the ones that you are presently having. Surely
here we have a demonstration that there could not be a true impression
which is such that it could not arise from what is not. No
sane person thinks that these skeptical hypotheses are actually true.
The point is rather that if one of them were true, our sense
experience would be indistinguishable from what (we take to be) our
true and accurate sense impressions of real tables, chairs and
fireplaces. Doesn’t this show that there is no such thing as a
cognitive impression?
One thing to note in passing is that skeptical scenarios like the evil
demon or the brain in the vat did not seem to figure in the debate
between the Stoics and Skeptics. The Skeptics press the point that
at the time the dream may be completely convincing to the
dreamer, even if she does not believe that the events actually
transpired when she awakes (Cicero, Lucullus or
Academica II, 88). They do not consider thought experiments
in which all our sense experience is systematically
misleading. But if we set this aside, there will still be one
important difference between a clear and distinct impression that
arises from a real fireplace and one that arises from the manipulation
of my neurons by unscrupulous brain scientists. The first is
caused by a fireplace, while the second is caused by some
other means. When the Stoics say that a cognitive impression is
“of such a sort as could not arise from what is not,” they
can be interpreted to mean simply that the true clear and distinct
impression will be different from a false one. Nothing said
thus far by the skeptics rules out the possibility that we have a
mechanism that has potential to become sensitive to these differences.
They might deny that the difference between the two is always
something that can be discerned from the subject’s
point of view. We do not have a firmer means of knowing by virtue of
which we check candidate impressions to see if they are really
cognitive or not. Rather, we have the potential to increase our
sensitivity to cognitive impressions when they are present.
If this is so, then the Stoics’ position would be somewhat akin
to externalist theories of knowledge or justification. Externalists
insist that an agent might know a proposition or be justified in
believing a proposition even when, nonetheless, the evidence for that
belief is not subjectively available to the person. So, on one early
externalist theory of knowledge, it was suggested that an agent might
know a certain sort of proposition (e.g. that there is a fireplace
here) if their belief that there is a fireplace here was caused by a
reliable causal process (e.g. a normal visual system) – and not,
e.g., by the interventions of wicked scientists fiddling with the
subject’s brain. Annas (1990) explores the possibilities for
reading the Stoic view as a proto-externalist one. Perin (2005)
considers the limitations of this reading.
So where does this leave the matter? If this is the right way
to understand the definition of the Stoic cognitive impression, then
it would seem that they win their argument with the Skeptics. Examples
of false impressions that are subjectively indiscernible from clear
and distinct, true, ones do not show that there are no cognitive
impressions. However, the admission that a cognitive impression might
be subjectively indistinguishable from a false impression does alter
the sense in which the cognitive impression can serve as a criterion
of truth. Assent to a cognitive impression will guarantee that what
you assent to is true. But, because cognitive impressions can be
indistinguishable from the subject’s point of view from false
ones, the Stoics can no longer say that even the sage can be confident
that what seems to be a cognitive impression actually is one. Thus
instead of automatically commanding assent, the cognitive impression
(according to later Stoics) commands assent “if there is no
impediment” (Sextus Empiricus, 40K), and if it has been
successfully “tested” and is “irreversible”
(cf. Sextus Empiricus, 69E). This means that I should only assent to
what seems to me to be a cognitive impression if I have reason to
believe that I’m not in a context where deceptive but convincing
impressions are possible. But the Stoic sage never errs. So when will
I have absolutely compelling reasons to believe that I’m not
presented with a convincing but deceptive impression? For these
reasons, the Pyrrhonian skeptic Sextus Empiricus argues that the Stoic
sage will never assent to any impression. In practice, he will suspend
judgement, just like the Skeptic does (41C). Another suggestion is
that the Stoic sage hedges his bets by assenting only to the
impression that it is reasonable that there is fireplace here
(as Sphaerus did about the pomegranates, 40F). In this case it will
also be hard to see how he differs from a skeptic who takes ‘the
reasonable’ as his criterion (Sextus Empiricus, 69B).
In many ways, Aristotle’s ethics provides the form for the
adumbration of the ethical teaching of the Hellenistic schools. One
must first provide a specification of the goal or end (telos)
of living. This may have been thought to provide something like the
dust jacket blurb or course description for the competing
philosophical systems – which differed radically over how to give
the required specification.
A bit of reflection tells us that the goal that we all have is
happiness or flourishing (eudaimonia). But what is happiness?
The Epicureans’ answer was deceptively straightforward: the
happy life is the one which is most pleasant. (But their account of
what the highest pleasure consists in was not at all straightforward.)
Zeno’s answer was “a good flow of life” (Arius
Didymus, 63A) or “living in agreement,” and Cleanthes
clarified that with the formulation that the end was “living in
agreement with nature” (Arius Didymus, 63B). Chrysippus
amplified this to (among other formulations) “living in
accordance with experience of what happens by nature;” later
Stoics inadvisably, in response to Academic attacks, substituted such
formulations as “the rational selection of the primary things
according to nature.” The Stoics’ specification of what
happiness consists in cannot be adequately understood apart from their
views about value and human psychology.
The best way into the thicket of Stoic ethics is through the question
of what is good, for all parties agree that possession of what is
genuinely good secures a person’s happiness. The Stoics claim
that whatever is good must benefit its possessor under all
circumstances. But there are situations in which it is not to my
benefit to be healthy or wealthy. (We may imagine that if I had money
I would spend it on heroin which would not benefit me.) Thus, things
like money are simply not good, in spite of how nearly everyone
speaks, and the Stoics call them ‘indifferents’ (Diog.
Laert., 58A) – i.e., neither good nor bad. The only things that
are good are the characteristic excellences or virtues of human beings
(or of human minds): prudence or wisdom, justice, courage and
moderation, and other related qualities. These are the first two of
the ‘Stoic paradoxes’ discussed by Cicero in his short
work of that title: that only what is noble or fine or morally good
(kalon) is good at all, and that the possession (and
exercise) of the virtues is both necessary and sufficient for
happiness. But the Stoics are not such lovers of paradox that they are
willing to say that my preference for wealth over poverty in most
circumstances is utterly groundless. They draw a distinction between
what is good and things which have value (axia). Some
indifferent things, like health or wealth, have value and therefore
are to be preferred, even if they are not good, because they are
typically appropriate, fitting or suitable (oikeion)
for us.
Impulse, as noted above, is a movement of the soul toward an object.
Though these movements are subject to the capacity for assent in fully
rational creatures, impulse is present in all animate (self-moving)
things from the moment of birth. The Stoics argue that the original
impulse of ensouled creatures is toward what is appropriate for them,
or aids in their self-preservation, and not toward what is
pleasurable, as the Epicureans contend. Because the whole of the world
is identical with the fully rational creature which is God, each part
of it is naturally constituted so that it seeks what is appropriate or
suitable to it, just as our own body parts are so constituted as to
preserve both themselves and the whole of which they are parts. The
Stoic doctrine of the natural attachment to what is appropriate
(oikeiôsis) thus provides a foundation in nature for an
objective ordering of preferences, at least on a prima facie basis.
Other things being equal, it is objectively preferable to have health
rather than sickness. The Stoics call things whose preferability is
overridden only in very rare circumstances “things according to
nature.” As we mature, we discover new things which are
according to our natures. As infants perhaps we only recognised that
food and warmth are appropriate to us, but since humans are rational,
more than these basic necessities are appropriate to us. The Greek
term ‘oikeion’ can mean not only what is
suitable, but also what is akin to oneself, standing in a natural
relation of affection. Thus, my blood relatives are – or least
ought to be – oikeioi. It is partly in this sense that we
eventually come to the recognition – or at least ought
to – that other people, insofar as they are rational, are
appropriate to us. Cicero’s quotation of Terence’s line
‘nothing human is alien to me’ in the context of On
Duties I.30 echoes this thought. It is not only other rational
creatures that are appropriate to us, but also the perfection of our
own rational natures. Because the Stoics identify the moral virtues
with knowledge, and thus the perfection of our rational natures, that
which is genuinely good is also most appropriate to us. So, if our
moral and intellectual development goes as it should, we will progress
from valuing food and warmth, to valuing social relations, to valuing
moral virtue. Ideally, we’ll have the recognition that the value
that moral virtue has is of a different order to those things that we
were naturally attracted to earlier. We then come to see that virtue
is the only good.
Is that all there is to Stoic ethics? Some writers, such as Annas
(1993), suppose that Stoic moral philosophy largely floats free of
Stoic metaphysics, and especially from Stoic theology. Other writers,
such as Cooper (1996, and 2012), suppose that Stoic moral philosophy
is intimately intertwined with Stoic metaphysics. The latter reading
draws our attention to the fact that the unfolding of God’s
providential plan is rational (and therefore beneficial) through and
through, so that in some sense what will in fact happen to me in
accordance with that plan must be appropriate to me, just like food,
warmth, and those with whom I have intimate social relations.
When we take the rationality of the world order into consideration, we
can begin to understand the Stoic formulations of the goal or end.
“Living in agreement with nature” is meant to work at a
variety of levels. Since my nature is such that health and
wealth are appropriate to me (according to my nature), other things
being equal, I ought to choose them. Hence the formulations of the end
by later Stoics stress the idea that happiness consists in the
rational selection of the things according to nature. But, we must
bear in mind an important caveat here. Health and wealth are not the
only things which are appropriate to me. So are other rational beings
and it would be irrational to choose one thing which is appropriate to
me without due consideration of the effect of that choice on other
things which are also appropriate to me. This is why the later
formulations stress that happiness consists in the rational
selection of the things according to nature. But if I am faced with a
choice between increasing my wealth (something which is prima facie
appropriate to my nature) and preserving someone else’s health
(which is something appropriate to something which is appropriate to
me, i.e. another rational being), which course of action is the
rational one? The Stoic response is that it is the one which is
ultimately both natural and rational: that is, the one that, so far as
I can tell from my experience with what happens in the course of
nature (see Chrysippus’ formula for the end cited above, 63B),
is most in agreement with the unfolding of nature’s rational and
providential plan. Living in agreement with nature in this sense can
even demand that I select things which are not typically appropriate
to my nature at all – when that nature is considered in isolation
from these particular circumstances. Here Chrysippus’ remark
about what his foot would will if it were conscious is apposite.
We too, as rational parts of rational nature, ought to choose in
accordance with what will in fact happen (provided we can
know what that will be, which we rarely can – we are not gods;
outcomes are uncertain to us) since this is wholly good and rational:
when we cannot know the outcome, we ought to choose in accordance with
what is typically or usually nature’s purpose, as we can see
from experience of what usually does happen in the course of nature.
In extreme circumstances, however, a choice, for example, to end our
lives by suicide can be in agreement with nature. 
So far the emphasis has been on just one component of the Stoic
formulation of the goal or end of life: it is the “rational
selection of the things according to nature.” The other thing
that needs to be stressed is that it is rational
selection – not the attainment of – these things
which constitutes happiness. (The Stoics mark the distinction between
the way we ought to opt for health as opposed to virtue by saying that
I select (eklegomai) the preferred indifferent but I choose
(hairoûmai) the virtuous action.) Even though the
things according to nature have a kind of value (axia) which
grounds the rationality of preferring them (other things being equal),
this kind of value is still not goodness. From the point of view of
happiness, the things according to nature are still indifferent. What
matters for our happiness is whether we select them rationally and, as
it turns out, this means selecting them in accordance with the
virtuous way of regarding them (and virtuous action itself). Surely
one motive for this is the rejection of even the limited role that
external goods and fortune play in Aristotelian ethics. According to
the Peripatetics, the happy life is one in which one exercises
one’s moral and theoretical virtues. But one can’t
exercise a moral virtue like liberality (Nic. Eth. IV.1)
without having some, even considerable, money. The Stoics, by
contrast, claim that so long as I order (and express) my preferences
in accordance with my nature and universal nature, I will be virtuous
and happy, even if I do not actually get the things I prefer. Though
these things are typically appropriate to me, rational choice is even
more appropriate or akin to me, and so long as I have that, then I
have perfected my nature. The perfection of one’s rational
nature is the condition of being virtuous and it is exercising this,
and this alone, which is good. Since possession of that which is good
is sufficient for happiness, virtuous agents are happy even if they do
not attain the preferred indifferents they select.
One is tempted to think that this is simply a misuse of the word
‘happiness’ (or would be, if the Stoics had been speaking
English). We are inclined to think (and a Greek talking about
eudaimonia would arguably be similarly inclined) that
happiness has something to do with getting what you want and not
merely ordering one’s wants rationally regardless of whether
they are satisfied. People are also frequently tempted to assimilate
the Stoics’ position to one (increasingly contested)
interpretation of Kant’s moral philosophy. On this reading,
acting with the right motive is the only thing that is good – but
being good in this sense has nothing whatsoever to do with
happiness.
With respect to the first point, the Stoic sage typically selects the
preferred indifferents and selects them in light of her knowledge of
how the world works. There will be times when the circumstances make
it rational for her to select something that is (generally speaking)
contrary to her nature (e.g., cutting off one’s own hand in
order to thwart a tyrant). But these circumstances will be rare and
the sage will not be oppressed by the additional false beliefs that
this act of self-mutilation is a genuinely bad thing: only vice is
genuinely bad. For the most part, her knowledge of nature and other
people will mean that she attains the things that she selects. Her
conditional positive attitude toward them will mean that when
circumstances do conspire to bring it about that the object of her
selection is not secured, she doesn’t care. She only preferred
to be wealthy if it was fated for her to be wealthy. These reflections
illustrate the way in which the virtuous person is self-sufficient
(autarkês) and this seems to be an important component
of our intuitive idea of happiness. The person who is genuinely happy
lacks nothing and enjoys a kind of independence from the vagaries of
fortune. To this extent at least, the Stoics are not just using the
word ‘happiness’ for a condition that has nothing at
all to do with what we typically mean by it. With respect to the
second point, the Stoic sage will never find herself in a situation
where she acts contrary to what Kant calls inclination or desire. The
only thing she unconditionally wants is to live virtuously. Anything
that she conditionally prefers is always subordinate to her conception
of the genuine good. Thus, there is no room for a conflict between
duty and happiness where the latter is thought of solely in terms of
the satisfaction of our desires. Cicero provides an engaging, if not
altogether rigorous, discussion of the question of whether virtue is
sufficient for happiness in Tusculan Disputations, book
V.
How do these general considerations about the goal of living translate
into an evaluation of actions? When I perform an action that accords
with my nature and for which a good reason can be given, then I
perform what the Stoics call (LS) a ‘proper function’
(kathêkon, Arius Didymus, 59B) – something that it
“falls to me” to do. It is important to note that
non-rational animals and plants perform proper functions as well
(Diog. Laert., 59C). This shows how much importance is placed upon the
idea of what accords with one’s nature or, in another
formulation, “activity which is consequential upon a
thing’s nature.” It also shows the gap between proper
functions and morally right actions, for the Stoics, like most
contemporary philosophers, think that animals cannot act morally or
immorally – let alone plants.
Most proper functions are directed toward securing things which are
appropriate to nature. Thus, if I take good care of my body, then this
is a proper function. The Stoics divide proper functions into those
which do not depend upon circumstances and those that do. Taking care
of one’s health is among the former, while mutilating oneself is
among the latter (Diog. Laert., 59E). It appears that this is an
attempt to work out a set of prima facie duties based upon our
natures. Other things being equal, looking after one’s health is
a course of action which accords with one’s nature and thus is
one for which a good reason can be given. However, there are
circumstances in which a better reason can be given for mutilating
oneself – for instance, if this is the only way you can prevent
Fagin from compelling you to steal for him.
Since both ordinary people and Stoic wise men look after their health
except in very extraordinary circumstances, both the sage and the
ordinary person perform proper functions. A proper function becomes a
fully correct action (katorthôma) only when it is
perfected as an action of the specific kind to which it belongs, and
so is done virtuously. In the tradition of Socratic moral theory, the
Stoics regard virtues like courage and justice, and so on, as
knowledge or science within the soul about how to live. Thus a
specific virtue like moderation is defined as “the science
(epistêmê) of what is to be chosen and what is to
be avoided and what is neither of these” (Arius Didymus, 61H).
More broadly, virtue is “an expertise (technê)
concerned with the whole of life” (Arius Didymus, 61G). Like
other forms of knowledge, virtues are characters of the soul’s
commanding faculty which are firm and unchangeable. The other
similarity with Socratic ethics is that the Stoics think that the
virtues are really just one state of soul (Plutarch , 61B, C; Arius
Didymus, 61D). No one can be moderate without also being just,
courageous and prudent as well – moreover, “anyone who does
any action in accordance with one does so in accordance with them
all” (Plutarch, 61F). When someone who has any virtue, and
therefore all the virtues, performs any proper function, he performs
it in accordance with virtue or virtuously (i.e. with all the virtues)
and this transforms it into a right action or a perfect function. The
connection here between a perfect function and a virtuous one is
almost analytic in Greek ethical theorizing. Virtues just are those
features which make a thing a good thing of its kind or allow it to
perform its function well. So, actions done in accordance with virtue
are actions which are done well. The Stoics draw the conclusion from
this that the wise (and therefore virtuous) person does everything
within the scope of moral action well (Arius Didymus, 61G). This makes
it seem far less strange than it might at first appear to say that
virtue is sufficient for happiness. Furthermore, because virtue is a
kind of knowledge and there is no cognitive state between knowledge
and ignorance, those who are not wise do everything equally badly.
Strictly speaking, there is no such thing as moral progress for the
Stoics (if that means progress within morality), and they
give the charming illustration of drowning to make their point: a
person an arm’s length from the surface is drowning every bit as
surely as one who is five hundred fathoms down (Plutarch, 61T). Of
course, as the analogy also suggests, it is possible to be closer or
farther from finally being able to perform proper functions
in this perfected way. In that sense, progress is possible.
We are finally in a position to understand and evaluate the Stoic view
on emotions, since it is a consequence of their views on the soul and
the good. It is perhaps more accurate to call it the Stoic view of the
passions, though this is a somewhat dated term. The passions or
pathê are literally ‘things which one
undergoes’ and are to be contrasted with actions or things that
one does. Thus, the view that one should be ‘apathetic,’
in its original Hellenistic sense, is not the view that you
shouldn’t care about anything, but rather the view that you
should not be psychologically subject to anything – manipulated
and moved by it, rather than yourself being actively and
positively in command of your reactions and responses to things as
they occur or are in prospect. It connotes a kind of complete
self-sufficiency. The Stoics distinguish two primary passions:
appetite and fear. These arise in relation to what appears to us to be
good or bad. They are associated with two other passions: pleasure and
distress. These result when we get or fail to avoid the objects of the
first two passions. What distinguishes these states of soul from
normal impulses is that they are “excessive impulses which are
disobedient to reason” (Arius Didymus, 65A). Part of what this
means is that one’s fear of dogs may not go away with the
rational recognition that this blind, 16 year old, 3 legged Yorkshire
terrier poses no threat to you. But this is not all. The Stoics call a
passion like distress a fresh opinion that something bad is
present (Andronicus, 65B): you may have been excitedly delighted when
you first saw you’d won the race, but after a while, when the
impression of the victory is no longer fresh, you may calm down.
Recall that opinion is assent to a false impression. Given the
Stoics’ view about good and bad, as against merely indifferent
things, the only time that one should assent to the impression that
something bad is present is when there is something which might
threaten one’s virtue, for this and this alone is good. Thus all
passions involve an element of false value-judgement. But these are
false judgements which are inseparable from physiological changes in
the pneuma which constitutes one’s commanding faculty. The
Stoics describe these changes as shrinkings (like fear) or swellings
(like delight), and part of the reason that they locate the commanding
faculty in the heart (rather than the head, as Plato in the
Timaeus and many medical writers did) is that this seems to
be where the physical sensations which accompany passions like fear
are manifested. Taking note of this point of physiology is surely
necessary to give their theory any plausibility. From the inside a
value-judgement – even one like “this impending dog bite
will be bad” – might often just not feel like such an
emotional state as fear. But when the judgement is vivid and so the
commanding faculty is undergoing such a change, one can readily enough
see that the characteristic sensations might inexorably accompany the
judgement.
Another obvious objection to the Stoic theory is that someone who
fears, say pigeons, may not think that they are dangerous. We
say that she knows rationally that pigeons are harmless but that she
has an irrational fear. It might be thought that in such a case, the
judgement which the Stoics think is essential to the passion is
missing. Here they resort to the idea that a passion is a fluttering
of the commanding faculty. At one instant my commanding faculty judges
(rightly) that this pigeon is not dangerous, but an instant later
assents to the impression that it is and from this assent flows the
excessive impulse away from the pigeon which is my fear. This switch
of assent occurs repeatedly and rapidly so that it appears that one
has the fear without the requisite judgement but in fact you are
making it and taking it back during the time you undergo the passion
(Plutarch, 65G).
It is important to bear in mind that the Stoics do not think that all
impulses are to be done away with. What distinguishes normal impulses
or desires from passions is the idea that the latter are excessive and
irrational. Galen provides a nice illustration of the difference
(65J). Suppose I want to run, or, in Stoic terminology, I have an
impulse to run. If I go running down a sharp incline I may be unable
to stop or change direction in response to a new impulse. My running
is excessive in relation to my initial impulse. Passions are
distinguished from normal impulses in much the same way: they have a
kind of momentum which carries one beyond the dictates of reason. If,
for instance, you are consumed with lust (a passion falling under
appetite), you might not do what under other circumstances you
yourself would judge to be the sensible thing.
Even in antiquity the Stoics were ridiculed for their views on the
passions. Some critics called them the men of stone. But this is not
entirely fair, for the Stoics allow that the sage will experience what
they call the good feelings (eupatheiai, Diog. Laert. 65F).
These include joy, watchfulness and wishing and are distinguished from
their negative counterparts (pleasure, fear and appetite) in being
well-reasoned and not excessive. Naturally there is no positive
counterpart to distress. The species under wishing include kindness,
generosity and warmth. A good feeling like kindness is a moderate and
reasonable stretching or expansion of the soul presumably prompted by
the correct judgement that other rational beings are appropriate to
oneself.
Criticisms of the Stoic theory of the passions in antiquity focused on
two issues. The first was whether the passions were, in fact,
activities of the rational soul. The medical writer and philosopher
Galen defended the Platonic account of emotions as a product of an
irrational part of the soul. Posidonius, a 1st c. BCE Stoic, also
criticised Chrysippus on the psychology of emotions, and developed a
position that recognized the influence in the mind of something like
Plato’s irrational soul-parts. The other opposition to the Stoic
doctrine came from philosophers in the Aristotelian tradition. They,
like the Stoics, made judgement a component in emotions. But they
argued that the happy life required the moderation of the
passions, not their complete extinction. Cicero’s Tusculan
Disputations, books III and IV take up the question of whether it
is possible and desirable to rid oneself of the emotions.
The ordinary Greek in the street may have had little idea of the views
of Plato or Aristotle. The founder of the Stoic school, however, had a
statue raised to him in Athens at public expense, the inscription on
which read, in part: 
Of course the citizens of Athens couldn’t have honoured Zeno for
a life lived in consistency with his philosophical principles unless
the content of those principles was known to the general public. Since
the Stoics gathered, discussed and taught philosophy in a public
place, the general import of their philosophy was widely known.
Stoicism became a “popular philosophy” in a way that
neither Platonism nor Aristotelianism ever did. In part this is
because Stoicism, like its rival Epicureanism, addressed the questions
that most people are concerned with in very direct and practical ways.
It tells you how you should regard death, suffering, great wealth,
poverty, power over others and slavery. In the political and social
context of the Hellenistic period (where a person could move between
these extremes in very short order) Stoicism provided a psychological
fortress against bad fortune.
At the political level, the Antigonid dynasty (which ruled Greece and
Macedon from shortly after the death of Alexander to 168 BCE) had
connections with the Stoic philosophers. Antigonus Gonatas was alleged
to have been a pupil of Zeno of Citium. He requested that Zeno serve
as the tutor to his son, Demetrius, but Zeno excused himself on the
ground that he was too old for the job. The man he sent instead,
Persaeus, was deeply involved in affairs at court and, according to
some sources, died in battle at Corinth in the service of Antigonus.
Another Hellenistic strong-man, Cleomenes of Sparta, had the Stoic
philosopher Sphaerus as one of his advisors. The reforms instituted in
Sparta (including the extension of citizenship to foreigners and the
redistribution of land) were seen by some as a Stoic social reform,
though it is less clear that it was anything other than an instrument
of power for Cleomenes. (For one view, see Erskine 1990 chapter 6; for
a more cynical view see Green 1990, p. 248 ff.)
Middle Stoicism is the term used to encompass the work of later Stoic
philosophers including Antipater of Tarsus (d. 130/129 BCE), Panaetius
(d. 110/09 BCE), and Posidonius (d. ~45 BCE). Earlier scholarship on
Middle Stoicism tended to accentuate the degree of discontinuity
between it and the “Old Stoa”. It is certainly true that
there was evolution in Stoic ideas with these philosophers and
disagreements with earlier Stoics. Thus, for instance, Antipater was
much more positive about marriage and family than Chrysippus was. We
can, in many cases, attribute the Middle Stoa’s divergence from
the Old to a desire to amalgamate what these writers took to be
correct in other philosophical schools. In particular, these Stoics
looked to Platonism and especially to Plato’s dialogue the
Timaeus; cf. Reydams-Schils (1999). Panaetius denied the
periodic conflagration posited by earlier Stoic philosophers (Van
Staaten, fr. 65). Posidonius, though he is wrongly reported by Galen
to have returned to Plato’s tri-partite soul and to have
rejected Chrysippus’ purely intellectualist theory of emotion
(on this interpretation, see Sorabji 2000, 94ff), he did think it
necessary to acknowledge non-rational movements in the human soul
corresponding to Plato’s appetite and spirit (see Cooper 1999,
449–84). In spite of these differences, however, in many other
ways the Middle Stoics remained, well, Stoics.
Our evidence for the views of the philosophers of the Middle Stoa is
relatively fragmentary. The testimonia for Antipater were included in
volume 3 of von Arnim (1903–05). For Panaetius, see van Staaten
(1962) and for Posidonius, see Edelstein and Kidd (1972). Panaetius
hovers in the background of one of the most influential books in moral
philosophy up through the late 19th century: Cicero’s On
Duties or De Officiis. In one of his letters to his
friend Atticus (XVI. 11.4) Cicero says that he based the first two
books of his work on Panaetius’ treatise of the same name. It is
perhaps on this basis that some interpreters have taken Middle Stoic
moral philosophy to be more “practical” than that of the
Old Stoa, for On Duties concentrates on identifying proper
functions in a context where it is clear we are not talking about the
infallible Stoic sage. But Sedley (in Inwood, 2003) correctly points
out that any work on proper functions would have just such a focus.
Our evidence may constitute an unrepresentative sample of
Panaetius’ work in moral philosophy.
In 155 BCE Athens sent a delegation of three philosophers (Stoic,
Academic skeptic, and Peripatetic) on an embassy to Rome. Their
teachings caused a sensation among the educated. The Skeptic Carneades
addressed a crowd of thousands on one day and argued that justice was
a genuine good in its own right. The next day he argued against the
proposition that it was in an agent’s interest to be just in
terms every bit as convincing. This dazzling display of dialectical
skill, together with the deep seated suspicion of philosophical
culture, generated a conservative backlash against all Greek
philosophers led by Cato the Elder (234–149 BCE). By 86 BCE,
however, Rome was ready to receive Greek philosophy with open arms.
It was natural that an ambitious and well off Roman like Cicero
(106–43 BCE) should go and study at the philosophical schools in
Athens and return to popularise Greek philosophy for his less
cosmopolitan countrymen. Epicureanism tended to be favored in the
ranks in Rome’s military, while Stoicism appealed more to
members of the Senate and other political movers and shakers. Several
Roman political figures associated with Julius Caesar and the end of
the Roman Republic had assorted philosophical connections. Those
associated with Stoicism include Cato the Younger (95–46 BCE)
and Marcus Junius Brutus (85–42). Brutus’ fellow assassin,
and brother-in-law Gaius Cassius Longinus (85–42) professed
Epicureanism.(See Sedley 1997 for an examination of their actions in
light of their philosophical allegiances.) Posidonius was known to
Julius Caesar’s sometimes-ally, sometimes-adversary, Pompey
(106–48). Pompey visited Posidonius in Rhodes during his
campaigns in 66 and 62 BCE. Gaius Octavius (who became Caesar
Augustus) had a Stoic tutor, Athenodoros Calvus.
In contrast to the fragmentary evidence that we possess for the
philosophers of the Old and Middle Stoa, we have substantial writings
from a number of Roman Stoic philosophers. Two of them wrote in Greek,
 Epictetus
 (circa 55–155 CE) and the Roman emperor
 Marcus Aurelius
 (121–180 CE), while the third wrote in Latin,
 Lucius Annaeus Seneca
 (4 BCE–65 CE). Other Roman Stoics whose works have not been so well
preserved include Musonius Rufus (c. 25–90 CE) and Hierocles the
Stoic (c. 150 CE – not to be confused with the 5th century
Neoplatonist of the same name who wrote a commentary on the
ps-Pythagorean ‘Golden Verses’). 
In spite of the fact that we have more evidence for these Roman
Stoics, scholarship has treated these philosophers – and
particularly Seneca – primarily as sources of evidence for early
Stoicism. Happily this situation has changed significantly over the
last decade so that Marcus Aurelius and Seneca are being read as
thinkers in their own right. (Epictetus has always been treated
somewhat more seriously.) In what follows I will simply gesture toward
some of excellent work being done on Roman Stoicism. The detailed work
of scholarship has shown the dangers of generalising about Roman
Stoicism in opposition to the original Stoic philosophy of Zeno,
Cleanthes and Chrysippus. In spite of this, it is perhaps not too rash
for the purposes of this encyclopedia entry to say the following: (1)
Epictetus, Seneca and other Roman Stoics are less interested in what
we might call the metaphysical theory of the mind or soul in relation
to the body and more interested in the psychological and moral
category of the self. This is not to say that the Roman
Stoics retreat from the earlier Stoic materialism. It is rather that
they were more interested in notions that we might call self-hood or
personality. See Gill (2006) and, more broadly, Sorabji (2006). (2)
The Roman Stoics may or may not have resiled from the earlier absolute
distinction between the sage (who alone is wise, virtuous and happy)
and everyone else (who are all equally ignorant, equally vicious, and
equally unhappy). But, in any case, the writings that we have from
them show much more interest in the problems that confront the person
who is still making progress toward wisdom. The central theme of
Reydams-Schils (2005) is that their notion of the self provides the
bridge between the ideal of the Stoic sage and the actual world of
less-than-ideal communities and families. (3) While it seems unlikely
that any of the Roman Stoics retreated from the causal determinism and
compatibilism of the Old Stoa, they were much more interested in a
psychological notion of freedom. This ideal of freedom stands in
opposition, not to universal causation, but rather to a self-imposed
slavery that is the result of taking external things to be genuine
goods. See Stephens (2007). (4) A significant portion of the writings
of the Roman Stoics concern how one might move from the
abstract recognition that, for instance, anger is a mistake to the
condition of being immune to anger. Recent scholarship has considered
these techniques, often under the label of ‘spiritual
exercises’ For an example, see the careful reading of Marcus
Aurelius’ Meditations in Hadot (1998). Against the
assimilation of Stoic techniques of emotional ‘therapy’ to
Christian ‘spiritual exercises’, see Cooper 2012.)
Christian writers were certainly receptive to some of the elements of
Stoicism. There exists an inauthentic correspondence between St Paul
and Seneca included in the Apocrypha. This forgery is a very ancient
one, since it was referred to in both Jerome (de Viris
Illustribus 12) and Augustine (Epistle 153.4). But the fact that
the letters were not written by Paul or by Seneca does not mean that
Paul was unaware of Stoic philosophy, nor that his own thought may not
be understood in relation to Stoic naturalism. See Engberg-Pedersen
2000. The tradition of theories of natural law in ethics seems to stem
directly from Stoicism. (Compare Cicero, de Legibus I, 18
with later writers like Aquinas in Summa Theologica II, 2, q.
94.) Augustine, alas, chose to follow the Stoics rather than the
Platonists (his usual allies among the philosophers) on the question
of animals’ membership in the moral community (City of
God 1.20). Sorabji (2000), part IV argues that the Stoic idea of
freedom from the passions was adapted and transmuted into the idea of
seven deadly sins by Evagrius. In general, see Colish (1985) for the
presence of Stoicism in Latin writers through the sixth century.
The influence of Stoicism on Medieval thought has been considered by
Verbeke (1983). In general, the handling of Stoic ideas in the context
of Christian orthodoxy required a certain delicacy. While it was
agreed by nearly all that God was not a material being, the state of
the human soul was a more controversial matter. In general, orthodoxy
evolved away from materialist anthropology of the sort found in
Tertullian to the immaterialist notion of the soul that present-day
Christians take for granted. Medieval Christians felt it necessary to
reject what they called Stoic fatalism, but notions of conscience and
natural law had clear connections with Stoic thought.
The late 16th and early 17th centuries saw efforts to form a
systematic synthesis of Christianity and Stoicism. The most important
figure in the Neo-Stoic movement was
 Justus Lipsius
 (1547–1606). Lipsius has his own separate entry in the Stanford
Encyclopedia, so I will not discuss him further. See also Cooper
(2004). The influence of the Hellenistic schools generally on early
modern philosophy is the theme of the essays collected in Miller and
Inwood (2003). See also Osler (1991) and Strange & Zubek
(2004).
Academic interest in Stoicism in the late 20th and early 21st century
has been matched by interest in the therapeutic aspects of the Stoic
way of life by those who are not specialists in the history of
philosophy. There seem to be strong affinities between the central
role that Stoicism accords to judgement and the techniques of
Cognitive Behavioral Therapy or CBT. Among the most prominent (and
historically grounded) is
 Stoicism Today
 which runs events such as Live Like a Stoic Week. Another modern
application of Stoicism is in the field of military ethics. See
Sherman (2005).