Time and consciousness are interwoven on several levels. From
the vantage point of ordinary life and common sense, consciousness
plainly seems to exists in time. When we hear the clock
strike twelve, our auditory experience of it so doing also occurs at
twelve (or at most a few moments later). Watching a 120
minute action movie results in a two hour stream of auditory and visual
experiences (along with accompanying thoughts and feelings), and this
stream runs concurrently with the playing of the movie. Quite
generally, our conscious states, irrespective of their kind or
character, seem to occur in the same temporal framework as the events
in the wider world – even if their precise timing is not easy to
ascertain. But this is by no means the whole story. 
Our consciousness may be located within time, but there are also ways
in which time or temporality might be regarded as
manifest within consciousness. While watching a two hour
movie, we will generally remain aware how much of the two hour period
remains, even if we are paying no attention to the plot.  We can judge
the duration of temporal intervals, particularly short ones, with
reasonable accuracy – an ability that psychologists have
investigated in considerable detail (see Wearden 2016 for an
overview). Our episodic (or autobiographical) memories supply us with
access to our own pasts; thanks to such memories our earlier states of
consciousness are not altogether lost to us: they can be recreated (or
relived), albeit imperfectly, in our present consciousness. And of
course there are past-oriented emotions, such as remorse or regret or
shame: through these the past can influence our present feelings,
often in powerful ways. While there is no future-directed counterpart
of memory, we can anticipate future happenings (more or less
accurately, more or less eagerly), and experience future-directed
emotions: fear, dread, hope – and these too can exert a powerful
influence of our present states of consciousness.
The story is still by no means complete, for temporality is manifest
in consciousness in a further and more intimate way. In our
ordinary experience, over brief intervals, we seem to be directly aware of
temporally extended phenomena such as change, persistence and
succession. When we see a friend waving goodbye, do we
infer that their arm is moving, on the basis of having
observed a motionless arm occupying a sequence of adjacent spatial
location? We do make such inferences of this kind: if I see that
my neighbour’s dustbin is in the middle of the road rather than
its usual position on the pavement, I (rightly) infer that it has been
moved. But the case in question is not at all like this: what we
see is simply an arm in motion. (Is it for nothing that
cinema is often called ‘the moving image’?) The same
applies in other sensory modalities. When listening to a
melody, we hear each note giving way to its successor; when we hear a
sustained violin tone, we hear the tone continuing on, from
moment to moment. If temporally extended occurrences such as
these can feature in our immediate experience, it is natural to
conclude that our awareness must be capable of embracing a temporal
interval.
While this may seem obvious, it can also seem problematic. We
can remember the past and anticipate the future, but we are only
directly aware of what is present – or so it is natural to say
and suppose. But the present, strictly speaking, is
momentary. So if our awareness is confined to the present, our
awareness must itself lack temporal depth. Hence we are led
swiftly to the conclusion that our direct awareness cannot possibly
encompass phenomena possessing temporal extension. We are thus
confronted with a conundrum: it seems our awareness must extend over
time, but it seems it can’t.
In grappling with this ‘paradox of temporal awareness’
as it is sometimes called, different philosophers have proposed quite
different accounts (or models) of the structure of this form of temporal
consciousness. Simplifying somewhat, the most commonly favoured
options fall into three main categories:
Cinematic Model: our immediate awareness lacks any
(or any significant) temporal extension, and the same applies to the
contents of which we are directly aware – they are akin to
static, motion-free ‘snapshots’ or
‘stills’. Our streams of consciousness are composed
of continuous successions of these momentary states of
consciousness. In this respect they are analogous to
movies, which (as displayed) consist of rapid sequences of still
images.
Retentional Model: our experiencing of change and
succession occurs within episodes of consciousness which themselves
lack temporal extension, but whose contents present (or represent)
temporally extended intervals and phenomena. These episodes thus have a
complex structure, comprising momentary phases of immediate experience,
along with representations (or retentions) of the recent
past. Our streams of consciousness are composed of successions of
these momentary states.
Extensional Model: our episodes of experiencing are
themselves temporally extended, and are thus able to incorporate change
and persistence in a quite straightforward way. Our streams
of consciousness are composed of successions of these extended
‘chunks’ of experience.
These labels are not standard – in this field there is little
by way of terminological uniformity – but for present purposes they will serve (see Kon and Miller (2015) for a more fine-grained categorization). All three models are depicted in Figure 1 below. In
each of the diagrams the horizontal line represents ordinary
clock-time. Although the Retentional and Cinematic models both
trade in momentary (or very brief) states of consciousness – in
the diagrams such states are represented by thin vertical lines –
these states are construed very differently. In the Cinematic
case the momentary contents seem momentary, and are static (they
contain no discernible motion or change); in the Retentional case the
contents appear to possess a brief temporal depth, containing as they
do experienced change and succession – hence the backward
pointing arrows, intended to signify the way in which the recent past
is supposedly ‘retained’ in present consciousness.
Figure 1. The Three Main Conceptions of Temporal Consciousness.
In his influential writings on these matters William James argued
that to make sense of our temporal experience we need to distinguish
the strict (or mathematical) present from the from the
experiential (or specious) present: whereas the first
is indeed durationless, the second possesses a brief duration,
sufficient to accommodate the change and persistence we find in our
immediate experience. The Retentional and Extensional
approaches can each be seen as implementing James’ proposal,
albeit in very different ways.
Ascertaining where the truth lies among the differing accounts of
the temporal contents of our immediate experience is interesting and
intriguing in itself. Although most forms of experience seemingly
feature succession and persistence – even the most primitive
forms if James was correct in characterizing infant consciousness as a
‘blooming, buzzing confusion’ – it is not easy to
understand how any form of experience can have such
features. The interest and importance of the debate does
not end here, for each of the accounts of temporal awareness on offer has
significant, and very different, implications for our understanding of
the general structure of consciousness. In this entry we will be
exploring the principle features and motivations of the competing
accounts, as well as their strengths and weaknesses.
Although proponents of all three approaches are attempting to make
sense of our experience of temporally extended phenomena, there are
divergences on the issue of how precisely this experience should be
construed, and on several related matters.
One significant divide is between those who believe that temporally
extended phenomena really do figure in our immediate experience, and
those who deny this. To coin some terminology:
Phenomeno-temporal Realism (PT-realism,
sometimes further abbreviated to realism): change, succession
and persistence can be directly perceived or apprehended.
Phenomeno-temporal Antirealism
(PT-antirealism, sometimes further abbreviated to
antirealism): change, succession and persistence
cannot be directly perceived or apprehended.
The Extensional and Retentional models are the two principle forms
of PT-realism. Proponents of the Cinematic model can subscribe to
realism, but most do not. The task facing PT-antirealists
is in one respect the easier of the two: unlike their realist
counterparts, they are under no obligation to provide an intelligible
account of how it is possible for our consciousness to embrace
temporally extended phenomena. But in another respect their task
is the more difficult. Antirealists are under an obligation to
‘save the (temporal) phenomena’: they need to supply a
credible explanation as to why it seems so natural to say we
perceive movement and change when, in actual fact, we do no such
thing.
For realists it is important to distinguish the experience
of succession from a mere succession of experiencings.
An experience of succession involves a temporal spread of contents
being presented together in consciousness, albeit in the form
of a perceived succession rather than simultaneously. Hence both
Extensional and Retentional theorists agree that a temporal spread of
contents can be apprehended as a unity. To introduce some further
terminology:
The Diachronic Unity Thesis: simultaneous contents
can be experienced together, but so too can contents that appear to be
successive (at least over short intervals).
Contents which are apprehended as unified in this way belong to a
single specious present. Note the ‘appear to be
successive’. This is needed to accommodate Retentional
specious presents: although on a phenomenological level these seem to
possess temporal extension, in reality they are housed in episodes of
experiencing which are momentary, objectively speaking.
Extensional theorists, by contrast, regard specious presents as
extending a short distance through ordinary clock-time, in just the way
they seem to.
The confinement of immediate experience to a momentary present has a
long and distinguished pedigree. In the preamble to his
Lectures on the Consciousness of Internal Time Husserl tells
us ‘The analysis of time-consciousness is an ancient burden for
descriptive psychology and epistemology. The first thinker who sensed
profoundly the enormous difficulties inherent in this analysis, and who
struggled with them almost to despair, was Augustine’ (1991:
3). Irrespective of whether he was the first to dwell on such
matters, Augustine’s labours in Book XI of the
Confessions led him to espouse a position that is at least
highly suggestive of the Cinematic conception outlined in
§1. Augustine subscribed to the doctrine of
Presentism (as it has latterly become known), i.e., he held
that only what is present is real:
Since for Augustine it was also clear that the present must be
entirely without duration, and that our perception is restricted to
what is present – ‘that only can be seen, which is’
(Gale 1968: 43) – we are led swiftly to the conclusion that we
can perceive or experience only what is contained in a momentary
present.
Augustine went further. If our consciousness is confined to
the momentary present, how is it possible for us to know as much as we
do about the duration of events or processes we live through?
Augustine’s solution to this problem turns on the way memory and
expectation can interact. For illustrative purposes he envisages
himself on the verge of reciting a familiar Psalm. Before
starting to speak all the verses are laid out before him in the form
of expectations concerning what he is about to say; when part-way
through his performance, the reciting of some verses is transferred
from expectation to memory; as he continues to speak this transfer
continues until the whole of the Psalm passes into memory: ‘thus
the life of this action of mine is divided between my memory as to what
I have repeated, and expectation as to what I am about to
repeat.’ (Gale 1968: 52). Analogous considerations apply
over shorter timescales (the experiencing of individual sounds and
syllables) and over longer periods (a person’s entire
life).
As we shall see, this reliance on a combination of momentary
perceptual experience, memory and expectation in explaining our
experience of temporality is typical of PT-antirealists.
Since we evidently possess concepts of persistence,
succession and suchlike, one would expect philosophers who believe that
our basic concepts derive their content from the content of our
immediate experience – philosophers such as Locke, Berkeley and
Hume – would incline in the direction of realism. And
generally speaking, albeit with certain complications, this is
what we find. In the Enquiry (1690) Locke
writes:
As it stands, the import of this passage is not entirely clear, for
it is not entirely clear what Locke mean when he talks of our
‘reflecting’ on successions of ideas (i.e.,
experiences). If reflection simply means introspection
– i.e., the directing of our attention, the focusing of our
introspective awareness – then for Locke succession is something
of which we are directly aware. If ‘reflecting’ means
‘think about’ in the sense of reason about, there
is no such implication. Other passages from the Enquiry
tend to confirm the introspective construal. When explicitly
defining ‘reflection’ Locke links it closely to attentive
awareness: ‘By REFLECTION … I would be understood to mean,
that notice which the Mind takes of its own Operations, and the manner
of them, by reason whereof, there come to be Ideas of these
Operations in the Understanding.’ (II, 1, 4) The
introspective interpretation gains further support in this passage:
Given that Locke’s defines consciousness itself as
‘the perception of what passes in a Man’s own mind’
(II, 1, 19), if we can observe (and hence perceive) succession in our
own minds, we are surely conscious of it too.
The case for taking Locke to subscribe to realism looks
 strong.[1]
Remarks along
very similar lines can also be found in Berkeley: in section 98 of
The Principles of Human Knowledge (1710) he tells us that
‘Time therefore [is] nothing, abstracted from the
succession of ideas in our minds’. Hume’s position on
the origin of our concept of succession is likewise broadly similar to
that of Locke. In Book 1, Part II(§3) of his
Treatise (1739) he writes:
… time cannot make its appearance to the mind, either alone,
or attended with a steady unchangeable object, but is always discovered
by some perceivable succession of changeable objects.
(Treatise: 35)
… Five notes played on a flute give us the impression and
idea of time; though time be not a sixth impression, which presents
itself to the hearing or any other of the senses.
(ibid., 36)
… the indivisible moments of time must be filled with some
real object or existence, whose succession forms the duration, and
makes it conceivable by the mind. (ibid., 39)
Although Hume agrees with Locke over the origin of our concept of
succession, what he says about duration sits uneasily with
Locke’s contention that we arrive at the latter concept by
observing the distances between impressions. For Hume,
Since a period of (total) silence between the hearing of two sounds
would not itself contain any change or succession – at least of
an auditory kind – the concept of duration cannot be derived from
this period of silence, or so Hume maintains. For an ingenious
attempt to derive a consistent doctrine from Hume’s various
(sometimes puzzling) remarks on time and temporal concepts in the
Treatise see Baxter (2007); for further useful discussion see
Bardon (2007).
Thomas Reid also takes issue with some of Locke’s claims in
his Essays on the Intellectual Powers of Man (1785). For
Locke succession is a more basic concept than duration – since we
arrive at the concept of duration by reflecting on the distances
between parts of successions – but Reid argues the reverse is the
case. For a succession to exist at all, its parts – either
particular impressions or the intervals between them – must
themselves already have duration: for if these parts were all entirely
lacking in duration, we would be dealing with a purely momentary
phenomenon, and hence something which could not contain any kind of
succession. Hence succession presupposes duration, and not
vice-versa.
Reid’s second complaint concerns the role Locke assigns to
reflection, construed as the awareness we have of the contents
and operations of our own minds. Reid doesn’t dismiss this
use of the term as illegitimate, but he does suggest it is a good deal
narrower than the ordinary (and thus more proper) use, which
allows reflection to encompass reasoning, judging, and remembering what
is past. The latter is of particular relevance, for Reid goes on
to argue without memory to inform us of what we have already
experienced, we could never arrive at a concept of succession.
Consequently, since ‘reflection’ construed in Locke’s
narrow, quasi-technical way doesn’t involve memory,
Locke was mistaken in thinking that reflection – of this sort at
least – could ever furnish us with our concept of
succession.
In arguing thus Reid is evidently assuming that our direct awareness
is incapable of spanning even a brief temporal interval: if it could,
we could directly apprehend successions, without relying on
memory. His argument for this assumption is succinct, and on the
face of it, quite plausible:
Since the claim that we are immediately aware only of what is
present can seem common sense of the plainest sort, it is not
surprising to find Reid endorsing it, and hence rejecting realism in
favour of the antirealist alternative. Reid recognizes that it
seems equally common sensical to say that we see bodies move
– after all, we often talk in such terms: e.g., ‘I saw her
waving her arm’. In response he argues that such talk is
perfectly legitimate, provided it is construed in loose or popular
sense, and not taken strictly and literally.
So far as the perception of change is concerned, matters are by no
means as clear-cut as Reid suggests. Endorsing the
plausible-seeming Augustinian doctrine that consciousness is confined
to the present point of time does not oblige one to reject the (equally
plausible) claim that change and succession feature prominently in
immediate experience. These claims are quite compatible with one
another provided the experience of change occurs within the
confines of the momentary present. Indeed, in the eyes of
some – but not all – this confinement is a necessary
precondition for contents to be experienced together. For
according to one influential line of thinking regarding phenomenal
unity, in order for contents to be experienced as unified, they
must be presented simultaneously to a single momentary
awareness.
The obvious way of developing an account along these lines is to
hold that momentary episodes of sensory consciousness are accompanied
by a simultaneously existing array of representations (or
retentions) of immediately preceding conscious states, and our
awareness – at a single moment of time – of this
combination of ingredients provides us with (what we take to be) a
direct awareness of change and succession. Kant propounds
something alone these lines in ‘The Synthesis of Reproduction in
Imagination’ from the first Critique (1787):
Kant here is concerned with the necessary preconditions for thought
(or cognition) as well as perceptual experience, and his overall line
of argument is
 complex.[2]
However, it is easy to grasp (at
least part of) what he has in mind. Anyone who inclines to
realism, but also follows Augustine in confining consciousness to the
momentary present, faces the difficulty of explaining how we can have
an awareness of succession if our consciousness consists of nothing
more than a succession of momentary snapshot-like experiences.
Kant solves this problem by offering a richer account of these
momentary states of consciousness. In the visual case, momentary
episodes of visual experiencing are accompanied by representations of
recently experienced visual contents. More generally, these
representations (or retentions) allow us to be aware that our presently
occurring experience is a part of an ongoing process.
More needs to be said, but Kant supplies at least the beginnings of
one plausible-looking account of how it might be possible for us to be
aware of change and succession in the way we seem to be. This
‘Retentional’ approach – recalling the terminology of
§1.1 – soon found other advocates, and is comparatively
commonplace by the end of the nineteenth century. Brentano
recognized that reaching a clear understanding how it is possible for
us to directly experience succession and persistence is central issue
for phenomenology (or ‘descriptive psychology’ as he
preferred to call it). He also recognized that a mere succession
of experiences does not, in and of itself, add up to an experience of
succession. Brentano’s solution is reminiscent of
Kant’s: when listening (say) to an extended tone or melody, he
argued, at each moment you are aware of a momentary sound-phase, in the
form of a momentary auditory sensation, but you are also (and
simultaneously) aware of a series of representations (or retentions) of
the immediately preceding phases. The latter Brentano referred to
as proteraesthesis. In lectures in Würzburg in 1873
Brentano illustrated what he had in mind with a diagram, similar to the
one depicted in Figure 2, which depicts the experiencing of a
melody.
Figure 2.
Brentano on hearing a melody.
The horizontal line a-b-c-d corresponds to a continuous flow of
ongoing auditory sensations; the vertical lines correspond to the
proteraestheses which accompany these sensations at three particular
points b, c an d. As can be seen, as
we move from b to c to d, the
proteraestheses gradually increase in complexity, with the result that
the hearing of d is accompanied by representations of
preceding tone-phases stretching right back to a, but no
further: this is the limit of the experienced present. Although
in this last episode representations of a, b and
c are experienced together with d, these tone-phases
are not experienced as simultaneous – i.e., as a chord
– rather, they are experienced as a succession. This gives
rise to several questions. How can contents which are
simultaneous, objectively speaking, seem to be successive? What
is the precise nature of the representations occurring in
proteraestheses?
Brentano’s views on these matters underwent several
changes. In his earlier writings, he held that proteraestheses
are filled with non-existent (purely intentional) objects; the latter
are apprehended under a ‘modifying attribute’ which results
in their (seemingly) possessing a certain degree of pastness. He
came to view this is as mistake, and in later writings he argued that
the difference between the content of a proteraesthesis and an ordinary
(present) sensation lies not in the nature of the object of
which we are aware, but rather the way in which we are aware
of it – there are ‘temporal modes of
consciousness’. Initially he construed these temporal modes
in terms of differences in judgement (a represented content
a is judged be past to a certain degree); in the final phase
of his thought he opted instead for temporal modes of
presentation: sensory objects can be apprehended as past
to differing degrees. See Chisholm (1981) and Kraus (1976)
for further details.
In his account of how it is possible for us to perceive a temporally
extended phenomena such as a melody, Meinong (1899) defended a
Retentional conception of time consciousness along the same general
lines as Brentano’s, but he also emphasised some relevant
distinctions.
Meinong points out that the temporal properties of the objects we
perceive need not coincide with the temporal properties of the
presentations (or episodes of awareness) in which we apprehend
them: e.g., objects which are past can be presented in the
present. A further distinction concerns ‘temporally
distributed’ and ‘temporally undistributed’
objects. An entity is temporally distributed if its existence is
spread over time, it is temporally undistributed if its existence is
confined to a single moment. It is natural to think that a
temporally distributed process such as a melody is perceived via a
sequence of presentations which are themselves temporally distributed
– presentations which run concurrently, or in parallel, with what
is presented. However, this natural or naïve picture is also
problematic: since a succession of presentations does not amount to a
presentation of succession, something further is needed. For
Meinong, as for Brentano, the way forward is dictated by a necessary
constraint on experienced unity: for contents to make up a perceived
succession they must be presented simultaneously, to a single momentary
act of apprehension. So it turns out that, contrary to the
naïve view, temporally distributed objects are apprehended by
episodes of experiencing which are themselves non-distributed.
The naïve view rejected by Meinong may have its problems, but
it also has its defenders. The psychologist L.W Stern criticised
Meinong’s own preferred model on phenomenological grounds.
We are seeking an account of how we can directly perceive change and
persistence. Meinong locates the perception of succession in
reproductions of previously experienced contents, housed in
momentary episodes of experiencing. How can apprehending these
reproductions (or retentions) deliver a full-blooded perception of
succession? The only way to achieve what is needed is to allow
successions of properly perceptual contents to be directly
apprehended. For Stern this means acts of apprehension
must be temporally distributed:
So for Stern the episodes of experiencing in which temporally
extended phenomena are apprehended are themselves temporally
extended. The doctrine that diachronic phenomenal unity can only
exist in strictly momentary states of consciousness is rejected in
favour of a more natural (or naïve) model of temporal
awareness.
This ‘Extensional’ approach – again
recalling the terminology of §1.1 – has the definite
advantage of allowing change to be perceived in as immediate manner as
one might wish for. In subsequent years variants of it will be defended by
Mundle (1966), Foster (1979, 1982, 1991), Dainton (2000/2006, 2003,
2008, 2014), Hoerl (2013b), Phillips (2010, 2014b), Rashbrook (2013), Soteriou (2010). 

However, although it has its advantages, this model
also faces difficulties. How is it possible for contents that are
all experienced together, and also as present, seemingly to occur in
succession rather than simultaneously? Meinong pointed out a
further potentially significant problem. In virtue of what are
the successive phases of a temporally extended episode of experiencing
unified? What prevents a temporally distributed awareness from
also being a fragmented one? This is a difficulty Brentano,
Meinong and other Retentional theorists avoid: if the experience of
succession is housed in momentary states of consciousness, the problem
of securing diachronic unity for temporally distributed experiencings
simply does not arise. Allowing consciousness to extend through time may bring advantages, but it is not without costs.
The last decades of the 19th century saw the Retentional
form of realism also finding favour in Anglophone circles. James
Ward’s ‘Psychology’ entry for the ninth edition of the
Encyclopaedia Britannica (1886) includes the following account of the
experience of succession: ‘In a succession of events, say of
sense-impressions A B C D E … the presence of B means the absence of
A and of C, but the presentation of this succession involves the
simultaneous presence, in some mode or other, of two or more of the
presentations A B C D. In presentation … all that corresponds
to the differences of past, present and future is in consciousness
simultaneously’. The second chapter of Shadworth
Hodgson’s The Metaphysic of Experience (1898) contains a
detailed phenomenological analysis of what is involved in hearing a
succession of tones C-D, and the account Hodgson develops there is
clearly along Retentionalist lines: “In this sequence, when we are
actually hearing D, we are actually not hearing but remembering C
… the content of C being now continued, but with less
vividness, into the portion of the process occupied by D thereby
becoming a representation of C which is no longer heard as a
presentation.” (1898: 70–72) 
Both Ward and Hodgson are cited by William James in his influential
chapter ‘The Perception of Time’ in his Principles of
Psychology (1890). It was thanks to James’ discussion that
‘the specious present’ entered the vocabulary of both
philosophers and psychologists. James gives E.R. Clay credit both for
the term, and for recognizing that the ‘sensible present’
has duration; he quotes him thus:
While it is not clear from this passage quite how Clay construed the
specious present, it evidently has some apparent duration
– enough to contain the seeing of a shooting star – hence
its difference from the strict (durationless or
mathematical)
 present.[3]
James claimed the latter to be ‘an altogether ideal abstraction,
not only never realized in sense, but probably never even conceived of
by those unaccustomed to philosophic meditation.’ (1890:
608) For James the only present with experiential reality is the
specious present: ‘the original paragon and prototype of all
conceived times is the specious present, the short duration of which we
are immediately and incessantly sensible.’ (1890: 631) In
another formulation he enters into more detail, and says something
about what this short duration contains:
James’ specious present and Stern’s
‘presence-time’ obviously have much in common – both
are intended to designate the brief temporal window through which we
are directly aware of change and persistence – but in one respect
they are very different. Stern construed this window in an
Extensionalist way, as extending over a brief interval of ordinary
time. James, by contrast, followed Ward and Hodgson and
subscribed to a Retentional interpretation. Or at least he did so
in the Principles, in other writings a different story is
told; see Section 3 of the supplementary document
 The Specious Present: Further Issues
 for more on the interpretation of James.
Although Hodgson’s analysis of experiencing a sequence of tones is clearly Retentionalist in spirit – see Anderson (2017) for more on this –
what he says in the course of his analysis of the experiencing of a single C-tone in the Metaphysic suggests his position may be more complex.  Here Hodgson stresses that no matter how brief the C-tone might be it will have some experienced duration, and so will consist of an experienced transition between earlier and later phases, even if these are very difficult to discern in introspection.  Although these elementary durations will also feature retentions, they are of a distinctive kind:
In the context of the experiencing of C-D, Hodgson holds that
retention of C is definitely not a presentation, but rather a less
vivid “representation” of C that is experienced with D.
In the case of the single tone C, the retention of the earlier phase
is quite different: it is indistinguishable from perception, or
perception by “another name”.  Since Hodgson quotes the
second passage in clarifying his position in an exchange with Stout
(Hodgson 1900), he evidently believed it to be of some
importance.  
Although his terminology could have been clearer, Hodgson may well
have been conceiving of the single brief C-tone experience in an
Extensionalist manner, i.e. as being wholly perceptual in character,
even though it is temporally extended. In which case, by also holding
that these brief perceptions are accompanied by retentions, he was in
fact adopting a hybrid model of temporal experience that incorporates
elements of both Extensionalism (over short intervals) and
Retentionalism (over larger intervals).
As Canales (2015) vividly demonstrates, around the turn of the 20th century Bergson’s
writings on time and consciousness had considerable influence. In
his Time and Free Will: An Essay on the Immediate Data of
Consciousness (1889/1910) he began his campaign against the
‘spatializing’ of time, and in this campaign the concept of
duration (or durée) plays a key
role. At least in his earlier writings, this concept
applies to time as it is featured in our immediate experience.
For Bergson, duration is a continuous flow, immeasurable and
unquantifiable – the ‘ceaselessly seething surd at the
heart of things’, in Barrett’s words (1968: 373). As
such it is radically unlike the static conception of time as a manifold
of mere locations to be found in the scientific conception of the
world, whether Newtonian or Einsteinian.
 

Many of Bergson characterizations of duration are negative:
he tells us a good deal about what it is not, but comparatively little
about what it actually is. While this can sometimes be frustrating,
there is a rationale for it: Bergson held that any attempt to
conceptualize the flux of consciousness could succeed only at the cost
of distorting the phenomena – a doctrine which influenced
William James in his later years (for more on this see Dainton (2017)
and Section 3 of the supplementary
 document The Specious Present: Further Issues). 
The early years of the 20th century see Husserl developing an account of time-consciousness along
Retentional lines. Husserl attended Brentano’s lectures
between 1884–6; inspired by them, he decided to devote his
energies to philosophy rather than mathematics. If
Husserl’s phenomenology can be viewed as a development of
Brentano’s descriptive psychology, so too can his accounts of
time-consciousness. In elaborating his own position, in lectures
in 1904–6, although he begins with criticisms of what Brentano and
Meinong had to say on the topic, the position he ends up with is along
the same general lines. Husserl may not have adopted the term
‘specious
 present’,[4]
but he did hold that we have a seemingly direct
awareness of change and persistence amongst the objects and processes
we perceive over short intervals. He also held, plausibly, that
as our streams of consciousness flow on, we have an awareness of their
so doing. As for how this is possible, he thought it must
involve past phases of consciousness somehow being ‘retained in
grasp’ in later moments of consciousness. In this passage
we find the ‘wonder of time-consciousness’ disclosing
itself to him as he hears the rumble of an approaching coach:
At the heart of Husserl’s account is a dynamic tri-partite
view of the composition of consciousness at any instant. The
three components are: primal impressions, retentions
(or ‘primary memories’) and protentions.
Primal impressions are the live, actual experiences that occupy the
momentary now. No sooner does a primal impression – e.g., a
momentary tone-phase – occur than it slips seamlessly into the
past. But it does not vanish from consciousness altogether: it
survives in the form of a retention, which presents it as
past. For Husserl, retentions are a quite distinctive form of
consciousness, and differ significantly from ordinary memories.
(They are also the ‘adumbrations’ mentioned in the
quotation.) As new primal impressions dawn – as they gush
forth from the ‘primal source-point’ of the now – the
initial tone-phase continues to be retained, but as increasingly more
past, until it fades from consciousness altogether. From then on,
it can only be accessed through ordinary memory. As for
protentions, these are the future-oriented counterparts of
retentions. In some cases – e.g., when we are perceiving or
remembering a familiar sequence of events – they can be quite
detailed, but often they consist of nothing more than an
openness to the future, an expectation that something will
come. Or as Husserl puts it:
Irrespective of how the forward-looking protentional aspect of
consciousness is to be properly understood, this is a plausible piece
of phenomenology. As we go about our business, we generally do so
with an anticipative awareness – different in different
circumstances, and difficult to describe – of where we are
heading, or what is likely to come
 next.[5]
The broad outlines of Husserl’s position may be perfectly
clear, but the details pose more of a challenge. Husserl’s
terminology underwent regular changes: his wrote of ‘primary
memory’ prior to adopting ‘retention’; rather than
the ‘specious present’ or ‘presence-time’
Husserl prefers in his early writings to talk of ‘the original
temporal field’; in later writings he adopts other language:
‘primal present’, ‘flowing present’,
‘living present’. This terminological evolution goes
hand-in-hand with doctrinal evolutions. Husserl wrote
voluminously on time-consciousness throughout his career but never
found a position he was happy with for long – in his lectures
from 1907–10 he found fault with the position he elaborated in the
1904–6 lectures – and he never published a definitive statement
of his position. His early lectures, along with some additional
material, edited by Heidegger and Edith Stein, appeared in 1928 –
and in English as The Phenomenology of Internal
Time-Consciousness (1964). A fuller picture emerges from the
material on the topic gathered into Husserliana X. For
his subsequent thinking other sources come into play: the Bernau (or
L-manuscripts) contain notes on time-consciousness dating from 1917–18,
and the C-manuscripts contain material on the topic from the late
1920’s to the early 1930’s. For an overview of
Husserl’s changing views, over the whole of his career, see
Kortooms (2002).
In Anglophone circles in the same period, the realist position was
being advocated by leading figures such as Broad and Russell.
According to the latter,
Succession is a relation which may hold between two parts of
one sensation, for instance between parts of a swift movement which is
the object of one sensation. (1913: 65)
Immediate experience provides us with two time-relations among
events: they may be simultaneous, or one may be earlier and the other
later. These two are part of the crude data; it is not the case
that only the events are given, and their time-order is added by our
subjective activity. The time-order, within certain limits, is as
much given as the events. (1914: 121–2)
Broad was of much the same opinion. Writing in Scientific
Thought (1923) he says: ‘There is no doubt that
sensible motion and rest are genuine unanalysable properties of visual
sensa. I am aware of them as directly as I am aware of the
redness of a red patch.’ (1923: 287) – a clear commitment
to realism. Later in the same work he elaborates thus:
Unlike Russell, who did not elaborate greatly on these matters,
Broad went on provide quite detailed analyses of the structure of
temporal consciousness. The account developed in Scientific
Thought is of a distinctive kind. It is constructed around
acts of awareness that are themselves momentary, but which apprehend
phenomenal contents distributed over a short interval of time; a stream
of consciousness consists of dense sequences of such acts, with the
consequence that the contents apprehended by neighbouring acts largely
overlap. Since Broad agrees with Stern that our consciousness
extends a short distance through time his approach can be classed as
Extensional. But since Broad also maintains – along with
Brentano, Meinong and Husserl – that our immediate experience of
change involves contents being presented to acts of awareness that are
strictly momentary, it is not an Extensional view of the ordinary sort:
for Stern and those in the Extensional camp, the acts of awareness (or
episodes of experiencing) in which dynamic contents are apprehended are
themselves temporally extended. For this reason Broad’s
position is probably best classed as a Partial
Extensionalism. In any event, this hybrid approach is
not without its difficulties – see Mabbott (1951) – and in
his later An Examination of McTaggart’s
Philosophy (1938) Broad develops an account along more
orthodox Retentionalist lines.
The Cinematic, Retentional and Extensional models (as sketched in
§1.1) offer different and competing accounts of the structure of
consciousness over those short intervals – perhaps no more than a
second or so, perhaps less – during which we seem to be able to
experience change and succession. Before moving on to explore
these models in more detail, it is worth pausing to register in a clear
and explicit way some further important theses and distinctions; some
of these we have already encountered in one guise or another, others
are new.
PT-realists share a commitment to the Diachronic Unity
Thesis (see §1.2), i.e., the claim that contents (seemingly)
spread over a short temporal interval can be experienced
together. The various different ways of construing the specious
present reflect a divergence of opinion as to how the Diachronic Unity
Thesis can be satisfied. According to one influential
view, phenomenal unity – the sort of unity which exists amongst
contents that are experienced together – is confined to contents
which are (objectively) simultaneous. As we have just see,
Kant, Brentano, Meinong and Husserl were all of the opinion that
phenomenal unity is constrained in this manner. Miller (1984:
109) supplies a label for this doctrine:
The Principle of Simultaneous Awareness (PSA): to
be experienced as unified, contents must be presented simultaneously to
a single momentary awareness.
Cinematic and Retentional theorists generally embrace PSA.
Extensional theorists are united in their rejection of PSA: for them,
experiential phenomenal unity is not necessarily confined to
momentary episodes of experiencing. Hence it is possible for the
experiencing of change to occur over intervals of ordinary time.
This (potential) divergence aside, both Retentional and Extensional
theorists face a problem – albeit not the same problem –
when it comes to handling the relationship between
simultaneity and presence. Whatever their other
properties, the contents of the specious present (supposedly) all
seem present as and when they occur. This makes for a
problem for Extensional theorists. The contents of a typical
specious present will all be experienced together, as parts of a
unified whole, but they will also seem to occur successively. But
how is this possible? Won’t contents that are all
experienced together as present appear to occur simultaneously, rather
than in succession? Retentional theorists face a rather different
difficulty. If we suppose, in line with Retentional doctrine,
that the contents of an individual specious present are actually
simultaneous, at least with regard to ordinary clock time, how can it
be that they also appear successive? In slightly more formal
guise:
Extensional Simultaneity Problem: how is it
possible for contents which are (i) experienced together, and (ii)
experienced as present, to be experienced as anything other than
simultaneous?
Retentional Simultaneity Problem: how is it
possible for a collection of contents which occur simultaneously to
seem successive?
At first glance each of these problems may look very serious, even
insuperable. It is not for nothing that many have despaired of
finding a coherent account of the specious present. However, when
we turn to explore the Retention and Extensional approaches in more
detail, we shall see that these difficulties may not be as serious as
they can initially seem.
A further issue concerns the kind of contents to be found
within individual specious presents. Foster, himself a leading
realist of the Extensional persuasion, writes: ‘duration and
change through time seem to be presented to us with the same phenomenal
immediacy as homogeneity and variation of colour through space’
(1982: 255). Broad remarks: ‘There is no doubt that
sensible motion and rest are genuine unanalysable properties of visual
sensa. I am aware of them as directly as I am aware of the
redness of a red patch.’ (1923: 287) Broad and Foster are
committed to the following general principle:
The Immediacy Thesis: change, succession and
persistence can feature in our experience with the same vivid immediacy
as colour or sound, or any other phenomenal feature.
The contents of Extensional specious presents – the contents
apprehended as changing – are ordinary experiential
contents (e.g., sounds as they feature in immediate experience).
Consequently it is not surprising to find that proponents of the
Extensional model generally subscribe to the Immediacy Thesis.
Their Retentionalist counterparts can do so, but usually
don’t – a notable exception is Lee (2014a, 2014b). Brentano, Husserl and other leading Retentional theorists hold that the contents of the specious present appear under
varying ‘temporal modes of presentation’ (as they are often
called). If the succession of tones [C-D-E] form a single
specious present, if E seem fully or maximally present, D will appear
under the mode ‘just past’, and E ‘a little more
past’. On this view, each of C, D and E are experienced as
parts of a unified ensemble – in conformity with the Diachronic
Unity Thesis – but they are not experienced as possessing the
same phenomenal immediacy.
Proponents of the Cinematic, Extensional and Retentional models are
offering very different accounts of the structure and composition of
our consciousness of over short periods of time. There is a
further issue: what is the structure of consciousness over
longer intervals? It is not unusual for us to remain
awake for hours at a stretch; although the contents of our
consciousness may frequently change, we can remain continuously
(uninterruptedly) awake and aware for quite long periods. William
James is well-known for emphasising the continuity of
experience – ‘Consciousness, then, does not appear to
itself as chopped up into bits. Such words as “chain”
or “train” do not describe it fitly … It is nothing
jointed, it flows. A “river” or a
“stream” are the metaphors by which it is naturally
described’ (1890: 239) – and James’ stream metaphor
strikes many as apt. In the light of this new questions
arise. How do the momentary static states of the Cinematic
theorists combine to form extended streams of continuous consciousness
of the sort we typically enjoy during our waking hours? Indeed,
can they combine in the way required? Analogous
questions can be posed for the specious presents posited by Retentional
and Extensional theorists: how do they manage to combine to
form such streams?
While the inability to answer these new questions in a satisfactory
manner can certainly count against a model of temporal consciousness, the situation is
complicated by the diversity of opinions concerning both the degree to
which consciousness really is continuous, and manner or nature of its
continuity. James himself defined ‘continuous’
as ‘that which is without breach, crack or division’ (1890:
237), but what he meant by this requires some unpacking.
It is certainly possible – and quite natural – to
characterize continuity in terms of an absence of gaps: a subject
S’s consciousness can be said to be continuous with
respect to an interval T if S is having an experience of some
kind at every moment during T. In more subjective vein, a
succession of stream-phases belonging to S could be said to be
continuous if S is incapable of discerning any gaps between
them. For James this subjective mode of continuity was
particularly important, and – perhaps controversially – he
held that it is possible for streams that are objectively discontinuous
(e.g., separated by a gap of minutes or hours) to be subjectively
continuous.
However, for James the continuity that is characteristic of our
consciousness involved more than the mere absence of gaps, whether
objective or subjective. He also held that this continuity
typically involves a (fairly) high degree of similarity in the
qualitative character of one’s experience from moment to
moment. Large and sudden variations do occur – a sudden
thunderclap makes a massive difference to one’s auditory
experience – but these do not usually disrupt background
continuities in (say) bodily feeling, or so James argued.
In addition to gaplessness and qualitative similarity, James
recognized a further mode of connectedness between stream-phases:
successive phases are linked experientially. He held
that each brief phase of our stream of consciousness flows, in seamless
fashion, into its successor, and that these ‘co-conscious
transitions’ are themselves experienced. There is more than
a hint of this in the passage just cited, but elsewhere he is more
explicit. In the essay ‘A World of Pure Experience’
(1904) he writes: ‘My experiences and your experiences are
“with” each other in various external ways, but mine pass
into mine, and yours pass into yours in a way in which yours and mine
never pass into one another’. More generally, James
held that consciousness is not composed of absolutely distinct
component parts (i.e., individual isolated experiences), but is
‘conjunctive’:
To coin some further terminology, on this view each brief
stream-phase is experientially connected to its
neighbours. Irrespective of whether it is correct, James’
contention certainly possesses prima facie plausibility: if one hears a
succession of brief tones do-re-mi-fa-so, it is certainly
natural to say that one also hear each tone flowing into its
successor. It does not seem implausible to suppose the same holds
more generally: does not each brief phase of a typical stream of
consciousness seem to merge smoothly and seamlessly with its
successor?
Although the Jamesian emphasis on the continuity of consciousness is
widely viewed sympathetically, there are dissenters. Galen
Strawson endorses realism – he believes change and succession can
be directly experienced – but he also rejects James’
stream-metaphor as ‘inept’, and argues that consciousness
is radically discontinuous and disjointed: ‘It is always shooting
off, fuzzing, shorting out, spurting and stalling.’ (1997:
421). For Strawson there are gaps and fissures in our experience,
and these are sometimes accompanied by dramatic changes in content:
‘The (invariably brief) periods of true experiential continuity
are usually radically disjunct from each other in this way, even when
they are not radically disjunct in terms of content.’
(1997:
 422)[6]
In a
similar vein, Dennett holds that ‘One of the most striking
features of consciousness is its discontinuity (1991:
356).
Pulling these points together, we can distinguish three main
positions on the continuity issue:
The Discontinuity Thesis: although consciousness is
commonly described as continuous, this is wrong: in fact our
consciousness is highly disjointed, far more so than most people
suppose.
The Modest Continuity Thesis: our typical streams
of consciousness are indeed continuous, and this involves (i) freedom
from gaps, in either or both of the senses mentioned above, and/or (ii)
a significant degree of moment-to-moment qualitative similarity.
The Strong Continuity Thesis: in addition to the
relationships encapsulated in the Modest Thesis, the successive brief
phases of our typical streams of consciousness are experientially
connected.
What divides Modest from Strong forms of continuity is the existence
of directly experienced connections – James’
‘co-conscious transitions’ – between successive
stream-phases. The experienced transitions posited by advocates
of Strong Continuity can plausibly be regarded as experienced changes
(or successions). Since antirealists deny that change or
succession can be directly experienced, they are not in a position to
accept the Strong Continuity Thesis. It is otherwise for
realists: since the latter hold that change and succession can
be directly experienced, their position looks to be entirely compatible
with Strong Continuity. However, as we shall see in due course,
the situation is by no means straightforward: some realist models can
accommodate Strong Continuity more easily than others.
When it comes to explaining how it is possible for our consciousness
to combine experiential continuity with the experience of change
the account offered by the Cinematic realist is appealingly
straightforward. On this view, a typical stream of consciousness
consists of a close-packed, gap-free continuum of momentary (or very
brief) phases. Although the contents of these phases are
themselves momentary – they do not present motion or change, they
are akin to static snapshots – their occurrence in rapid
succession succeeds in generating all the change, succession and motion
we find in our experience – or so the Cinematic realist
claims. The basic feature of the model are depicted in Figure
3. On the left we see a punctual beam of awareness, the smooth,
steady advance of which generates a sequence of momentary snapshot-like
contents (of a falling object, in this instance), only a small
selection of which is shown on the right.
Figure 3.
Cinematic PT-realism: seemingly dynamic phenomenal contents are
produced by an advancing ‘beam’ of awareness.
This Cinematic form of realism does not feature prominently in the
literature – it was not encountered at all in the course of our
brief historical survey – and with good reason: we shall see
shortly that it is vulnerable to serious objections. But it
nonetheless has sufficient intuitive appeal to be worth
considering. By accepting that motion and change feature in our
immediate experience the doctrine has the merit of taking the
phenomenological data at face value. It also combines a quite
natural way of conceiving of the temporal structure of consciousness
– i.e., as confined to the momentary present – with an
equally natural view as to the kind of content the resulting
momentary episodes of experiencing could have. A
camera with a fast shutter-speed (e.g., 1/10,000 of a second) will
‘freeze’ all but the fastest of motions: the facial
expression of victorious sprinter at the precise moment they crossed
the line can thus be revealed. If our consciousness takes the
form of a series of momentary (or extremely brief)
‘exposures’, won’t the contents of our consciousness
be similarly static or frozen? As an additional bonus the
Cinematic realist can easily explain at least one aspect of the
continuity of consciousness. If a stream of consciousness is
composed of a gap-free sequence (or continuum) of momentary
(or extremely brief) states, it is not surprising that we can be
continually aware for hours at a stretch. The Modest Continuity
Thesis (§3) is thus easily accommodated.
As for how sequences of static ‘snapshots’ can give rise
to experiences which seem to possess dynamic contents, the Cinematic
realist certainly has to provide a plausible account of how this comes
about. Two avenues may seem promising in this regard.
First, even if our awareness lacks any significant temporal depth, as
it does on the proposed model, might it not be that the
continuous advance of a point-like ray of awareness will
generate episodes of experiencing which can encompass change and
succession? By way of an analogy, think of the way a needle (or
any other sharply pointed object) moved across the surface of
one’s skin produces a continuous sensation of motion.
Although at any one time it is only the needle’s
near-dimensionless point that is in contact with our skin, we can
nonetheless feel the needle moving smoothly and continuously
from one location to another. Second, in the visual case, it is
well known that rapid successions of static images can result
in experiences of motion. The images shown on a TV or cinema
screen are static snapshots, but evidently, they are perceived as
dynamic: objects on a cinema screen are seen to move as smoothly and
continuously as their real-life counterparts. Might not the same
apply to other modes of experience, and hence to our streams of
consciousness as a whole?
Unfortunately for the Cinematic realist, closer scrutiny reveals
that each of these proposals is problematic. A moving
‘beam’ of awareness could produce a period of time during
which experience is continuously occurring, in the sense that at each
moment during the interval there is an experience being had by the
relevant subject, but by itself it can produce nothing more, and
– for a viable form of realism, at least – more is
required. For a subject to be directly aware of a temporally
extended phenomenon (such as a brief movement), adjoining phases of the
phenomenon must in some manner be experienced together by the
subject. As noted in §1.2, realists subscribe to the
Diachronic Unity Thesis: they hold that contents that appear to occur
in succession can be experienced together (or be co-conscious), in just
the same way as contents which appear to occur simultaneously, at least
within the confines of the specious present. But since for the
Cinematic realist individual episodes of awareness are durationless,
and likewise the contents apprehended in such episodes, it is difficult
to see how the required Diachronic Unity can be accommodated.
Since ex hypothesi our awareness does not extend beyond or
between momentary episodes of experiencing, there is no scope at all
for adjoining phases to be experienced together in the way
required.
The point can be made a slightly different way. To employ the
usual terminology, a succession of experiences is one thing, an
experience of succession is quite another. Suppose there are
ten people, P1, P2, P3 …
P10 standing in line with their eyes closed, but
directed at a tennis game taking place nearby. If first
P1 opens their eyes momentarily before closing them again,
followed immediately by P2, then by P3, all the
way to P10, then we have a succession of ten experiences,
each revealing the on-court action at a particular moment. But
there is no experience of succession: all each person sees is a
momentary still image, and these momentary experiencings are completely
isolated from one another. Accordingly, the resulting sequence of
experiences do not add up to an experiencing of movement or
change. Although it may not be quite so obvious, the model
of temporal consciousness proposed by the Cinematic realist also
creates nothing more than mere succession of experiences. There
are, of course, differences between the two cases, but these
differences do not affect the point at issue. First, in the
tennis example there are ten distinct subjects, whereas the sequence of
momentary states posited by the Cinematic realist experienced by a
single subject. But for this difference to matter, the momentary
states enjoyed by the single subject would have to be unified within
that subject’s consciousness: for if they remain discrete,
experientially isolated from one another, as it were, there is
no possibility of their combining to constitute an experience of
succession. But with the resources available to the Cinematic
realist – momentary acts of awareness, momentary contents –
there is no obvious way of creating the required unity. As for
the second difference, in our simple example there are but ten
distinct experiences, whereas Cinematic realists will insist that on
their model we are dealing with a true continuum, in the
mathematical sense: we are to suppose that the perceiving of the tennis
game involves an infinite number of distinct momentary
experiences, not just ten. But as Bergson was fond of pointing
out, numbers make no difference here: the points in the orthodox
mathematical continuum are always entirely distinct from one
another, no matter how close together they may be: indeed, since these
points are densely ordered, between any two points there is always a
further
 point.[7]
What of the cinematic analogy itself? Isn’t the fact
that we see motion on TV and movie screens evidence that successions of
motion-free images can give rise to an experience of
motion? Although there is a sense in which this is correct, it is
of little or no assistance to the Cinematic realist.
It is perfectly true that perceiving a succession of still images
can result in a full-blooded perception of motion. If the stills
which compose cinema film are shown quite slowly – say 2–5 frames
per second (fps) – they are seen quite clearly as
stills; if the pace picks up – to around 10 fps, they start to
look somewhat blurred; if the pace picks up still further – to 20
or 25 fps – something remarkable happens: the images come
alive, and we suddenly start to see genuine (and very clear,
non-blurry) motion. This phenomenon – known as
‘illusory motion’ or ‘the phi phenomenon’ was
first explored in the 19th century by Exner, and has been
much-studied since then (not surprisingly, since it underpins
televisual industries). But while it is real enough, the phi
phenomenon is of little assistance to the Cinematic realist. What
the latter needs is an account of how successions of momentary
conscious states, each possessing entirely static contents, can
give rise to the experience of motion. Static images are
indeed being displayed on a cinema screen while we view a movie, but
not only are these onscreen stills not themselves experiences, they do
not register in our visual experience as static images: what
we actually seem to see onscreen are objects in motion.
Phenomenologically speaking, the stills are invisible. Given
this, all the phi phenomenon clearly and unambiguously demonstrates is
that a rapid succession of brief perceptual stimuli (each
deriving from a brief on-screen image) can be transformed by our visual
systems – after a good deal of processing – into
experiences which feature motion. These perceptual stimuli are
not themselves experiential in nature, consisting as they do of showers
of photons (or, alternatively, patterns of electro-chemical activity on
the surface of the retina).
In the absence of any plausible account of how change and succession
can feature in our immediate experience, the Cinematic model cannot be
regarded as a promising form of realism. Its difficulties do not
end here. The Cinematic model certainly conforms to the Modest
Continuity Thesis – it is compatible with our streams of
consciousness being continuous in the sense of gap-free – but it
is otherwise with regard to the Strong Continuity Thesis.
According to proponents of the latter, the sense we have that each
brief phase of our streams of consciousness flow into their successors
is underpinned (or generated by) the existence of real experiential
connections between such phases. It is not obvious, to say the
least, how such connections could exist if all streams are composed of
discrete momentary states that are experientially isolated from their
immediate neighbours – see Figure 4.
Figure 4.
How to satisfy (and not satisfy) the Strong Continuity Thesis.
This failure will not matter for realists who reject the full-blown
Jamesian conception of streamal continuity, but for those realists who
find the case for Strong Continuity compelling, the failure is a
serious one.
For the PT-antirealist it is a mistake to suppose that change,
persistence and succession feature in our immediate experience.
While this standpoint can seem wrongheaded, it can also seem the
plainest common sense – or at least a consequence of
plain common sense. As Augustine and Reid both recognised, it is very
natural to suppose that we are only directly aware of what is going on
now. If the present, strictly conceived, is the
durationless interface between the past and the future – and it
is commonly taken to be precisely this – the conclusion that our
consciousness is confined to a durationless instant swiftly
follows. As noted in §4.1, in connection with Cinematic
realism, it is also quite natural to think that the content of a
momentary state of consciousness will itself have a momentary
character: in effect, such a content will take the form of a still,
static snapshot. If this conception of both consciousness and its
contents is correct, antirealism looms large on the horizon.
Irrespective of the considerations which can make antirealism an
appealing doctrine, there remain the considerations, of a largely
phenomenological character, which strongly favour realism.
Aren’t there occasions (many of them) when we see a
horse crossing a finishing line, or a car turning round a corner, or a
postman walking up the garden path? Can’t we hear
the explosive roar of crowd, or the sound of an approaching car, or the
barking of a dog? Can’t we feel shivers running
down our spine? Claims that change and movement can be directly
experienced have a good deal of plausibility. What can be done to
undermine these claims?
Thomas Reid believed that our streams of consciousness are composed
of sequences of momentary states; since he also believed these such
states incapable of furnishing us with an genuine experience of
succession (see §2.3) Reid can safely be classed as a Cinematic
antirealist. Although Reid recognized that this austere position
on the contents of experience is in conflict with how we normally think
and talk, he also thought this conflict could be defused.
For Reid the apparent contradiction between strict philosophical
truth and common sense (and common experience) is superficial:
‘It arises from this, that philosophers and the vulgar differ in
the meaning they put upon what is called the present time, and
are thereby led to made a different limit between sense and
memory’ (1855: 236). Reid argues that our ordinary talk of
‘seeing’ things move is intelligible, at least on its own
terms, because in ordinary life we generally construe the present in a
loose and flexible way. If it suits our purposes – and it
often does – we allow ‘the present’ to denote a
period of time, rather than a durationless moment.
(There is no need for the period to be short: we sometimes refer to the
present decade or century.) And since temporal intervals can
contain change and movement, our ordinary ways of talking are not in
the least paradoxical:
So far so plausible, perhaps. But a significant worry
remains. How plausible is Reid’s proposed (precise,
philosophical) delineation of the respective provinces of
sense and memory? Realists will insist that it
is questionable. To illustrate, consider the case of
motion. Reid claims that ‘it is only by the aid of
memory that we discern motion, or any succession whatsoever.
We see the present place of the body; we remember the successive
advance it made to that place: the first can, then, only give us a
conception of motion, when joined to the last.’ (ibid.
237) If this is right, then when (say) we see a car turning a corner,
all that is ever present in our sensory consciousness is a
series of static images, each revealing the car to be at a particular
location. The car’s motion, to the extent it enters our
awareness at all, exists only in memories which accompany these
momentary perceptions. But from a phenomenological standpoint at
least, this does not ring true. The phenomenal character (the
‘what it’s like-ness’) of actually seeing a
car turn a corner, and remembering (via recollected visual
images) seeing an otherwise similar car turn a corner are very
different indeed. Not to dwell too long on the obvious: in the
perceptual case the car is clear, vivid and (seemingly) out
there in the world, whereas the remembered car is far less clear
and vivid, and very definitely in here (in the head, rather
than out in the world). If the car’s motion is
something we perceive, and it certainly seems to be, Reid’s
antirealist analysis is lacking in plausibility.
In fact, the antirealist’s predicament may well be more
serious still. Conflating perceived motion with remembered motion
is one thing, but there is an important sense in which the antirealist
is not in a position to appeal to memories of motion
either. A memory-replay of a prior perceiving of motion is itself
a process which unfolds over time, and – on the face of it
– has a dynamic character: e.g., you see (albeit in your
mind’s eye) the car sweeping round the corner.
Since it would be odd to hold that motion can be remembered but not
perceived, the antirealist will presumably want to analyse both forms
of experience in the same sort of way. Accordingly, your visual
remembering (or replay) of the car’s turning the corner will take
the form of a series of static memory-images of the car at particular
locations, and each of these images (save the first) will be
accompanied by other static images, in the form of
snapshot-like memories of the car as seen at still earlier
locations. Antirealism in this form may be a more consistent
doctrine, but the wholesale elimination (or reduction) of the moving to
the motion-free has two consequences. First of all, it is by no
means obvious how our memories could have the dynamic character they
seem to possess if they consisted of nothing but still images piled on
top of other still images. Second, and for present purposes more
importantly, the Reid-style antirealist’s account of
perceived motion is significantly weakened. Realists
will argue that it is not very plausible to analyse the perceived
motion in terms of momentary motion-free perceptual experiences
accompanied memories of motion, but it is significantly less plausible
if the relevant memories, rather than being truly dynamic, are
themselves composed of entirely static images.
Although it may well be that the most compelling evidence for the
realist’s claim that motion (and other forms of change) feature
in immediate experience is straightforwardly phenomenological –
that’s just the way our experience seems to be – there are
empirical findings in psychology and neuroscience which point in the
same general direction. We have already encountered (in
§3.1) the phi phenomenon (or ‘illusory motion’).
In the simplest of cases – as observed by Plateau in 1850 and
Exner in 1875 – what is in reality a pair of lights some distance
apart flashing alternately, is perceived as a single light moving back
and forth. A more dramatic (and ubiquitous) illustration of the
same tendency is television and cinema, where a mere 25 frames per
second suffices to produce a perception of smooth motion. It
seems that when our visual systems are supplied with stimuli which are
merely suggestive of movement they are eager to supply us with vivid
experiences of motion itself. This is not all. Studies of
the visual systems in the brain have revealed areas – in
particular the region known as V5 – which specialize in
motion-detection. Interestingly, the condition of cerebral
akinetopsia, a form of motion-blindness, has been linked to damage
in the V5 area. An afflicted patient, known as LM,
This too is suggestive: if, as the antirealist claims, motion never
features in the immediate experience of normal human perceivers, what
is it that LM has lost? (For some further details of these findings
see Section 1 of the supplementary document
 Some Relevant Empirical Findings (Psychology, Psychophysics, Neuroscience).)
Empirical findings along these lines by no means definitively refute
the antirealist – alternative interpretations are possible
– but they do make life more difficult. Rather than
straightforwardly denying that we directly experience motion in the
manner of Reid, the antirealist stance would be more plausible if a
credible explanation as to why we believe we experience motion
(and more generally, change) if in fact we do not. One route,
suggested by Crick and Kock, is to find (or posit) a vector-like
feature that durationless contents could possess, and which is also
such as to strongly suggest or imply movement, even though no movement
is actually present. According to their ‘snapshot
hypothesis’ (2003: 122) – in effect, a version of Cinematic
anti-realism – our consciousness not only comes in discrete
chunks, the experience of motion is itself illusory:
Quite what is involved, at the phenomenal level, in motion being
‘painted onto’ a motionless snapshot is explained only by
way of an analogy: a drawing of a person in motion (running or ice
skating, say) can suggest motion, even though it is entirely
motion-free. In response, realists will point out that there is a
sizeable difference, phenomenologically speaking, between even looking
at a still image which merely depicts motion, no matter how suggestively,
and actually seeing motion. By way of further support, Koch
quotes Oliver Sacks, who reports in his (1970) an occurrence of
‘cinematographic vision’ during one of his own migraine
attacks:
Koch approvingly cites Sacks’ suggestion that cinematographic
vision – a form of akinetopsia – reveals the ‘nature
of visual experience when the illusion of motion has been
lost’. However, this speculation is puzzling for two
reasons. The first is trivial: the designation
‘cinematographic’ is less than ideal and potentially
misleading: as we have already seen (in §4.1), a plausible case
can be made for holding that in a properly run cinema, the stills
projected onto the screen are not themselves seen as such
– all we see are the intended moving images.
Second and more importantly, given the world of difference between
Sacks’ motion-free experience and our everyday visual experience,
in what sense can the motion we apprehend in the latter reasonably be
construed as illusory? The realist will insist that if motion is
an intrinsic feature of sensory experience – and it seems to be
– doesn’t that suffice to ensure that it is a real
feature of it too?
Le Poidevin (2007: 88–92) tentatively forwards an alternative
hypothesis. As Aristotle noted, if you stare at a waterfall for a
short period, and then turn your gaze to the bank beside it, you will
see part of the bank (seemingly) start to move in an upwards
direction. This phenomenon is commonly called ‘the
waterfall illusion’ (or motion aftereffect), and the
illusory motion is of an intriguing sort. You will not see a part
of the bank detach itself from its surroundings and drift up towards
the sky. Rather, you will see the contents within a fixed and
immobile region of the bank – roughly the size of the waterfall
you were staring at previously – losing their normal solidity and
becoming fluid-like. Although these contents seems to be flowing
upward, they do so without changing – at least in a clear and
unambiguous way – their location with respect to the rest of
the
 bank.[8]
As
for an explanation of what is going on in such cases, Le Poidevin (following Richard Gregory) suggests that perhaps we can discern here
the workings of two distinct neural mechanisms. One
‘registers what we might call “pure motion”, i.e.,
gives rise to the impression of motion without any associated sense of
change of position. It is this system that is responsible for the
sense of perceiving motion as happening now.’ (2007:
89) A second system, relying on short-term memory, tracks and
compares the alterations in location over time. This second
system is not concerned with telling us about presently occurring
motions, rather it gives rise to the sense that objects have changed
their positions relative to one another. Hence Le
Poidevin’s proposal. Perhaps our ordinary experience of
motion does, after all, consist of nothing but momentary static
snapshots – in accord with Cinematic antirealism – but
these momentary experiences seem dynamic thanks to the
activation of the ‘pure motion’ mechanism in our visual
system. These snapshots do not actually feature movement, but as
the waterfall illusion illustrates, movement – at least in the
form of change of position over time – is not required for the
vivid impression of motion.
Although this is a far more promising line for the antirealist to take – see Arstila (2016a) for a spirited defence – it also faces challenges.
As Le Poidevin concedes, it is not obvious that the proposed explanation can be generalized: even if the
existence of the envisaged twin-track neural systems could be
established in the visual case, there is at present no reason to think
that there are corresponding systems for all the other modes
of experience, and as Realists will be swift to point out, change can
be heard, felt, remembered and imagined, as well as
 seen.[9]
A second
worry concerns the character of the ‘sense’ or
‘impression’ of motion delivered by the hypothesized pure
motion system. These have to account for the very vivid
appearances of motion in ordinary perceptions, not just the
rather peculiar motions produced in waterfall-type illusions. How
precisely do they do this? What is their character? There
are only two obvious options. The impressions could themselves be
sensory ingredients, of a visual kind, which are in some way suggestive
of motion. Alternatively, they could be non-sensory: perhaps they
are akin to judgements, or intuitive feelings (or convictions or
beliefs), bearing a message along the lines of ‘that thing
there is moving!’ The sensory option is problematic, for
– as already noted in connection with Crick and Koch – it
is not easy to see what feature of a still, static image could be
sufficiently suggestive of motion. But the non-sensory option is
also vulnerable to an objection. Realists will point out, once
again, that perceived motion – both the ordinary kind, and the
peculiar kind associated with motion aftereffect – exists on the
level of sensory phenomena: it features prominently in our immediate experience. If this is right, the claim that motion-as-seen can be
constituted of judgements or convictions, no matter how deep-seated or
instinctive these might be, does not seem very plausible.
These issues about temporally dynamic contents aside, there remains
the more general question of whether the Cinematic antirealist can deal
in a satisfactory manner with the continuity of
consciousness. If not, the Cinematic model itself would be less
than fully unsatisfactory, even if it could provide a credible account
of our short-term experience of motion and change. In this
regard, the points made in connection with the realist version of the
Cinematic approach (in §4.1) also apply to the antirealist
version. Whereas Modest Continuity poses no difficulty at
all, the confinement of phenomenal unity to the contents of momentary
states (see Fig. 4.2) means that Strong Continuity is
unattainable.
Given the difficulties antirealists have encountered in doing full
justice to the phenomenological considerations to which their realist
counterparts give such emphasis, they may be tempted – or wise to
consider – a more radical option. Perhaps there is a more
dramatic discrepancy between the actual characteristics of our
experience, on the one hand, and our beliefs about these
characteristics on the other, than anything we have considered up to
now. True, we do talk as though we see things move (and more
generally, perceive change), and doubtless this talk reflects our
beliefs, but perhaps our beliefs are simply wrong. Perhaps our
immediate experience is in reality entirely motion-free, and our
streams of consciousness radically fragmented, but since we do not
believe our experience is like this, we do not talk as though it
is.
With regard to the continuity issue, as noted in §3, a position
along these lines has been advocated by Dennett. If asked whether
our typical visual fields are fully continuous, even when one of our eyes is closed, most
of us are inclined to answer in the affirmative: when we look at (say) a white wall, we see an uninterrupted expanse of white.  In such cases we are certainly
unable to detect a beachball-sized fuzzy dark expanse lying just to one side
of the central axis of vision. But the physiology of the eye
suggests there should be a ‘blind spot’ at that location,
corresponding to the region of the retina occupied by the optic nerve
which is devoid of light-sensitive cells. As for why we do not
detect a blind region in our visual field, the standard – and on
the face of it, plausible – answer is that our visual systems
engage in some ‘perceptual interpolation’ or
filling-in: our brains extrapolate from the stimuli reaching
the light-sensitive cells in the region of the retina immediately
surrounding the blind-spot, and fabricate experience to fill the
relevant region of the visual field accordingly.
Dennett points out that there is alternative to this account. Rather
than ‘making up’ experience in this manner, perhaps our
brains simply fail to notice that there is a lack of visual
information deriving from the hole-region: after all, an absence of
information is not the same thing as information about an
absence. Never having received information from this region, the
brain simply works on the assumption that nothing special is going on
there: ‘The brain doesn’t have to “fill in” for
the blind spot, since the region in which the blind spot falls is
already labelled (e.g., “plaid” … “more of the
same”) (1991: 335). In effect, since we have a
belief about what the blind region contains – typically,
‘more of the same’ – why should the brain go to the
trouble of generating experience as well? Dennett goes on to
suggest that this treatment of spatial holes can plausibly be extended
to temporal holes (gaps in the continuity of experience) also.
Our visual experience is constantly interrupted by our eyes darting
about during saccades. We don’t notice the resulting holes or
gaps in our experience, but they don’t need to be filled in
because we’re not designed to notice them. More
generally: ‘One of the most striking features of consciousness is
its discontinuity – as revealed in the blind spot, and
the saccadic gaps, to take the simplest examples. The
discontinuity of consciousness is striking because of the
apparent continuity of consciousness.’ (1991:
356)
Although Dennett himself concentrates on explaining why we are
inclined to describe our experience as continuous if it really
discontinuous, the approach can be extended to the immediate experience
of change, or so Chuard argues:
Suppose the ‘succession of static snapshots’ conception of
experience, as proposed by the Cinematic antirealist is
correct. Provided the contents and temporal arrangement of these
static snapshots are enough to convince our brains that we are
perceiving motion and change, we will inevitably believe that
this is what we are perceiving, and hence describe our
experience in such terms. Isn’t this all that we are required to
explain?  For Dennett and Chuard nothing further is needed.
In response realists will fully accept that we believe that change and
continuity (of the Modest and/or Strong forms) are features of our
immediate experience. What they are unlikely to accept is the
proposal that (in effect) these features of our experience
reduce to these beliefs. They will claim – and on
the face of it, plausibly – that we know there is more to our
consciousness than our beliefs about our consciousness. We know
this because we have direct introspective access to the content and
character of our experiences, and typically, our beliefs about the
character of our experiences are informed by what introspection
reveals. Hence if we believe our visual field is spatially
continuous, it is because – when we direct our attention and
introspect – we find precisely this; similarly, if we believe our
immediate experience exhibits continuity and embraces change, it is
because these same features are to be found in our
experience. Prudent realists will accept that our judgements
about the character of our experience are fallible. But they will
also point that our judgements are less likely to err when they concern
the more basic and ubiquitous features of our consciousness, and
– arguably – change and continuity are among these
features. The situation would be different if the antirealist
could provide reasons for being particularly sceptical about our
judgements concerning change and continuity – reasons for
thinking that our beliefs about these features of our experience are
more dubious than the belief that colour, sound or warmth are
experienced. It is certainly possible to argue – and some
antirealists have (e.g., Plumer 1985) – that we know these
beliefs are false because it is impossible to provide intelligible
account of how we can be directly aware of change or
movement. We will be considering such arguments when we come to
assess the viability of the various realist proposals.
Dennett himself is unmoved by such considerations. While
recognising that we find it natural to think our beliefs about our
experiences are answerable to a distinct and distinctive realm
of experience, Dennett argues that this is misguided, that
ultimately – so far as consciousness is concerned – there
is only judgement and belief:
Dennett’s strong reductionism with regard to experience is an
extreme and controversial doctrine. It may well give antirealists
what they need, but many may find the price rather too high.
While PT-realists agree that change, persistence and other
temporally extended phenomena can feature in our immediate experience,
they disagree over the experiential structures which make this
possible. Cinematic realists hold that all our experiences of
change are the product of gap-free successions of momentary
stream-phases, each possessing momentary – and static,
motion-free – phenomenal contents. As we saw in §4.1,
although this version of realism can seem appealing, it is also
problematic, in several respects. Proponents of the
remaining principal forms of realism, the Extensional and Retentional
approaches, allow that the contents of our consciousness are themselves
dynamic – they can contain or present succession and persistence
– but they disagree about the manner in which these contents exist
within consciousness. On the Retentional view, which we shall be
looking at in more detail in §6, the dynamic contents are housed
in episodes of consciousness that are themselves momentary.
According to the Extensional view, the topic of this section, these
contents are themselves spread through (or extended over) time.
Although the Extensional model can be developed in different ways, much
of what these variants have in common can be brought out by looking at
how proponents of the approach construe individual specious
presents. For present purposes, so as to bring the
essentials to the fore, it will be useful to focus on a very simple
instance. Figure 5 depicts a single specious present with a
very simple content: ‘C’ and ‘D’ are each brief
tones, which are heard and experienced in succession; this specious
present contains nothing but these two tones.
Figure 5.
Both ‘C’ and ‘D’ here denote the actual
‘live’ experiencings of tones C and D, rather than
memory-images or any other form of after-the-event
representation. The specious present they jointly compose is a
(short-ish) period of continuous experiencing, spread through ordinary
time. Although D occurs later than C, it is also experienced as
following on from C (as indicated by the small block-arrows connecting
the two). Accordingly, what we have here is a genuine experience
of succession, and no mere succession of experiences. Since
the tones are experienced together, albeit in succession, the
two are phenomenally unified, or diachronically co-conscious – as
indicated by the lower double-headed arrow. The limits of the
specious present are determined by the temporal extent of the
diachronic co-consciousness relationship.
As we saw in §2.5, in characterizing his presence-time,
Stern held that experiences unfolding over an interval of time can
“form a unified and complex act of consciousness regardless of
the non-simultaneity of individual parts.” Since the successive
phases of the specious present depicted in Figure 5 do form a
unified ensemble, they clearly conform to Stern’s conception of a
presence-time. James sometimes referred to the specious present a
duration-block, which he characterized thus: ‘We do not
first feel one end and then feel the other after it, and from the
perception of the succession infer an interval of time between, but we
seem to feel the interval of time as a whole, with its two ends
embedded in it.’ (1890: 610) The specious present of
the Extensional model conforms to this characterization. Since
the successive constituents which compose a duration-block are live
experiences, the Extensional specious present also conforms fully to
the Immediacy Thesis (see §3): change can be experienced with the
same force, vivacity (or immediacy) as colour, sound or any other
phenomenal feature.
Figure 6.
The specious present, thus construed, is not confined to the housing
of successions of discrete tones: it can also house continuous change,
in the manner shown in Figure 6. Here we see a ball falling,
bouncing and rising again, all within the confines of a single specious
present. The contents of specious presents are often dynamic
temporal patterns of this sort – though of course
real-life specious presents will usually have far complex and more
varied content: in addition to perceptual contents (from all five
senses) there will usually be conscious thoughts, bodily sensations,
mental images and so forth.
There may seem to be a fundamental difficulty with supposing that our
immediate experience extends through time in the way being
envisaged. Since the successive contents contained within a specious
present are experienced together, isn’t there is a sense in which both
tones are present even though they are non-simultaneous?
Recalling the Extensional Simultaneity Problem (from §3), this
can easily seem absurd. If x and y are experienced
together, and both x and y are present, how can x
and y fail to be simultaneous? If x and y are
both occurring now, mustn’t they also be simultaneous? It is
for precisely this reason that Le Poidevin argues that change and
duration cannot be directly
 perceived.[10]
However, closer scrutiny suggests
there is no real difficulty here. The earlier and later contents
of a single specious present do not occupy ‘the present
moment’ if this is construed as the durationless interface
between past and future – the defining trait of the Extensional
approach is the rejection of the confinement of consciousness to
momentary stream-phases. Nonetheless, there is a sense – a
quite different sense – in which all the contents of a specious
present could legitimately be regarded as ‘being present’:
such contents possess (what we might call) phenomenal
presence, i.e., they each have the immediacy and vivacity that is
characteristic of experiences as they occur. There is no
contradiction in the idea that experiences (or experiential contents)
at different times can possess this property, they obviously do:
yesterday’s toothache was as vivid and real current toothache at
the time I felt it as the toothache I am currently feeling – both
have just as much phenomenal
 presence.[11]
Returning to our main theme – the makeup of individual
specious presents – while Figures 5 and 6 capture the core
features of the Extensional model, they also have their limitations:
the Extensional approach can accommodate different views as to general
character and composition of consciousness, and these differences do
not register in these diagrams. Some philosophers hold that
consciousness has an act-object (or awareness-content) structure, so
every experiencing – even the simplest –involves two
distinguishable components: an awareness (however construed) on the one
hand, and an object or content on the other. Other philosophers
reject this two-level picture, and hold that contents do not need to
fall under an awareness in order to be conscious. As we shall see
in §5.4, the Extensional model is compatible with both these
views. Divergent conceptions of the nature of perceptual
experience are also very relevant in this context. Is the moving
item shown in Figure 6 a phenomenal feature of a conscious state, or
is it a physical object in motion through physical space? Those
who incline to the direct (or naïve) realist view of perception
will favour the latter answer, whereas those who subscribe to the
indirect realist (or Lockean-style representational) view of perception
will favour the former answer. In slightly more general terms,
Extensional theorists who believe that in our ordinary perceptual
experience we are presented with purely phenomenal items (sense-data,
qualia or similar) will regard the visual and auditory contents of
specious presents as themselves being phenomenal in nature.
Although most Extensional theorists subscribe to this general view of
perception – e.g., Foster, Broad, Dainton, Sprigge – there
is no obvious obstacle to combining the Extensional conception of the
specious present with a direct realist construal of perception.
With this combination of views, a typical specious present will consist
of a temporally extended episode of awareness, some of whose contents
will be internal or phenomenal (e.g., a conscious thought, a mental
image), whereas others will be external (e.g., a bouncing ball, a
moving
 car).[12]
Enough has been said – for present purposes at least –
about individual specious presents. The next task is to examine
how individual specious presents, construed in a broadly Extensional
manner, combine to form continuous streams of consciousness. As
we shall see, on this issue there are significant divergences of
opinion among Extensional theorists – divergences which impact
significantly on the general structure of temporal consciousness.
When it comes to explaining how individual specious presents combine
to form streams of consciousness, a simple and perspicuous solution is
available to the Extensional theorist: perhaps a stream of
consciousness is nothing more than a succession of specious presents
laid end-to-end in the manner of a line of building blocks, or bricks
in a wall, in the manner depicted in Figure 7 below. Here just
a short stretch of a stream of consciousness is depicted, consisting of
just two adjacent specious presents, SP1 and SP2,
but the same experiential structure could easily extend over longer
periods.
Figure 7.
Something along the lines of this ‘Discrete Block’ (as
we might call it) conception of a stream of consciousness has been
advocated by Sprigge, Bradley and (perhaps)
 Whitehead.[13]
But while it has a
simplicity that may well be appealing, it is also
problematic.
PT-realists are agreed that change and succession feature in our
immediate experience. To be viable on the phenomenological level,
a realist account of how this is possible must not just capture
some of the change that it is plausible to suppose we directly
experience, it must capture all of it. Let us suppose
that C-D-E-F in Figure 7 are brief tones that are heard in
succession. Given that this sequence is a typical one –
with no sudden or massive disruptions in the listener’s
consciousness over the relevant period – each tone will be heard
as flowing into (or giving way) to its immediate successor. The
discrete block model certain captures some of these experienced
transitions: namely C-D (occurring in SP1) and E-F
(occurring in SP2). But what of the transition between
D and E? Since each of these tones occurs in a distinct specious
present, and (by hypothesis) there is no specious present which
includes them both, this transition is not experienced. For a
sequence of contents to be experienced as a succession, they
must be experienced together, and to be experienced together
they need to be diachronically co-conscious. C and D are thus
related, as are E and F, but D and E are not diachronically
co-conscious. The tones are experienced in a sequence
– D is heard first, then E – but they are not experienced
as a sequence – or to put it another way, these tones
form a succession of experiences, but there is no
experience of succession. The difficulty is serious and
pervasive: Figure 7 illustrates just one instance of a
‘missed’ succession, if the Discrete Block model obtained,
every transition between successive specious presents would fail to be
experienced. Evidently, this is not a desirable result, at least
from the standpoint of realism.
Essentially the same point can be made in terms of the distinction
drawn in §3 between the Moderate and Strong Continuity
theses. If our streams of consciousness were structured in the
way envisaged, there would be no gaps in our experience – no
periods during which nothing is being experienced – and so the
key requirement of Modest Continuity is satisfied. But the Strong
Continuity Thesis requires more: as well as an absence of gaps, all the
successive brief phases which make up a single stream must
experientially connected to their immediate neighbours – each
must be experienced as flowing into its successor. The Discrete
Block model evidently falls short in this respect.
A very different variant of the Extensional approach was proposed by
C.D. Broad in Scientific Thought (1923).
As we have already seen, Broad subscribed to the Immediacy
Thesis: he held that (over short intervals) we experience change with
the same phenomenal immediacy as we experience colour or sound.
Since change can only be directly apprehended if our consciousness can
span a temporal interval, Broad concluded that consciousness
can span a temporal interval. Given this commitment, his
(1923) account is naturally classed as Extensional. However, as
noted in §2.7, this is not the whole story: the mechanics of
Broad’s account are such that is probably more accurately
construed as only partially Extensional. For Broad also
held that our experience of change occurs within momentary episodes of
experiencing – a doctrine which is characteristic of Retentional
accounts.
This hybrid model is heavily dependent upon a particular conception of
the structure of experience. Broad generally worked with a two-level
‘act-object’ or ‘awareness-content’ conception
of consciousness. On this conception, any episode of experiencing
comprises two components: an act of awareness, and a phenomenal
content; experiences per se come into being when contents are
apprehended by acts of awareness. Broad starts his analysis by
proposing that acts of awareness that are themselves strictly
momentary are capable of apprehending phenomenal contents distributed
over short periods of time, in the manner depicted in Figure 8.
Figure 8.
The earlier and later parts of the temporal spread apprehended by the
momentary act of awareness depicted in Figure 8 are evidently
experienced together – they are diachronically co-conscious
– and they are also experienced as a succession. This
spread of content is experienced as a temporally extended whole, in
conformity with James’ characterization of the specious present
as a ‘duration-block’. There is however, one significant
point of divergence: whereas James held that the specious present both
backward and forward (or future-directed) elements, for Broad it is
entirely backward-looking: it stretches from the present point of time
a short distance into the past.
Whatever one may think of its reliance on a ‘momentary
awareness + extended content’ mechanism, Broad’s theory has
– on the face of it at least – a distinctive advantage over
the Sprigge’s Discrete Block model when it comes to conforming to
the Strong Continuity Thesis. The many experienced successions
the Discrete Block model fails to register are all effortlessly
captured by Broad’s theory. This is easily
appreciated with the assistance of Figure 9.
Figure 9.
As can be seen, act of awareness A1 apprehends the
tone-sequence C-D, and act of awareness A3 apprehends the
tone-sequence E-F, but the tone-sequence not recognized by the
Discrete Block model – D-E – is now apprehended by the act
of awareness A2, which occurs between A1 and
A3. Since Broad postulated that the acts of awareness
form a dense continuum (hence between A1 and A2
there are uncountable number of other acts, and likewise between
A2 and A3) the theory can accommodate all the
experienced transitions it needs to accommodate. The
act-continuum is represented in Figure 9 by the line running beneath
A1-A3.
In the light of what has been said so far, it would be natural to
suppose that Broad would identify individual specious presents with
momentary acts and the contents these acts apprehend (e.g., the
combination A1[C-D] would count as a single specious
present). In fact he opted for another position. Agreeing
with James that strictly durationless experiences (or apprehensions)
are abstractions, Broad insists that a viable account of sensible
duration must rest on the foundation of continuous periods of
sensing. Since he defines the duration of the specious present in
terms of momentary acts, strictly speaking temporally extended acts do
not possess specious presents; however, they do possess close analogues
of these: what is (in effect) the specious present of an interval of
sensing S is the stretch of content that is apprehended
throughout S. To get a rough idea of what this involves,
consider the continuous act of sensing A1-A2 in
Figure 9. What stretch of content does the specious present of
this act comprise? According to Broad the answer is D. The
earlier phases of A1-A2 apprehend C (or parts of
it), and the later phases of it apprehend E (or parts of it), but D is
the largest stretch of content that is apprehended by every
phase of A1-A2.
This feature of Broad’s theory is counterintuitive, and it
gives rise to some intriguing, and arguably peculiar,
 results.[14]
Present
purposes, however, will best be served by concentrating on two most
fundamental problems faced by Broad’s account. The first
worry concerns phenomenological adequacy. Consider again
tone-phase D in Figure 9. As we have just seen, it is
experienced as a whole throughout the period of sensing
[A1-A2]. Broad may reject durationless acts
of sensing, but he does not reject acts of sensing of varying extents
or durations, and [A1-A2] includes as proper
parts many acts of finite duration that are shorter than itself, and
just as [A1-A2] apprehends D as a whole, so too
do all these finite parts. In which case, instead of being
experienced just once, won’t D be experienced many times
over? How could it be otherwise, given that each of these finite
parts includes an experiencing of the whole of D? If
Broad’s model predicts the existence of experiences which do not
actually occur, it seems safe to conclude that the mechanism at the
heart of it is
 flawed.[15]
The second worry is whether Broad’s model can secure the
continuity of consciousness in a way that is acceptable to the
realist. At the heart of Broad’s account are acts of
sensing which apprehend temporally extended contents. Since in
the case of a continuous stream of consciousness these acts form a
dense continuum, there is no difficulty with ‘gaps’ in
consciousness, and so Broad’s account meets the requirements of
the Modest Continuity Thesis. It is not clear, however, that it
meets the requirements of the Strong Continuity Thesis. To do so,
Broad’s account must allow successive phases of a stream to be
experienced as flowing into one another – it must make room for
experiential connections between stream-phases – but
this looks problematic. Returning to Figure 9, consider the
extended act of sensing stretching from A1 to AN,
and the extended act stretching from shortly after AN to
A2, where AN (not shown in the figure) is roughly
mid-way between A1 and A2. These two
extended acts can be as close together in time we like, but they are
nonetheless entirely distinct acts of awareness, and the two
are not experientially connected. Hence the problem. It is
true that the acts apprehend (in part) the same content, but
it is not clear this suffices to forge the required experiential
links. We can certainly stipulate that the acts concerned have
the same subject, but in the absence of any compelling story
as to how this secures phenomenal continuity it is not clear how this
helps either. Nor is it clear that a viable account can be
constructed if we remain faithful to the spirit of Broad’s
approach. Suppose we were to hold that the acts
[A1-AN] and [AN-A2] are
unified by virtue of their both falling under a second-order act of
awareness, an act which apprehends first-order acts (and their
contents). Since the entire spread of content apprehended over
the interval encompassed by A1 and A2 would be
experienced together, the result would be phenomenologically
unrealistic: the specious present would have twice the duration that it
has in actuality. And the difficulties do not end here: for what
unifies the second-order acts? As illustrated in Figure 10, if
we take this route, we can easily end up with a situation in which the
entire content of a stream of consciousness is apprehended as a single
whole, by a single all-embracing act.
Figure 10.
According to one theological tradition, God’s experience has the
character of a totum simul, and takes in the entire history of
the universe in a single apprehension. Since it is clear that our
is experience is not of this form – the span of our
immediate awareness is measured in seconds at most – it is clear
that this way of securing Strong Continuity is a non-starter.
The problems encountered by the Discrete Block theory and
Broad’s hybrid model point the way forward to a more promising
Extensional account. Recall the problem of ‘missed
transitions’ that afflicts the Discrete Block model: in the case
of the succession of tones C-D-E-F, although C and D are experienced as
phenomenally continuous, E and F likewise, D and E are not – for
unlike [C-D] and [E-F] they do not fall within the confines of a single
specious present (see Figure 7). There is a simple remedy for
this problem: the omitted transition can be restored by positing that
[D-E] itself forms a single specious present – a further
‘duration block’ in the manner of Sprigge and Bradley
– which for convenience we can call SPX. Since
(by hypothesis) D-E is an experienced succession, this stipulation is
well-motivated on the phenomenological level. What is more, this
useful result has been achieved without recourse to Broad’s
momentary-act/extended content conception of the specious present: the
account remains fully (rather than merely partially)
Extensionalist.
As Figure 11 makes clear, acknowledging the existence of
SPX does not commit us to recognizing any experiences in
addition to C-D-E-F, for SPX is composed of the second-half
of SP1 (= D) and the first-half of SP2 (=
E). To put it another way, there is a D-type experience to be
found in SP1 and also in SPX, but there are not
two token D-type experiences, for the simple reason that the
D-token in SP1 is numerically identical with the D-token in
SPX, and similarly for E. By holding that specious
presents can overlap by sharing common parts, phenomenal
continuity can be secured in an economical manner. As Foster puts
it: ‘where the successive patterns overlap, the experiences which
present them overlap in a corresponding way’ (1991: 249).
Figure 11.
Recognizing the existence of SPX may not incur the cost
of additional experiences, but it does involve the
introduction of additional experiential relationships.
It is now being supposed that D and E are connected by the relationship
of diachronic co-consciousness, whereas previously it was previously
held that only C-D and E-F were so related. But on the assumption
that D and E constitute a directly experienced succession, D evidently
is diachronically co-conscious with E.
As this example also illustrates, the relationship of diachronic
co-consciousness is not transitive: C and D are related in this manner,
as are D and E, but C and E are not so related. This
failure of transitivity plays a crucial role in ensuring that the
overlap theory delivers a phenomenologically realistic result. If
diachronic co-consciousness were transitive, all the phases of a
continuous stream of consciousness would be experienced together
– we would be back with the totum simul. The point
concerning transitivity failure was perhaps first noted by Russell in
his ‘On the Experience of Time’ (1913), where he assumes
specious presents combine by overlap to form streams
of
 consciousness.[16]
The Overlap Model (as we can
call it) in the form just outlined has been advocated on several
occasions by Foster (1979; ;1982: 255ff; 1991: 247–50) and Dainton
(2000/6: §7; 2003; 2009).
Its proponents intend the Overlap Model to capture not just the
structure of a sequences of tones, but of entire streams of
consciousness. If the Overlap theorists are right, such streams
are composed of successions of stream-phases which overlap by sharing
common parts, in the manner of C-D-E-F. However, on close
scrutiny the description just given of the structure of even this
simple sequence turns out to be inadequate. By supposing that
SPX exists, in addition to SP1 and SP2
we capture an experienced transition (or specious present) which
actually exists, but which gets ignored by the Discrete Block
model. But does Figure 11 include all the experienced
transitions which exist in the case of C-D-E-F? Given the
continuous character of our experience, probably not: for just as D-E
is experienced as an extended whole, so to is the tone-pattern running
from the mid-point in C to the mid-point in E, or from the
three-quarter point in D to the three-quarter point in F, and so on for
many (many) other cases. These ‘omitted transitions’
are easily accommodated by the Overlap Model, as illustrated in Figure
12. This new example is still unrealistically simplistic, for
once again only a single sensory modality is represented, in the form
of a visual experience of a bouncing ball, but it in one key respect it
is less artificial.
Figure 12.
As this diagram makes illustrates, specious presents can be more
closely packed than sequence of tones depicted in Figure 11. In
this new example, each double-headed line represents a distinct
specious present, each differing from its immediate neighbours by a
just-noticeable
 difference.[17]
Although these specious presents
overlap to a very significant degree, given that the overlap takes the
form of a sharing of common parts, there is no phenomenologically
unrealistic repetitions: the greater the extent to which two specious
presents overlap, the greater the number of phases they share.
What we have here is what is needed: a temporally extended stretch of
consciousness that is phenomenally continuous, and which includes all
the experienced transitions which are experienced. Or so
the Overlap theorists maintain.
The ‘duration-blocks’ we have been dealing with latterly
are unified episodes of experiencing, conceived in the Sprigge-Bradley
manner, i.e. as collections of phenomenal contents that are also
phenomenally unified (or experienced together). The Overlap Model
can also be developed in the context of an awareness-content conception
of experience, of the sort which Broad adopted. The most
straightforward way of implementing this
‘awareness-overlap’ model is illustrated in Figure
13. Here A1, A2 and A3 are
temporally extended acts of awareness, apprehending contents C-D, D-E
and E-F respectively. Each of these acts generates a single
specious present. We further suppose that these acts overlap by
sharing common parts, i.e., that the portion of A1 which
apprehends D is numerically identical with the portion of A2
which apprehends D, and likewise for the portions of A2 and
A3 which apprehend E. Once again we have a situation
in which continuous streams of consciousness are composed of
overlapping specious presents.
Figure 13.
When the awareness-content conception of the specious present is
developed in this manner the problems which afflicted Broad’s
account no longer arise. Phenomenal continuity is secured by the
overlapping of neighbouring acts of sensing (e.g., the second half of
A1 and the first half of A2 are numerically
identical). As Foster notes (1979), these overlaps also solve the
problem of repeatedly-experienced contents. If A1 and
A2 are discrete acts then D is experienced
twice-over. But if A1 and A2 overlap in the
manner indicated, D is experienced just once: by the episode of sensing
that is common to A1 and A2.
So much for the bare bones of the Overlap version of
Extensionalism. For further elaboration and discussion see
Dainton (2003, 2009, 2014a, 2014b), Hoerl (2013a, 2013b), Phillips (2014c), Rashbrook (2013b), Soteriou (2010).
The Overlap Model looks to be the most promising variant of the
Extensional approach. Like other Extensional accounts, it allows
change and succession to be directly experienced in a clear and
unambiguous manner, and so fully satisfies the requirements of
realism. Also, by virtue of the fact that each successive
phase of an Extensional specious present contains ordinary first-order
experiences, the requirements of the Immediacy Thesis are also met:
change and succession can be experienced with maximal (phenomenal)
vividness. Further, and distinctively, the Overlap Model secures
both Modest and Strong Continuity: not only is a (typical) stream of
consciousness a gap-free stretch of experience, but each of its
successive brief phases is experientially connected to its immediate
neighbours. Kelly (2005: 231) points out that for the Extensional
approach to be viable it must be able to explain how we manage to
perceive continuous changes which last longer than the specious
present, which in turn requires an explanation of how it is possible
for specious presents to be strung together; he also suggests no such
explanation is available. The Overlap approach provides just such
an explanation.
Despite this, some critics have suggested the overlap mechanism is
surplus to requirements. Gallagher (2003) is unable to find any
trace of the alleged overlaps between specious presents in his own
experience, and concludes that the account is phenomenologically
suspect. The Overlap theorist can respond by arguing that the
seamless continuity, lasting for minutes or hours, that we find in our
streams of consciousness is itself evidence for the proposed overlap
structure, since the latter is responsible for the continuity in
question:
If these claims are true, the Extensional model (in its Overlap
mode) has secure foundations. But are they? Strawson (2009:
Part 5) argues, in effect, that direct experiential connections between
successive stream-phases are invisible to introspection; for further
discussion see Dainton (2004: §4).
In a different vein, Mabbot argues that ‘qualitative
differences of content alone determine sub-divisions within our
continuous experience’(1951: 166). Finding this plausible,
Phillips (2010: 189) suggests that the overlap theory
‘looks like unwholesome food served to a man already
full’. Overlap theorists will agree that content does
indeed provide a way of demarcating subdivisions within streams – the period spent
listening to the sound of a passing plane, or watching a bird fly
across the sky, etc. – but they will insist that an additional
ingredient is required. We need to be able to explains why it is
that we are only directly aware of change and persistence over short
intervals, rather than the several hours through which a typical stream
of consciousness extends. By holding that the diachronic
co-consciousness relationship only extends for a short interval the
Overlap theorist can meets this need. In the Overlap Model
inherently dynamic contents and the limited span of the diachronic
co-consciousness relationship work together in delivering (what is
arguably) a phenomenologically realistic result.
Other criticisms are directed at the Extensional specious
present. One main issue here concerns phenomenal
unity. As we saw in §2.5, Meinong (1899: 187) pointed
out a potential difficulty with Stern’s temporally extended
‘presence-time’ (in effect, an Extensionalist specious
present). If a specious present extends through (ordinary) time,
the parts or phases of which it is composed – let us designate
them [P1, P2, P3 …
Pn] – will also be distributed through time. The
question then arises as to what unifies these components. If
nothing unifies them, we are left with a succession experiences, but no
experience of succession. We could hold that [P1,
P2, P3 … Pn] are unified
because they fall within the scope of a single episode of awareness A,
but if we also hold that A is extended through ordinary time, the
original problem simply re-occurs: A will be composed of a succession
of phases, [A1, A2, A3 …
An], and unless these phases are themselves unified, we will
once again be left with a mere succession of experiencings. To
avoid this we might posit a higher-order act awareness, A*, which takes
[A1, A2, A3 … An]
and their contents its objects, and in so doing creates an experience
of succession. But if we suppose that A* is a temporally extended
episode of awareness, then evidently we have solved nothing –
what unifies the component parts of A*? – and are embarked on a
menacing-looking infinite regress. Happily, there is a simple and
obvious way to avoid this regress: we need simply hold that the
awareness A which unifies [P1, P2, P3
… Pn] itself lacks temporal extension. If A is
strictly momentary, the problem of what unifies its constituent phases
simply does not arise: it lacks such phases entirely.
This influential line of argument leads directly to PSA, and thence
to the associated Retentional model of temporal
consciousness. Although the difficulty may seem serious, the
Extensional theorist has an effective line of reply: the argument in
question can be seen as simply begging the question. Recall the
way in which the Extensional theorist construes an individual specious
present, as depicted in Figures 5 and 6: a single specious present
is viewed as a temporal spread of contents that are all experienced
together, i.e., that are diachronically co-conscious. Right
at the heart of the Extensional model is an assumption concerning the
nature of phenomenal unity. The assumption is precisely that
phenomenal unity is not confined to contents that are
momentary and simultaneous, it can embrace contents that are spread (a
short distance) through time. Accordingly, provided the envisaged
succession of phases [P1, P2, P3
… Pn] are related in this manner – they are
diachronically co-conscious, and so are experienced together –
they already constitute an experience of succession, and nothing
further is required. Now it could be that the Extensional
theorists are misguided in making this assumption: perhaps phenomenal
unity cannot extend over time in the way they claim. But since
the line of argument set out in the previous paragraph simply ignores
the mode of phenomenal unity posited by Extensional model theorists, it
fails to provide us with any reason for thinking this is the
case. In effect, the objection presupposes that that synchronic
phenomenal unity – the sort of unity which obtains among
simultaneous momentary contents – is the only mode of phenomenal
unity.
Since Extensional specious presents comprise earlier and later
phases that are experienced together, in a single unified (albeit
extended) state of consciousness, it may well be that Extensional
models are incompatible with the Presentist conception of time,
according to which only what is present is real. For two
phenomenal contents C1 and C2 be experienced
together, to be diachronically co-conscious, both
C1 and C2 must surely both exist. But if
Presentism were true, when C1 is present C2 would
be non-existent, and when C2 is present C1 would
be non-existent. Extensional theorists will not be overly worried
by this consequence, which they will construe as a reason for rejecting
the Presentist conception of time. See §7.2 for further
discussion of this issue.
Coming from a very different direction, Grush has argued
(2005b, 2006, 2007, 2016) that Retentional models have a distinct advantage
over Extensional models when it comes to accommodating certain
‘temporal illusions’. The relevant category of cases
are those where a stimuli occurring later than a time t
affects the character of what is perceived as occurring at t
itself; the so-called flash-lag effect and the
phi-phenomenon fall into this category. These instances
of (apparent) retro-active causation are only found occurring over
brief intervals, but they are certainly as puzzling as they are
intriguing. Grush suggests that Retentional models can handle
such cases by virtue of the fact that what is perceived as occurring at
t need not remain constant from one specious present to
another. So, for example, a particular spot of light might be
perceived as motionless in a specious present S1 occurring very shortly
after t, and that same spot might be perceived as being in
motion in a later specious present S2. This option is not
available to Extensional theorists – since on this view the spot
is represented just once – and as a consequence there will be
conflicting perceptual experiences of what is occurring at t:
the spot will be perceived (impossibly) as both stationary and in
motion. However, there are replies available to the Extensional
theorist. It takes some time for our perceptual systems to
produce an experience in response to a stimuli; perhaps our perceptual
systems make use of this time to work out (as it were) a single
coherent response to ambiguous or conflicting stimuli.
Accordingly, rather than the spot’s being experienced as both
stationary and as moving, it is experienced just the once, in
motion. For more on the relevant illusions, Grush’s
argument, and the responses available to the Extensionalist see
Section 3 of the supplementary document
 Husserl, the Brain and Cognitive Science, 
and the supplementary document 
 Interpreting Temporal Illusions.
Still more recently, Pelczar has argued (2010a, 2010b) that
the Extensional model rests on an inadequate conception of the temporal
microstructure of consciousness. An Extensional specious present
is a chunk of experiencing which extends over a second or so of
ordinary time, so it will inevitably possesses temporal parts –
the still briefer chunks of experiencing of which it is composed
– and the briefest of these parts will be strictly momentary
episodes of experiencing. Since on the Extensional model it takes
an interval of time to experience change or succession, these momentary
stream-phases will not contain any experience of change: their contents
will be entirely static in character. This is problematic, argues
Pelczar, because we have good reason to believe it is impossible for
such experiences to exist. The grounds for this are
phenomenological: ‘When I have an experience as of some smooth
continuous change – when watching a leaf drift to the ground, for
example, or listening to a steadily rising tone – my experience
does not contain or decompose into a series of experiences that are not
as of change’ (forthcoming A). Since the briefest of
experiences that we can conceive or imagine contains some element of
change, or passage – or so Pelczar maintains – we should
accept that experience is essentially dynamic, or better:
subjectively dynamic. Since the momentary episodes of
experience which feature in the Extensional model do not feature
change, it seems that Extensional specious presents are composed of
ingredients which cannot possibly exist. Retentionalist accounts
do not face this difficulty. A Retentionalist specious present is
momentary episode of experiencing whose contents are (by hypothesis)
subjectively dynamic.
If this reasoning is sound, it looks as though we have good reason
for preferring the Retentional model to the Extensional
alternative. However, there are replies available to the
Extensionalist. One option is to hold grant that phenomenal
contents are essentially (subjectively) dynamic, but hold that the
briefest genuine episodes of experiencing in a specious
present (or stream of consciousness) have a finite temporal extension;
on this view momentary cross-sections of a stream of consciousness are no more than abstractions. A second option is to
reject the claim that phenomenal contents are essentially
dynamic. We may not be able to imagine experiential contents that
are entirely static, but this doesn’t mean they are not possible:
perhaps our imaginations are incapable of recreating all possible modes
of experience. A third, and more intriguing option, is to accept
that experience is essentially dynamic, and also accept that a stream
can decompose into ever briefer parts, but reject the
assumption that this decomposition must terminate in durationless
episodes of experience. An alternative possibility is that the
decomposition continues indefinitely – to infinity –
without ever terminating in durationless point-like parts. In
contemporary parlance, perhaps consciousness has the structure of
atomless gunk. This species of gunk is a sort of stuff
that is infinitely divisible, but not possessing point-like parts: all
the parts of a portion of gunk have proper parts, without end.
Whitehead and Broad were of the view that ordinary space and time
possessed this structure. Irrespective of whether they were right
about this, it may be that our streams of consciousness have this
structure. If so, then they can possess an infinite number of
parts, all of which have some (usually very brief) duration,
and each of these parts may have a dynamic content. Wherever the
truth lies on this issue, the temporal microstructure of experience
looks to be fertile ground for Extensionalist exploration.
For discussion of some further issues relating to the Extensional
specious present see the supplementary document
 The Specious Present: Further Issues.
Having looked in some detail at two of the main forms of PT-realism
– the Cinematic approach (in §4.1) and the Extensional model
(in §5) – there remains the third: the Retentional
model. Although the Retentional model itself comes in several
variants, its proponents share a distinctive conception of the
structure of temporal consciousness. Whereas Extensional
theorists hold that our immediate experience of change and succession
occurs within specious presents which are themselves extended through
time, Retentional theorists hold that individual specious presents lack
temporal duration, but have contents which succeed in presenting (or
representing) temporally extended phenomena. As standardly
conceived, a Retentionalist specious present consists of a complex of
experiential contents, comprising an instantaneous (or
near-instantaneous) phase of immediate experience, together with a
collection of representations – retentions – of the recent
past, all packaged into an episode of experiencing that is momentary; a
stream of consciousness is composed of a continuum of these
momentary
 episodes.[18]
In effect, whereas Extensional specious presents run horizontally
along the time-line, Retentional specious presents stands vertically,
at right-angles to it. On the face of it the Extensional approach
is the more natural way for a realist to go: the most obvious and
straightforward explanation of how we can be directly aware of change
and persistence is to hold that our direct awareness can span an
interval of ordinary time. By contrast, the Retentional view can
seem almost perverse: why think that our apparently immediate
experience of change and persistence is in fact packaged into momentary
(or extremely brief) slices of experience? Since it is by no
means obvious how this can be, Retentionalism is not the
obvious way to go. Yet a good many of the most famous names
associated with the specious present – James (at times), Husserl,
Broad (in his later work on the topic) – have opted for the
Retentional approach. Before looking at Retentional models in
more detail, it is worth pausing to consider the motivations which have
led such philosophers to move in this direction.
Why think our experience of change occurs in experiences which are
themselves durationless? There are a number of considerations
which point in this direction; some of these we have already
encountered, others we have not.
For the Retentional model to be viable at all, we must be able to
make sense of the idea that duration and succession, in the forms we
immediately experience them, can be contained in episodes of
experiencing that are themselves without duration. Provided one
draws some relevant distinctions, this is by no means as impossible as
it might initially seem. The three letters ‘R E D’
can represent red without themselves being red; and the same applies,
mutatis mutandis, for ‘L O U D’ and ‘S Q U A
R E’. Generally speaking, the properties of a
representation (that which is doing the representing) and the content
of that representation (what is represented) can differ
dramatically. The distinction extends to mental representations:
the conscious thought ‘the Earth’s equator is
circular’ succeeds in representing the geometrical property of
circularity without itself possessing this property. Bearing this
in mind, there is no obvious reason why the temporal
properties of a mental representation R need entirely coincide
with the temporal properties of the content C carried by
R. Accordingly, in a more extreme case, it may be
possible for a content C to have an apparent duration of a
second or so, whereas R exists in an episode of experiencing
which has no significant duration at all. As Hoerl (2013(a) argues, Retentionalists such as
Meinong and Husserl were well aware of the need to distinguish between
the temporal properties featuring in the contents of experience, from
the temporal properties of the experiences carrying these
contents. See §7.1 for more on this distinction; see Rashbrook (2013a) for more in its role in motivating Retentionalism.
As for the question of motivation, common sense no doubt plays a
role. Reid’s contention (see §2.3) that ‘the
senses give us information of things only as they exist in the present
moment’ has a good deal of intuitive plausibility, as does taking
the present moment to lack duration, in the manner of Augustine.
Anyone who subscribes to each of these doctrines and who also believes
we are immediately aware of change has little option but to opt for the
Retentional approach. Tradition is another likely reason.
As we saw in §2.4, in his First Critique Kant
maintained that we could only have experience of the sort we have if at
every moment we also retain something of our prior experience:
‘if I were always to lose the preceding representations (the
first parts of the line, the preceding parts of the time, or the
successively represented unity) from my thoughts, and not reproduce
them when I proceed to the following ones, then no whole representation
and none of the previously mentioned thoughts, not even the purest and
most fundamental representations of space and time, could ever
arise.’ (A102) For philosophers working within the Kantian
and Post-Kantian tradition – and this includes the majority of
European phenomenologists in the late 19th and early
20th centuries – it would be natural to start from the
assumption that our experience of change and persistence arises from a
combination of two factors: a momentary phase of present experience and
simultaneously apprehended reproductions or retentions of just-past
experiences.
Many realists have no doubt found the Retentional approach appealing
because it offers a simple and intuitively satisfying explanation of
how an experience of succession differs from a mere succession of
experiences: in the former case, the contents forming the succession
are presented together, as an ensemble, to a single momentary
awareness. Brentano and Husserl both subscribed to The
Principle of Simultaneous Awareness (PSA) ‘No succession of
awarenesses – no matter how close together in time they come
– can, by itself, account for an awareness of succession; it must
be the case that an awareness of succession derives from simultaneous
features of the structure of that awareness’ (Miller (1984:
109). As we saw in §5.5, Meinong and Husserl both argued
– correctly – that the successive phases of a temporally
extended awareness of the sort advocated by Stern needed to be unified,
and both realized that a unifying act which is not temporally
extended does not face the same difficulty. Indeed, it may well
be that some theorists, consciously or unconsciously, have found the
Retentional approach appealing because of the way it (in effect)
reduces the problem of diachronic phenomenal unity to the
comparatively straightforward problem of synchronic unity.
Although the latter is by no means unproblematic – there are
different accounts of it – it is at least widely accepted that
there is such a thing as synchronic phenomenal unity.
A further, and no less deep, motivation for the Retentional view is
connected with the common sense considerations mentioned above: tacit
assumptions, of a broadly metaphysical character, concerning the
structure or nature of time itself are very relevant in this
context. There may well be no single conception of time which
perfectly fits all our common sense assumptions about it, but
Presentism – the doctrine, favoured by Augustine, that
neither the past nor the future exist, and hence that only the present
is real – fits them better than most. If the momentary
present is all that is real, there is no obvious option but to locate
our experience of change and persistence in the momentary
present. (The relationship between different conceptions of
temporal consciousness and different ways of thinking about time
per se is the topic of §7.2 below.)
A similar conclusion can be reached without recourse to highly
controversial conceptions of time. Russell once wrote
‘There is no logical impossibility in the hypothesis that the
world sprang into being five minutes ago, exactly as it then was, with
a population that “remembered” a wholly unreal past.
There is no logically necessary connection between events at different
times’ (1921: 159). If the world could have sprung into
existence five minutes ago, why not five seconds, or five
nano-seconds ago? The claim that the subjective character of our
current experience is logically independent of the past can seem
eminently plausible. But so too can the claim that the character
of our current experience is logically independent of the future.
Suppose five seconds from now I were to be instantaneously annihilated
by a nuclear bomb concealed under my chair. Would this fact
impinge on my current experience? It seems unlikely – how
can something that is yet to happen affect what is happening now?
But doesn’t the same apply if I will be annihilated a mere five nano-seconds
from now? It seems plausible to think that it does. This reasoning leads ineluctably to the conclusion that the character of our experience at any one time is
logically independent of our past and future experiences, and this
applies to every part of every stream of consciousness. If this
is the case, our experience of change and persistence cannot
essentially depend on experiential connections between the neighbouring
phases of our streams of consciousness, connections of the sort
Extensional models posit and require: for if such connections were to
exist, adjoining stream-phases would not be logically independent of
one another. And if adjoining momentary stream phases
are logically independent of one another, it may well be that
the Retentional approach is the only game in town.
Let us suppose that for the past minute or so you have just been
watching the pointer moving around a dial; the pointer has been moving
sufficiently quickly that you are able to see it in motion.
Let us further suppose that your experience of change is
occurring within the confines of a succession of specious presents, and
that each of the latter consists of a momentary phase of perceptual
experience together with a sequence of retentions of recent
experiences. For present purposes, we can think of retentions as
a special form of past-directed mental representations that are
triggered in an automatic (and involuntary) manner after each momentary
phase of experiencing. This basic Retentional model is depicted
in Figure 14.
Figure 14.
In the bottom row of the diagram are three momentary perceptual
experiences, registering the location of the pointer at three
neighbouring times. For convenience, only a small selection of
such experiences have been shown; we can suppose that in reality you
enjoyed a distinct momentary experience for (at least) each discernibly
distinct location of the pointer as it moved from the half-past
position to the quarter-to position. The vertical column to the
right depicts a single specious present, S. This has two sorts of
component: a momentary visual experience of the dial-face (with the
pointer at quarter-to); accompanying the latter (and co-conscious with
it) are retentions of the earlier experiences, shown unshaded and in
dotted outline. Again, only a few of the actual retentions are
shown in the diagram: in reality there will be a retention
corresponding to each of the momentary perceptual experiences you
enjoyed during this brief interval. We are to suppose that your
direct experience of change – in this case visible movement
– takes place exclusively within these vertical structures.
So much for the basics of the Retentional model. Might
experiential structures of this sort be responsible for our immediate
experience of change and persistence? Perhaps, but there are a
number of hurdles which must be crossed or circumvented.
For a Retentional model to amount to a viable form of PT-realism it
must be possible for momentary states such as S to include change,
succession and persistence in the forms in which we experience
them. One difficulty here is the Retentional Simultaneity Problem
noted in §3. The contents in any given Retentional specious
present exist simultaneously – at least as measured by ordinary
clock-time – but if they are to generate the appearance of
succession they must avoid leaving the impression that the events they
represent also occur simultaneously. If a number of tones are
heard simultaneously, the result is obviously a chord rather
than a succession. In fact, it is not just succession that the
Retentional theorist needs to accommodate. Returning to Figure
14, it was stipulated that you see the pointer moving
smoothly from half-past to quarter-to. Where is the
movement in S? There may seem to be no real difficulty
here: after all, we can easily call up a moving image in our memories
or imaginations – as when we remember seeing a bird in flight, or
a ball in motion – so we know that our minds are capable of
generating dynamic imagery. There is, however, an important
difference between the two cases. Running re-plays of past
experiences in ordinary memory is a process which itself unfolds over
time, but the dynamic re-plays required by the Retentionalist are
supposed to occur at a single moment. Indeed, as
processes which occur over time, remembered or imagined movements will
themselves occur within momentary specious presents, and so their
dynamic character will depend on that of retentions.
Given the requirements of realism, what characteristics must
retentions themselves possess? Retentions are akin to
memories in that they re-present the past, but to fulfil the task
required of them they must be more vivid than ordinary memories.
We all know what it is like to call up a memory of seeing and hearing
the falling of a tree; we all know what it is like to actually see
and hear the falling of a tree. In the case of the former
there is a visual and acoustic mental images. In the latter case
there is the immediately perceived motion and noise: sharp, vivid
– LOUD – and out there. Between these
two forms of experience there is all the difference in the
world. Since it is not plausible to suppose that ordinary
memory-images are responsible for our immediate experience of change,
retentions must be a of a distinctive (and not commonly recognised)
form of experience.
Diagrams along the lines of 6.1 are commonplace in the
Retentionalist literature, and all such figures serve the useful
purpose of making it clear that Retentionalist are offering what is, in
effect, a two-dimensional model of temporal
consciousness. The change and succession which feature in our
immediate experience occur within specious presents which have no
temporal extension in ordinary objective time; these specious presents
do possess a temporal extension – an experienced
extension – but this exists (as it were) orthogonally to ordinary
time, along the vertical rather than the horizontal. Opting for a
two-dimensional temporal framework is an elegant solution to the
problem of how it is possible for succession and persistence to exist
in experiences which (objectively) have no duration, but is also a
source of potential difficulties. Since Extensional models do not
require the positing of this additional dimension, Retentional models
are vulnerable to the accusation that they are needlessly
profligate.
The additional dimension also creates a problem on the purely
phenomenological level. There are two general options concerning
the subjective character of Retentional specious presents, we can call
them the Modal and Non-Modal, see Figure 15.
Modal theorists, such as Brentano and Husserl, hold that the successive contents within a single
specious present appear under different temporal modes of presentation:
roughly speaking, whereas some contents appear as fully present, others
as ‘just past’, others as ‘more past’, and so
on. These temporal modes do not figure in any shape or form on
the Non-modal option: on this view, all the contents within a
single specious present appear equally present, in the phenomenal
sense, as well as successive. In effect, the Retentionalist
Non-modal specious present is subjectively indistinguishable from an
Extensionalist duration-block (see §5.1), it is simply differently
located with respect to ordinary time. See Lee (2014a, 2014b) for a vigourous recent defence of a Non-Modal form of Retentionalism. 
Figure 15. Two
conceptions of the Retentionalist specious present.
 
The Non-Modal option has the advantage of ensuring that
Retentionalist specious presents feature change and succession with
maximal phenomenal immediacy – important for those who subscribe
to the Immediacy Thesis (see §3) – but it also brings a
serious disadvantage. To bring this out, let us suppose a single
specious present has an apparent duration of around one second, e.g.,
enough to encompass two brief tones ‘do-re’. Since
Retentionalist specious presents supposedly form a close-packed
continuum, over a period of (say) ten seconds of ordinary objective
clock-time, we will be experiencing content with a subjective duration
of vastly more than one minute. To simplify, if we suppose there are a
hundred specious presents per objective second, in a ten second
interval we will enjoy experiences with an apparent duration of 1000
seconds – enough (apparent) time to hear ‘do-re’ a
thousand times. Non-Modal versions of Retentionalism thus suffer from
a serious problem with surplus content: they generate more
experience (or more phenomenal content) than it is plausible to
suppose actually occurs over a given interval of experiencing.  For
diverging views as to the seriousness of this problem see Phillips
(2010), Lee (2014b), Dainton (2014), Pelczar (2015) and Grush
(2016).
Many Retentional theorists have eschewed the Non-Modal option in favour of
the Modal alternative. Since on this view only a small portion of
a single specious present is experienced as fully present, the
problem of surplus content is greatly diminished. The adoption of
temporal modes also offers a promising-looking solution the Retentional
Simultaneity problem: by virtue of appearing under different temporal
modes, the contents of a single specious present will not seem
to be simultaneous, even if this is what they are, objectively
speaking. As for how temporal modes are to be conceived,
Retentional theorists have outlined a variety of proposals.
In his Examination of McTaggart’s Philosophy (1938,
vol.2) Broad expounds an account of temporal consciousness which is
seemingly at odds with his earlier theory (see §5.3). First
of all, he no longer subscribes to the view that momentary acts of
awareness (or ‘prehensions’ in the McTaggart
terminology) are fictions: the new account is built on them. The
second main change is that Broad no longer allows momentary acts to
extend a short distance through ordinary time: he now holds that they are confined to single
moments. He thus trades in his previous (partial) Extensionalism
for a Retentional model. The third new ingredient is the property
of presentedness. This, claims Broad, is a
‘psychological’ (or phenomenal) feature which all
phenomenal contents possess to some degree. Different degrees of
presentedness are correlated with differences in apparent temporal
location, with contents possessing a high intensity of presentedness
seeming more present (or less past) than those which possess it to a
lesser degree. On Broad’s new view, a single specious
present can be conceived along the lines shown in Figure 16.
Figure 16.
Broad’s later conception of the specious present.
How does the property of presentedness work? How does one
phenomenal characteristic manage to make one or more other phenomenal
characteristics appear to be less than wholly present? The
question is of interest because the only obvious way of construing
‘different degrees of presentedness’ is in terms of
different degrees of Humean force and vivacity: a memory-image of a red
balloon could easily be described as seeming ‘less present’
in this sense than a perceptual experience of a red balloon. But
thus construed presentedness fails to do the job required: the upper
parts of the specious present depicted in Figure 16 evidently possess
less force and vivacity than those lower down, but they don’t
seem in the least less present (in the temporal sense) as a
result. Since Broad is silent on this issue, he presumably takes
presentedness to be a primitive property, whose character and mode of
functioning cannot usefully be elucidated. Nonetheless, it
remains mysterious how any phenomenal property could do the
work required.
Brentano has rather more to say on this issue. We saw earlier
(§2.4) that Brentano was the first to expound a Modal Retentional
model in any detail, and that his views went through several
changes. Initially he sought to explain the difference between
present sensations and proteraestheses (in effect, retentions) in terms
of different kinds of experiential objects: he held that
proteraestheses are composed of intentionally unreal objects that are
apprehended under a ‘modifying attribute’ of a (certain
degree) of pastness. He came to view this as an error, in part
because he believed past, present and future form a continuum, a view
which is difficult to hold onto if present experiences are real, and
past and future ones are not. In later writings he suggested that
the difference between the contents of an ordinary sensation and a
proteraesthesis is to be located in the way we are aware of
them. He first explicated these differences in temporal modes in
terms of differences in judgement : a represented content a is
judged be past to a certain degree, a content b is judged to
be past to a greater degree, and so forth. In a further change of
view he rejected judgements in favour of temporal modes of
presentation: sensory objects can be apprehended as past
to differing degrees. In his essay ‘Our intuition of Time
is a Continuum of Modes of Presentation and Acceptance’ he
writes:
Thus in Brentano’s mature account of the Retentional specious
present, alterations in contents themselves – a mechanism similar
to that proposed by Broad – have given way to alterations in the
way contents are experienced, and these ways of experiencing
are to be viewed as basic modes of consciousness.
This change of stance was accompanied by a further significant
evolution in doctrine. Brentano subscribed to a two-component
conception of consciousness: in perceiving an object, we are aware not
only of the object presented in perception, but also of our
perceiving of that object. Hence in any perceptual act, e.g.
the hearing of a tone C, there are two ingredients: the
primary object of the act, the tone C, and the
secondary object, which in this case is the hearing
of C. In virtue of this two-fold structure, consciousness at a
given moment of time is always accompanied by a form of
self-consciousness. But what of the diachronic case? Does
this mode of self-consciousness extend over time?
Brentano’s views on this also underwent changes. On his
early ‘object modification’ view, he held that the primary
object of a proteraesthesis is an earlier act of experiencing:
e.g., a past sensing of tone C, rather than C itself. In virtue of
this, we have a continuous awareness of our own conscious acts over
time as well as at a time, although the mechanism in the diachronic
case (involving primary objects) differs from that which operates in
the synchronic case (which relies on secondary objects). However,
Brentano came to regard this as a mistake, and in his mature
‘temporal mode of presentation’ account, the primary object
of the proteraesthesis is no longer the act of sensing C, but C itself,
albeit presented under the mode of ‘having occurred in the
past’.
The reasoning behind this shift in position sheds useful light on
the motives which move Retentional theorists. Brentano believed
that while we can never know with certainty that primary
objects of consciousness exist, we can know with certainly
that secondary objects exist, and are as they appear.
Accordingly, if the secondary object of a proteraesthesis were a
just-past act of sensing, we could know with certainty that we
ourselves, as the subject of that act, existed a few moments ago.
But Brentano held that we have no such knowledge: it is logically
possible that we have only just now come into existence. By
making the primary object the past tone, rather than the sensing of
this tone, the unwanted consequence is averted. For further
detail see Chisholm (1981), Albertazzi 1999 (59–65), Krauss (1976),
Moran (1996).
We saw in §2.7 that for Husserl the specious present (or in his
terminology, the ‘original temporal field’ or ‘living
present’) is a tripartite episode of experiencing consisting of
three ingredients: momentary primal impressions, a continuum of
retentions (or ‘primary memories’), and forward looking
protentions (a distinctive kind of expectation). On the important
question of the nature of retentions, Husserl’s views changed
significantly over the many years during which he wrestled with these
matters – his notes and sketches suggest he never found an
account he was entirely happy with.
In the 1904–5 lectures, Husserl finds Brentano’s early account
of time-consciousness – problematic on several counts. As
Husserl interprets him, Brentano construed retentions as a distinctive
kind of mental representation – or ‘phantasm’ –
imbued with a modifying temporal attribute:
pastness. Husserl discerns a fatal tension here:
retentional contents are presently occurring sensory items in
consciousness, but according to Brentano, they also supposed to be
‘unreal’, by virtue of appearing as past. How can
numerically the same content be real and unreal, present and
past? Husserl also finds it ‘most extraordinary that
Brentano does not take into consideration the difference between the
perception of time and the phantasy of time’ (1991: 17) In
effect, the charge is that by building retentions out of mental images
generated by the imagination, Brentano is unable to do adequate justice
to the perceptual character of our temporal awareness –
here Husserl’s starting point is the realist claim that change
and succession are seen and heard, not merely
imagined or inferred.
Husserl himself thought it appropriate to regard retentions as akin
to memories, but memories of a distinctive or ‘primary’
kind: ordinary memories, or recollections, he refers to as
‘secondary memory’. Earlier, in the
Principles, James had drawn a similar distinction, which he
explained thus:
James went on to suggest primary memories are akin to reverberations
or after-images, that are triggered by ordinary perceptions.
Husserl is in full agreement with James’ claim that retentions
differ from ordinary memories in this respect: they are not
re-presentations, since a retained content has never been
absent from consciousness. A further difference is that ordinary
memories are under the control of the will, whereas retentions are
not. However, Husserl thought it a mistake to suppose that
retentions are remotely akin to echoes or reverberations. He
fully accepts that echoes and the like are to be found in
consciousness, but they are contents of a perfectly ordinary kind
perceptual kind: they are experiences which reveal to us what is going
on around us at the present time. Retentions, by contrast,
although they exist alongside presently occurring perceptual contents,
reveal the past. For this reason retentional consciousness is
‘an original consciousness’ – a distinctive sui
generis mode of experience, quite unlike any other:
Husserl is vulnerable to the charge that he characterizes retention
primarily in terms of how it is different from other modes of
consciousness – recollection, imagination, and so forth –
and there is some truth in this: we do not get a truly informative
account of how retention manages to present in the past in a
perceptual way. In response, Husserl might reasonable point
out that this is only to be expected, if, as he maintains, retention is
a sui generis mode of experience.
In subsequent writings Husserl experimented with several different
ways of conceiving of retentions – see Kortooms (2002) and de Warren (2009) for a full
picture – but one development is of particular
significance. In his early lectures, although it is not always
evident from the lectures themselves, it seems that Husserl conceived
of retentions in terms of a general conception of perceptual experience
that he had developed earlier, in his Logical
Investigations. According to this
‘apprehension-content’ scheme, retentions – like all
forms of perceptual consciousness – are real sensory-like
contents in experience, contents that are animated by an act of
apprehension, and thus seem a certain degree past. In the years
following the 1906–7 period, Husserl came to think that it was wrong to
apply the apprehension-content scheme to retentions.
A normal perceptual content, such as a cloud-shaped white patch, can
end up being perceived very differently: for example, we might see it
as an actual cloud, or as merely part of a picture of a cloud –
such cases can legitimately be viewed as instances of
‘primary’ (sensory) contents being apprehended in different
ways. Husserl came to doubt whether temporal appearances
of a content can vary in this sort of way: ‘The primary contents
that spread out in the now are not able to switch their temporal
function: the now cannot stand before me as the not-now, the
not-now cannot stand before me as the now’ (1991: 334). He
continues: ‘Can a series of coexistent primary contents
ever bring a succession to intuition? Can a series of
simultaneous red-contents ever bring a duration of red, of a tone c,
and the like, to intuition? Is that possible as a matter of
principle?’ (1991: 335) Husserl now finds it is absurd
to suppose that qualitatively identical contents can appear as both
simultaneous and successive, depending merely on how they are
apprehended.
Since these difficulties arise because retentional contents are
being conceived as sensory-like items, present in
consciousness, the solution might be to find a different way of
thinking of retentional contents, and this is what Husserl does:
On this new view – modelled on his later understanding of
phantasy-experience – retentions are intentional ‘through
and through’: they do not have sensory-like content in the manner
of properly perceptual experience. But while this may help with
some difficulties, it gives rise to new ones. Recalling
Husserl’s own critique of Brentano, one might wonder whether a
specious present filled with purely intentional entities can
supply us with the properly perceptual experience of change and
succession that realism demands.
Providing a credible account of the character and composition of
individual specious presents is only the first stage in the development
of a viable form of Retentional realism. The second stage is
providing a credible account of how individual specious presents
combine and interact to form our streams of consciousness. Here
there is a good deal of agreement between Retentional theorists, as
well as some variation. The basics of Brentano’s account
were presented in §2.4. For Brentano a stream of
consciousness simply takes the form of a dense (or gap-free) succession
of momentary specious presents: see the diagram of hearing a melody
depicted in Figure 2. In his later writings Broad adopted a
similar approach, as shown in Figure 17.
Figure 17.
Broad’s later account.
The bottom line represents a continuous stretch of sensory
experience, a continuous auditory tone, let’s suppose. This
stretch of experience is apprehended by dense succession of momentary
acts, represented by the full-length vertical lines. (Only a
three of these are shown here, in reality there would be an infinity of
them.) Focus first on D and the vertical line standing on it:
D-A***. This line represents the content apprehended by the
momentary act occurring at D, and hence a single specious
present. This act’s content represents the tone segment
A-D, but the act does not embrace the entirety of A-D itself – we
are no longer dealing with acts of awareness which reach back to the
recent past. Instead, the act apprehends a content possessing
parts which seem more and more past (or less and less present)
as we move from D to A***. In the figure, the greater the number
of asterisks affixed to a content, the less presentedness it
possesses. Hence the same tone-segments occur in successive
specious presents with smoothly decreasing degrees of
presentedness. If we simplify by first considering momentary
tone-phases, the phase at A is experienced as A* in the specious
present at B, as A** in the specious present at C and finally as A***
in the specious present at D. In a similar way, D is experienced
as D* in the specious present occurring at E, and then as D** in
specious present occurring at F. Extended tone-segments (e.g.
B-C) behave in the same manner, being experienced as B**-C* (at D) and
B***-C** (at
 E).[19]
Broad’s account explains how it is possible for temporally
extended contents to be apprehended as wholes (provided they fall
within the span of the specious present) and also be experienced as
smoothly sinking into the past. But while these are definite
advantages, there is a question mark over whether Broad successfully
secures the continuity of consciousness. Modest
Continuity (see §3) poses him no difficulty: by virtue of being
dense, the envisaged succession of momentary specious presents will
constitutes a stream of consciousness which is free from gaps.
But if Broad’s model is to conform to the Strong Continuity
Thesis, neighbouring stream phases must be experientially connected to
one another. In the absence of such connections – or so the
proponents of the Strong Thesis will maintain – we do not have a
stream of consciousness at all, merely a sequence of isolated
momentary stream-phases. This is an issue Broad does not
address. He may have assumed that a sequence of specious presents
which (a) belong to the same subject, and (b) form a dense continuum,
cannot fail to be phenomenally unified. But this does not follow,
for the familiar reason that a succession of experiences does not
automatically constitute an experience of succession.
Although Husserl was certainly very much aware of the continuity
issue, his account of how individual specious presents combine to form
streams of consciousness is, in many respects, very similar to the
pictures painted by Brentano and Broad. Husserl supplied several
time-diagrams to illustrate the details of his theory, several are
along the lines of Figure 18
 below.[20]
Figure 18. 
Husserl’s time diagram.
The horizontal axis now represents a continuous flow of primal
impressions, the vertical axes represent a selection of retentions (and
in the case of F) protentions which accompany the primal impressions D,
E and F. (A ‘selection’ because in reality, according
to Husserl, a continuous stretch of consciousness consists of a dense
continuum of primal impressions, each of which is accompanied by its
‘comet’s tail’ of retentions and
protentions.) As can be seen, individual primal impressions
are retained in later specious presents – as previously,
increased ‘pastness’ is indicated by a greater number of
asterisks. What goes for momentary primal impressions also goes
for intervals: D-E is retained at F in the form of the retentional
continuum E*-D**.
From what we have seen so far, with the exception of the
protentional aspect of consciousness, there are no significant
differences between this Husserlian theory and Broad’s later
model. But differences there are. Unlike Broad, Husserl
addresses the Strong Continuity Thesis – albeit not in so many
words – and has a good deal to say about the experiential
relationships between neighbouring specious, relationships which (he
believes) suffice to secure the kind of continuity in consciousness
which actually exists. What he has to say on this topic is
difficult to interpret, and his views underwent changes, but they are
by no means devoid of interest.
Broad’s specious presents are complex things, containing as
they do continuum-many phases possessing distinct degrees of
presentedness. In some of his writings, Husserl introduces (or
recognizes) an additional level of complexity. In a manner
reminiscent of Brentano’s (early) view, according to the
Husserlian doctrine of the ‘double intentionality’ of
retentions, it is not only past primal impressions that are retained,
so too are the acts of experiencing which apprehend them. Accordingly,
at each moment we have a retentional awareness not merely of past
perceptual objects (e.g., tone-phases), but the experiences in which
these objects are presented or apprehended. It is in virtue of
this second level or aspect of retention that consciousness manages to
unify itself over time, or so Husserl believed.
What does this amount to in practice? Husserl again toyed with
a variety of options, and seemed to have difficulty in reaching a
settled view. According to one proposal he considered, a
retention such as E* in Figure 18 does not merely represent the
momentary primal impression to which it is directed, it represents (or
‘intends’) an entire act-phase or streamal
cross-section. In more concrete terms, the retention in question
not only contains a representation of E (the original primal
impression), it also contains representations of all the retentions and
protentions that were experienced with E. Since each of these
nested retentions and protentions themselves represent entire
act-phases, and so on ad infinitum (within the limits of the
specious present) we are clearly dealing here with a highly complicated
experiential structure. Thanks to this structure, later
stream-phases retain a rich awareness of their immediate
predecessors. But in other writings, Husserl envisages the
continuity of consciousness being secured by a somewhat different
mechanism:
Husserl sometimes used the terms ‘horizontal-intentionality
and ‘transverse-intentionality’ and to refer, respectively,
to the stream-unifying and object-constituting functions of
consciousness. Figure 19 (which for good measure includes
protentions too) is an attempt to express this pictorially –
although only a single retention and a single protention are
shown here, in reality there would be a continuum of them.
Figure 19.
Husserl refers to the upper level – the level in which
consciousness unifies itself, in which consciousness is perpetually
passively aware of itself as flowing – as ‘absolute’
time-consciousness. He suggests absolute consciousness (or
‘absolute subjectivity’) is best thought of as a
quasi-temporal process, on the grounds that our ordinary
temporal concepts properly apply only to objects we perceive in time,
and not to the phenomenal processes which make such perceptions
possible.
The introduction of absolute time-consciousness may solve one
problem, but another quickly appears. If absolute
time-consciousness is itself extended through time, and is composed of
momentary phases, what is it that unifies these phases? We could
posit a further and higher stratum of consciousness, but since the same
issue immediately arises with respect to this new level, nothing would
be gained. Husserl’s initial response was to hold
that the flow of absolute consciousness is not an ordinary temporal
process: it is not something which extends or flows through time, it is
that within which time itself – in the form of temporal
objects and processes – arises and
 flows. Quite how Husserl’s doctrine of absolute consciousness should be construed has been much discussed by commentators; Hoerl (2013a) proposes – intriguingly – that it is linked to a previously overlooked Extensionalist tendency in Husserl’s 
 thought.[21]
In later writings, after his discovery of the
transcendental-phenomenological ego, Husserl’s thought
took another turn. Rather than holding that streams of
consciousness unify themselves over (or through) time, he now claims
that the unifying work is carried out by the ego:
As usual, there are complications. Although in this passage
Husserl rejects the horizontal and transverse modes of intentionality
that he previously held to be responsible for the creation of temporal
unities in experience, it is not clear that he took the ego to be
responsible for all modes of temporal unity. There are
occasions when he seems think the most basic forms of experience
possess a passive ‘pre-temporal’ flow-structure prior to
the involvement of the ego – see Kortooms (2002: chapter 6) for
more on this. This complication aside, the basic picture is
reasonably clear. As with absolute consciousness, since the ego
is not itself a temporal object – it lies outside time, it is
what creates or constitutes temporality – and so the issue of
what unifies the successive phases of an ego (or an ego’s
awareness) simply does not arise.
The gain is a substantial one, but is by no means cost-free: Husserl
is now taking us deep into exotic metaphysical territory. And for
those who are prepared to follow him there, new questions arise.
What precisely is the relationship between the pre-temporal ego and the
temporalized contents of ordinary consciousness? If an ego is
aware of change and succession among such contents, it is natural to
suppose that its awareness must also be temporally extended,
phenomenally speaking. But if so, we are confronted once more
with the question of what unifies the successive phases of ego’s
consciousness: what prevents these phases being a mere succession of
experiencings, rather than an experiencing of succession? To
avoid this, we might hold that the ego’s awareness is timeless in
character, in the manner of Husserl’s own ‘absolute
consciousness’. The worry now is intelligibility: can we be
confident that we can really make sense of this mode of
consciousness?
The Retentional approach has some distinct advantages over the
alternative forms of realism. All variants of the approach have
this much in common: they compress the experiencing of change into
momentary (or near-momentary) phases of consciousness. In virtue
of this, Retentional models are compatible with metaphysical doctrines
which require precisely this feature. The most obvious candidate
here is Presentism, the doctrine that what is not present is not real
(see §7.2). In contrast, Extensional models require contents
that are distributed through an interval of (ordinary, objective) time
to be experienced together, in a single unified phenomenal state.
It is not obvious that such models are compatible with the doctrine
that reality itself is confined to the momentary present.
Accommodating the latter doctrine poses no problems whatsoever for
Retentional models.
No less important is the Retentional theorists’ solution to
the problem of diachronic phenomenal unity. All forms of the
Extensional approach stipulate that our immediate awareness is capable
of routinely bridging a temporal interval. This could be viewed
as admitting an unusual – and arguably undesirable – form
of action-at-a-distance. Retentional models are free of this
heavy commitment: the only mode of phenomenal unity such models require
is the sort which connects contents that are both momentary and
simultaneous. By virtue of their conformity with PSA, Retentional
models offer an appealing reduction of diachronic unity to synchronic
unity. Again, this option is not available to Extensional
theorists, who are obliged to recognize two forms of phenomenal unity
rather than just one. Further, as we saw in §2.5 and
§5.5, there are those – e.g., Meinong – who believe
that incurable problems arise if we suppose phenomenal unity can extend
over time. Though we as also saw in §5.5, the Extensional
theorists can, with some plausibility, argue that claims along these
lines are question-begging.
Confining the experience of change to momentary episodes of
experiencing may have its advantages, but it also makes for
difficulties of a distinctive sort. It might be objected that it
is simply impossible for the temporal properties of experiences and
their contents to diverge so dramatically: how could the latter be
temporally extended when the former are not? In reply, the
Retentional theorist can point out that it is widely accepted that the
properties of representational vehicles, and the contents carried by
these vehicles, commonly diverge – although in this
instance there are certain significant complications (for further
discussion of this issue see §7.1). Also pertinent here is
our current level of ignorance concerning the relationship between the
experiential and the physical. Given that we are sure of so
little in this domain, do we have any real grounds for supposing that
it is impossible for momentary (or very brief) brain-states to generate
experiences which possess temporal depth on the subjective or
phenomenal level?
The Simultaneity Problem (in its Retentional guise) may not in
principle be insuperable, but in addition to establishing the bare
possibility of objectively simultaneous contents appearing successive,
Retentionalists should also aim to supply an intelligible and credible
account of how this appearance is created. Retentional theorists
subscribe to the doctrine of PT-realism, and so believe that change,
succession and persistence figure in our immediate experience. We
saw in §3 that some realists also subscribe to the Immediacy
Thesis, and hold that change, and other dynamic properties,
feature as vividly in our experience as colour or shape. For
deep-seated structural reasons, Retentional models have difficulty in
accommodating the Immediacy Thesis. If retentions have the same
force and vivacity as ordinary (presently occurring, first-order)
experience, as they do on the Non-Modal variant, there is the risk of
flooding consciousness with enormous quantities of surplus content
– content which we have no reason to suppose exists, as we saw in
§6.2. It is thus not surprising to find that Retentional
theorists generally subscribe to the Modal form of the doctrine, and
hold that retentions lack the force and vivacity of presently occurring
contents. But this option also brings a danger: if retentions are
too unlike ordinary experience, there is a risk they will
prove incapable of doing the job they are intended to do: namely, be
the purveyors of our immediate impressional experience of persistence,
succession and change. To maintain that the dilemma is fatal to
the prospects of the Retentional approach would be premature. But
Brentano and Husserl’s shifting position on the nature of
retentions – recall the appeals to unreal objects, judgements,
primitive phenomenal features, additional dimensions, temporal modes of
presentation and the like – is indicative of the difficulty of
finding the right balance here, or so might purveyors of alternative
forms of realism allege.
Continuity is also problematic from a Retentional perspective.
As we have seen, the Modest Continuity Thesis is easily
accommodated. All the latter requires is that there be no gaps in
a typical stream of consciousness, and by stipulating that retentional
specious presents form dense, gap-free successions, this requirement is
easily met. Strong Continuity requires a good deal more: real
experiential or phenomenal connections between neighbouring
stream-phases. This is harder by far to achieve within a
Retentional framework. What is needed is a credible account of
how neighbouring specious presents are related to one another which
permits phenomenal continuity to run without impediment
between specious presents, as well as within them – or
so proponents of Strong Continuity will maintain. Yet the
defining characteristic of the Retentional approach is the confinement
of phenomenal unity to within momentary states of consciousness, which
is tantamount to the denial that phenomenal continuity can
connect earlier and later stream-phases, in the manner permitted by
Extensional approaches.
So far as the Strong Continuity Thesis is concerned, Broad did not
address the objection that Retentional models atomize or fragment the
stream of consciousness. Both he and Husserl were inclined to
view individual specious presents as abstractions from full-blown
streams of consciousness, and thus incapable of leading an independent
existence. But if they believed taking this step suffices to
secure Strong Continuity they were mistaken. Rendering individual
specious presents dependent on their neighbours in the
envisaged manner certainly affects their metaphysical status, but it
does not, in itself, do anything to forge phenomenal connections
between such states. Husserl saw there was a real problem here,
and at different stages of his career he ventured different
solutions. Early on he appealed to multiply-nested
retentions. But arguably, these merely increase the complexity
within individual momentary specious presents, without bridging the gap
between specious presents. The doctrine of horizontal
intentionality merely pushes the difficulty up a level: how precisely
do we have an awareness at one time of earlier acts of awareness
without our awareness itself extending over time? In later
writings, Husserl sought to solve the problem by excluding the unifying
agent – first in the form of absolute time-consciousness, later
in guise of the transcendental ego – from ordinary time
altogether. These manoeuvres may indeed solve the problem, but
they also leave the Retentional model reliant upon exotic and
heavy-duty metaphysical machinery. While Strawson (2009: Part 5)
favours the Retentionalist conception of individual specious presents,
he does not see the lack of direct experiential connections between
successive stream-phases as in the least problematic; but since
Strawson also believes that both the Modest and Strong Continuity
Theses are false, this is not surprising.
Difficulties aside, the Retentional approach in general, and
Husserl’s work in particular, has provoked interest among neuro-
and cognitive scientists, and like-minded philosophers. See
the supplementary document
 Husserl, the Brain and Cognitive Science
 for overviews and critical assessments.
For discussion of some further issues relating to the Retentional
specious present see the supplementary document
 The Specious Present: Further Issues.
The word ‘red’ can represent the colour red
without itself being red. If the message ‘bring the red
flag’ is successfully transmitted by Morse code, red is
signified by a temporal pattern rather than a spatial pattern. To
accommodate this sort of divergence the distinction is commonly drawn
between the content and the vehicle of a
representation: the former is that which is being represented, the
latter is the entity which carries or bears the representation.
It is by no means impossible for a representational vehicle to possess
one or more of the properties that are represented by the content it carries, e.g.
bold and black, but this is not always or necessarily
the case, as just seen. Experiences can represent temporal
features – a glance at a clock will reveal the time – but
they also themselves possess temporal features (e.g., different
experiences have different durations). How are the temporal
characteristics that are represented in or by experiences related to
the temporal characteristics of the experiences themselves? In
the rather special case of conscious thoughts, there need be no close
correspondence between content- and vehicle-properties: the thought
‘I’ve been thinking about this for many years’ need
only occupy a moment or two. But what of the more basic forms of
consciousness, forms of the sort we have been concerned with –
patterns in sensation, sequences of perceptual experiences, and the
like? As we shall see, the content-vehicle distinction impacts
upon or intersects the issues we have been concerned with thus far in a
number of interrelated ways.
Systematic divergences between content- and vehicle-properties lie
at the heart of the debate between the Extensional and Retentional
approaches. Retentional theorists are committed to the claim that
experiences which present us with succession or persistence are able to
disguise (or conceal) their true temporal
properties. Why? Because the contents of individual
specious presents appear to be temporally extended even though the
episodes of experiencing that possess these same contents are
themselves momentary or minimally brief (as measured by clock
time). This amounts to a clear-cut divergence between the
temporal properties of the contents carried by specious presents, and
the specious presents themselves.
The Extensional approach carries no such implications. For on
this view, a typical specious present is itself temporally extended,
and its parts succeed one another in time in just the way they seem
to. Here vehicle and content share their temporal
properties. Or as Foster puts it, ‘we have to take
each experience to extend over a period of real time in a way which
exactly matches the phenomenal period it presents.’ (1991:
249) However, while this precise matching may well be the norm,
Extensional theorists will want to find room to allow the apparent (or
subjective) duration of an objective interval to vary: a few
seconds spent waiting at traffic lights can seem like far
longer. This sort of discrepancy amount to another respect
in which it is possible for content- and vehicle-properties to
differ. (For further discussion see Section 1 of the supplementary document
 The Specious Present: Further Issues.)
The viability of the Retentional approach by no means entirely
depends on the content/vehicle distinction, but Retentionalists can and
do appeal to it when trying to overcome resistance to the very idea
that change and succession can reside in momentary episodes of
experiencing. It is worth noting that in this instance there is
an unusually close correspondence between the relevant content- and
vehicle-properties. In the case of a Retentional specious
present, the relevant contents represent succession, but they
do so by appearing as a succession (rather than by carrying an
inscription ‘this is a succession’). Does this mean
the vehicle must itself be temporally extended, so as to be able to
include the apprehended succession? Not necessarily, for
Retentional theorists can insist that we need to distinguish between
succession as a purely phenomenal feature – i.e., a property of
conscious mental states or representations – and succession as a
property of physical events in the wider world. This move made,
Retentional theorists can go on to argue that there is no reason to
think that phenomenal successions (and similarly for other temporal
properties) cannot reside within episodes of experiencing that are
themselves momentary. While this may well be true, it now looks
very much as though it is the phenomenal/physical distinction that is
doing the real work, rather than the content/vehicle distinction.
The latter distinction has entered recent debates by another
route. The school of contemporary
‘representationalists’ – e.g., Dretske, Harman and
Tye – hold that otherwise intractable-seeming problems can be
sidestepped by drawing on the distinction between vehicles and
contents. From the fact that the content of our experience is
‘red object over there’ or somesuch, we should not conclude
that the vehicle of this content is itself red. In a
more general vein, experiences of colour are not themselves coloured,
experiences of sound are not themselves sonic. In this manner,
the problematic phenomenal properties – or sense-data, or
qualia-instantiations – retreat from the scene. They are
pushed still further away by the second main plank of the
representationalist’s approach: an insistence on the
‘transparency’ of experience. By this they mean that
in ordinary perceptual experience, we have no awareness whatsoever of
our experiences themselves, we are simply aware of the (worldly)
objects and properties that are presented in or by our
experiences. If our experiences are invisible, there is no need
to introduce properties of experience – phenomenal
properties, qualia, sense-data and such – in order to explain the
content and character of our ordinary perceptual consciousness.
Extending this general approach to the particular case of temporal
consciousness, Tye argues as follows. First of all, if we assume
the transparency thesis is true, the traditional assumption that it is
experiences that are related by succession or simultaneity is
misguided:
Accordingly, Tye holds that anyone seeking to account for our
ability to directly apprehend change by appealing to a unifying
relationship between experiences is also misguided: there simply
aren’t the token experiences there to be unified; a
given period or stretch of consciousness is not composed of successive
perceptions or experiences (203: 102). By way of an alternative
he offers a one experience view of streams of consciousness:
‘The simplest hypothesis compatible with what is revealed by
introspection is that, for each period of consciousness, there is only
a single experience – an experience that represents everything
experienced within the period of consciousness as a whole.’
(2003: 97) As for the manner in which succession itself is
represented in the vehicles of phenomenal content, since
introspection provides us with no access to these vehicles, Tye leaves
the issue entirely open.
Whether or not experiences can be eliminated in this manner is
controversial, but in any event the direct awareness of change and
persistence is alive and well in Tye’s scheme, it has simply been
re-located and re-described. Tye himself sees the need to
distinguish between direct and indirect phenomenal
unity. Direct unity obtains when the qualities represented
in one specious present are experienced as succeeding on from qualities
in the immediately preceding specious present; indirect unity is the
ancestral of direct unity, and obtains when qualities experienced in
non-adjacent specious presents are connected by chains of direct
phenomenal unity (2003: 100). This general picture is close to
the orthodox one, at least to the extent that some experienced
qualities in a stream of consciousness are experienced as successive,
while others – farther apart in time – are not. Of
course, those who adhere to the orthodox representational theory,
according to which the immediate objects and properties of experience
are phenomenal – and Russell, Broad and Foster all fall into this
category – will see no need to adopt Tye’s way of
re-conceiving diachronic phenomenal
 unity.[22]
Returning to the main theme, it is by no means necessary to be a
sense-datum theorist in order to believe that there are systematic
correlations between the temporal properties of experiences and their
contents. If my clock goes TICK-TICK-TICK I will hear
TICK-TICK-TICK, with the order and temporal separation of the outer
events being mirrored – in a generally faithful manner – by
the order and temporal separation of my experiences (or the contents
they are carrying). Or so it seems plausible to suppose: as
external events occur they are detected (after some delay) by our
sensory organs, and when the resulting signals reach the brain they
trigger experiences, with the order of the experiences (or their
contents) reflecting the order of the relevant events.
This mirroring of basic temporal features has given rise to the idea
that, in a manner of speaking, time represents
itself. Mellor starts from the premise that seeing
e precede e* requires one to have a memory-trace of
seeing e while actually perceiving e*. Since
memory is a causal process, and causes precede their effects, it is
only possible to perceive that e precedes e* if
one’s perception of e occurs before one’s
perception of e*. Hence Mellor’s conclusion:
The general point is not new, and it applies to directly experienced
successions, as well as the memory-based ‘seeing’ of
successions that Mellor describes. James quotes Helmholtz, who
maintained that the only case in which
The picture painted by Helmholz is plausible and appealing. If
the pianist plays the note D followed by F followed by G, the
pianist’s audience will have a succession of specious presents in
which D is experienced as giving way to F, which in turn gives way to
G. Needless to say, the details of the process differ
depending on the particular form of realism: the tales told by
Cinematic and Extensional theorists is relatively straightforward,
while matters are rather more convoluted in the case of Retentional
models.
There are, inevitably, complications. In the broad run of
cases the temporal relationships between and within our perceptual
experiences may accurately reflect the temporal relationships between
the events we perceive, but this is by no means always or necessarily
the case. If I were to see a star explode whilst hearing a clap
of thunder (a remote coincidence, admittedly, but by no means an
impossible one), I would be mistaken to conclude that these two events
were in fact simultaneous. Since the light from the star has
taken years to reach me, whereas the sound from the thunder has been
delayed by only a few seconds, my experience is presenting as
simultaneous events that are non-simultaneous. There are
further complications on the micro-temporal scale. It is possible
for quite striking ordering discrepancies to arise on shorter
time-scales – i.e., of few tenths of a second, with stimuli
measured in a few tens of milliseconds. In the case of the
‘flash-lag illusion’, for example, stimuli which are in
fact simultaneous appear as successive (for more on this see
Section 3 of the supplementary documents
 Husserl, the Brain and Cognitive Science
 and the supplementary document
 Interpreting Temporal Illusions).
Dennett makes much of these phenomena, arguing that on the
micro-temporal scale there need be no correspondence between
the order in which we represent events as occurring and the order in
which these events impinge on our perceptual systems: ‘what
matters is that the brain can proceed to control events “under
the assumption that A happened before B” whether or not the
information that A has happened enters the relevant system of the brain
and gets recognized as such before or after the information that B has
happened.’ (1991: 
 149)[23]
Also, over short intervals it is
possible for the brain’s interpretation of what happens at a
given time to be revised or ‘re-written’ in the light of
subsequent information. Dennett goes on to argue that there is
often no fact of the matter concerning the precise time at which
informational vehicles become conscious – hence his preference
for talking in terms of ‘informational vehicles’ as opposed
to ‘experiences’. There is also no fact of the matter
as to which information vehicles are conscious independently of which
‘probes’ or queries are carried out. For Dennett, the
assumption that anything akin to the Jamesian stream of consciousness
exists is mistaken. These doctrines are important parts of his
‘multiple-drafts’ theory of consciousness, which we will be
looking at in more detail in §7.3.
In arguing for these striking conclusions Dennett relies only in
part on a variety of puzzling phenomena (‘temporal
illusions’) discovered by psychologists investigating our
perceptual abilities over short time scales. He also places
considerable weight on the general distinction between
content-properties and vehicle-properties, insisting frequently on the
dangers of confusing them, or supposing that representations need share
the properties represented in their contents. Phillips forcefully
takes Dennett to task for failing to recognize that the temporal case
is different and distinctive in this regard:
Returning to Helmholtz’s claim, when in the
Principles James remarked of it ‘This philosophy is
unfortunately too crude’ (1890: 628) he was not concerned with
the sort of counterexamples we have just been considering. James
was making a far more general point:
Even though we were to conceive the outer successions as
forces stamping their image on the brain, and the brain’s
successions as forces stamping their image on the mind, still, between
the mind’s own changes being successive, and knowing
their own succession, lies as broad a chasm as between the object
and subject of any case of cognition in the world. A
succession of feelings, in and of itself, is not a feeling of
succession. … what is past, to be known as past, must be
known with what is present, and during the
‘present’ spot of time. (1890: 628–9)
James here berates Helmholtz for failing to recognize that a mere
succession of experiences does not add up to an experience of
succession, and then goes on to endorse a Retentional account of where
the difference between the two lies: the earlier and later parts of a
succession must be experienced together and simultaneously in
order to be experienced as a succession. And for the reasons
already outlined, this means James himself was committed – to the
extent he was a Retentionalist – to a quite systematic
divergence between the temporal properties of experiential contents and
the temporal properties of experiences. For more on James’
views on the specious present, see Section 3 of the supplementary document
 The Specious Present: Further Issues.
Just as there are different conceptions of the nature of temporal
awareness, there are very different conceptions of the nature and
large-scale structure and composition of time itself (i.e., the time of
the universe as a whole). Can we hope to learn anything about the
nature of our experience of time from theories about time per
se? This is a complex issue, and this is not the place for a
thorough investigation of it. Nonetheless, even a cursory look at
the lay of the land reveals a few points that are worth noting.
Most of the connections between the metaphysics and the
phenomenology of time involve, in one way or another, temporal
passage. The latter can be characterized in a number of
ways, but at the very least passage is associated with the steady
advance of the present, an advance which entails that future times will
become present, that present times and events will become past, and
that past times become every more past with every passing
moment. But while few deny that time seems to pass – and
indeed, that this passage is (along with dimensionality) the most
obvious difference between time and space – there are many who
have denied that time really does pass. Of these a few
share McTaggart’s view that time cannot pass because time does
not exist. A more popular view, these days at least, is the view
that while time certainly exists, it is more akin to space than it
superficially seems. Proponents of the four-dimensional
‘Block’ universe – also known as eternalism
– hold that there is no ontological distinction between past,
present and future, and that all times are equally real. They
further hold that there is no unique privileged present time, and a
fortiori that there is no such thing as a moving
 present.[24]
Block theorists face a significant
challenge: Why does time seem to pass if it doesn’t? Part
of the explanation lies in the way our memories accumulate.
Another part of the explanation lies in the character of our
experience. Time per se may not pass or flow, but there
is undeniably something akin to passage and flow in our immediate
experience, and this phenomenal passage does not require
physical passage, it can exist a four-dimensional Block
universe. Or so proponents of the latter maintain.
The Block conception of time has its advantages. It has an
appealing simplicity, and accords well with Einstein’s relativity
theories, to mention but two. But the rejection of objective
temporal passage is not to everyone’s taste, and other
conceptions of time also have their advocates. The main
contenders are depicted in Figure 20 below.
Figure 20.
Four conceptions of the large-scale composition of the universe.
At the opposite extreme to the 4-D Block view is
Presentism, the doctrine that concrete reality is confined to
the momentary present. Presentists deny any reality to the past
or future. Coming in between these extremes is the Growing
Block model. According to the latter, the past is real but
the future is not, and the sum total of reality is gradually
increasing, by a process of moment-by-moment ‘absolute
becoming’. On this view the present is merely the most
recent addition to reality; it is also the interface between being and
non-being. The Moving Spotlight model is in one respect
akin to the standard Block model: it accords reality to all times and
events, including those yet to occur. It differs from the latter
by virtue of the fact that it incorporates objective passage into the
universe, in the shape of a privileged (and constantly advancing)
present – indicated by the blue line in Figure 20.
Moving Spotlight theorists agree with Block theorists that both the
future and the past exist, but they tend to hold that present events
are (in some manner)
 distinctive.[25]
How do these different conceptions of time accord with our competing
realist accounts of temporal consciousness? One point is more
obvious that most. If reality is confined to a momentary present
in the way Presentists maintain, then it is difficult to see how any
form of the Extensional approach can be true. Our immediate
experience cannot extend through time if time itself has no extension; if earlier and later stream-phases are experienced
together, in the way Extensional models require, then it seems very
plausible to suppose that these phases must both exist. (Or to
put it another way: an experience which no longer figures in the sum
total of reality is not in a position to be part of the same unified
state of consciousness as an experience which does so figure,
any more than a non-existent brick can help hold up a wall.) By
contrast, since Retentional theorists hold that our experience of time
takes no time – objectively speaking – their
position looks to be entirely compatible with Presentism, and similarly
for the Cinematic models (realist and non-realist).
 [26]
Is that the end of the story? Not necessarily, for the
Extensional approach is perfectly compatible with version of Presentism
which grant to the present a brief duration. It is only
Presentism of the strictest form which is irreconcilable with the
Extensional approach – for further discussion of this issue see
Dainton (2001: ch.6 and §7.8, also forthcoming) and McKinnon
(2003: §10). The same manoeuvre will be necessary to secure
the compatibility of Extensional models with the Moving Spotlight
conception of passage. The latter is most plausible when the
existence of consciousness is confined to the present, so a strictly
momentary Spotlight is problematic for the Extensional approach.
It is otherwise for a Spotlight which possesses some brief
duration.
As for the 4-D Block conception, it looks equally compatible with
both views of phenomenal temporality. The Retentional
theorists’ momentary specious presents can exist in universes of
this sort, as can those of Cinematic theorists, but so too can the
non-momentary specious presents to be found in Extensional
models.
But perhaps the situation is not quite so straightforward.
Someone might object: ‘There cannot be an experience of
succession without genuine succession, and the latter consists
of the coming into being of successive phases of a stream of
consciousness.’ If this view could be shown to be correct,
the Growing Block theorist would have the upper hand.
For if reality as a whole comes into being, drop by drop (or slice by
slice), then so too does experience, and the experience of succession
would thereby be possible. Of course, the viability of this line
of argument depends on the initial premise: does the experience of
succession require absolute becoming? Retentionalists will reject
this entirely, holding as they do that experienced succession occurs
within momentary slices of consciousness.
Extensionalists can also question the premise. If the Extensional
conception of Jamesian ‘duration-blocks’ expounded earlier
were along the right lines, then experienced succession would be an
intrinsic phenomenal feature of temporally extended experiences, and as
such would not require the successive coming-into-being of experiential
phases. Also, the earlier and later phases of a duration-block
are experienced together (they are diachronically
co-conscious), and it is by no means obvious that this relationship
requires absolute becoming; indeed, it is more naturally construed as a
connection between experiential phases which exist at
neighbouring
 times.[27]
There is obviously more work to be done here, and for further
discussion see Baron (forthcoming),  Callender (2008), Deng (2013a, 2013b), Dainton (2011, 2016), Frischut (2015), Ismael (2015), Paul (2014), Power (2015) and Prosser (2016). But it doesn’t look as though there are many straightforward or simple
answers to the question: ‘What do the differing conceptions of
the nature of time imply about the nature of temporal
awareness?’
PT-realists hold that Reid drew the line between sense and memory in
the wrong place: our immediate experience is not confined to an
instantaneous present, it extends a short way through time, with
Cinematic theorists, Retentionalists and Extensionalists offering very
different accounts of how this is possible. For Dennett, the
debate has been conducted on false premises, for in some cases at
least, there is no sharp dividing line between memory and experience,
and the project of trying to ascertain the temporal microstructure of
consciousness is misconceived. In support of this claim Dennett
deploys a range of intriguing examples – including the cutaneous
rabbit and the colour phi phenomenon (see Section 3 of the supplementary 
documents
 Husserl, the Brain and Cognitive Science
 and
 supplementary document
 Interpreting Temporal Illusions)
 – but the main line of argument can be brought out with
one of his simplest. (For the full case see Dennett (1991: chapters
5–6, and also Dennett and Kinsbourne 1992).
In cases of so-called ‘backward masking’, if two stimuli
are presented in rapid succession, most subjects will be able to
identify the second (and later) stimulus far more reliably than the
first. In the particular experiment Dennett describes, the target
stimulus is a solid disk, shown for 30 msec, and the mask – shown
immediately afterwards – is a larger surrounding circle.
Although subjects are shown both images, when queried they report that
they saw just one: the circle. The standard interpretation of
this sort of experiment, according to Dennett, is that in such cases
the subject do not experience the target stimulus: they have
no visual experience of the disk, the occurrence of the masking
stimulus somehow interferes with the normal perceptual process.
However, as he also notes, there is a second possible interpretation of
the subject’s responses. Perhaps the subjects
do experience the disk, but something interferes with their
memory of this experience, and so when subsequently queried they deny
having seen it. Dennett labels the first mechanism
Stalinesque: since the experiences our perceptual systems
produce do not accurately reflect the stimuli, there is a sense in
which they are putting on a false and misleading display, in a manner
(somewhat) reminiscent of Stalin’s show-trials. He calls
the second mechanism Orwellian: a false and misleading version
of recent events is being created by the subjects’ memories, and
so history is being rewritten, in a manner (somewhat) reminiscent of
Orwell’s 1984.
Dennett is right that the evidence thus far presented can be
interpreted in each of these ways, but what should we make of
this? The natural response would be to hold that in the absence
of any further plausible interpretations of the evidence, then either
the Stalinesque or the Orwellian version of events must be true: if the
latter, then the subjects do experience the disk, if the former they
don’t. Dennett maintains that this line of thinking is
mistaken. In the case described, and others like it,
neither interpretation is correct, there is simply no fact of
the matter as to whether or not the subject’s experience the disk
or not: ‘the distinction between perceptual revisions and memory
revisions that works so crisply at other scales is not guaranteed
application … The boundary between perception and memory, like
most boundaries, is not perfectly sharp’ (Dennett and Kinsbourne,
1992: §2.2). The assumption that there must be a
determinate ‘yes’ or ‘no’ answer to the
question of whether or not the subject saw the disk is grounded, he
argues, in an appealing but mistaken neo-Cartesian conception of
experience. According to this conception, for any given subject
during their waking hours the question ‘What is currently
appearing on the stage of your consciousness?’ always has a fully
precise answer, an answer determined by the experiential contents
present in the relevant subject’s consciousness. In place
of this conception he offers his ‘Multiple Drafts’ model.
The latter is not easily summarized, but it replaces the familiar
Jamesian stream of consciousness with a multiplicity of
‘informational vehicles’, and tightly connects the correct
ascription of experiences to subjects to what they say and do, and
hence what they remember: ‘We might classify the Multiple Drafts
model then as first-person operationalism, for it brusquely
denies the possibility in principle of consciousness of a stimulus in
the absence of that subject’s belief in that consciousness’
(1991: 132).
Dennett’s position is open to criticism on two main
fronts. He asserts that there is no possibility that future
research will uncover evidence that will allow us to distinguish
between Orwellian and Stalinesque interpretations. How can he be
so confident about what the future will bring? Second-guessing
scientific progress is a dangerous game. His argument also has a
verificationist slant, relying as it does on the principle that if
there is no possible evidence that P obtains, there is no fact
of the matter as to whether or not P obtains. When
applied to ordinary material objects this principle has
counterintuitive consequences. Suppose there is a box that cannot
be opened, or probed by X-rays, ultrasound or any similar method.
Does the fact that we will never be in a position to discover what is
inside the box mean there is no fact of the matter about its contents,
about whether it contains something or nothing at all? Dennett
himself agrees that verificationism is objectionable in this sort of
case, but insists that it is legitimate when it comes to
questions concerning the existence (or non-existence) of
experiences. Those who are inclined to a robust realism about the
phenomenal realm will certainly find this downgrading of the
ontological credentials of conscious experiences objectionable.
For this reason they are likely to find Dennett’s attempt to
further downgrade these credentials by appealing to features of
short-term experience guilty of begging the
 question.[28]