The history of terrorism is probably coextensive with the history of
political violence. The term “terrorism”, however, is
relatively recent: it has been in use since late 18th century. Its use
has repeatedly shifted in some significant respects. Moreover, in
contemporary political discourse the word is often employed as a
polemical term whose strong emotional charge occludes its somewhat
vague descriptive meaning. All this tends to get in the way of
sustained rational discussion of the nature and moral standing of
terrorism and the best ways of coping with it.
When it first entered public discourse in the West, the word
“terrorism” meant the reign of terror the Jacobins imposed
in France from the fall of 1793 to the summer of 1794. Its ultimate aim
was the reshaping of both society and human nature. That was to be
achieved by destroying the old regime, suppressing all enemies of the
revolutionary government, and inculcating and enforcing civic virtue. A
central role in attaining these objectives was accorded to
revolutionary tribunals which had wide authority, were constrained by
very few rules of procedure, and saw their task as carrying out
revolutionary policy rather than meting out legal justice of the more
conventional sort. They went after “enemies of the people”,
actual or potential, proven or suspected; the law on the basis of which
they were operating “enumerated just who the enemies of the
people might be in terms so ambiguous as to exclude no one”
(Carter 1989: 142). The standard punishment was death. Trials and
executions were meant to strike terror in the hearts of all who lacked
civic virtue; the Jacobins believed that was a necessary means of
consolidating the new regime. This necessity provided both the
rationale of the reign of terror and its moral justification. As
Robespierre put it, terror was but “an emanation of
virtue”; without it, virtue remained impotent. Accordingly, the
Jacobins applied the term to their own actions and policies quite
unabashedly, without any negative connotations.
Yet the term “terrorism” and its cognates soon took on
very strong negative connotations. Critics of the excesses of the
French Revolution had watched its reign with horror from the start.
Terrorism came to be associated with drastic abuse of power and related
to the notion of tyranny as rule based on fear, a recurring theme in
political philosophy.
In the second half of the 19th century, there was a shift in both
descriptive and evaluative meaning of the term. Disillusioned with
other methods of political struggle, some anarchist and other
revolutionary organizations, and subsequently some nationalist groups
too, took to political violence. They had come to the conclusion that
words were not enough, and what was called for were deeds: extreme,
dramatic deeds that would strike at the heart of the unjust, oppressive
social and political order, generate fear and despair among its
supporters, demonstrate its vulnerability to the oppressed, and
ultimately force political and social change. This was
“propaganda by the deed”, and the deed was for the most
part assassination of royalty or highly placed government officials.
Unlike the Jacobins’ reign of terror, which operated in a
virtually indiscriminate way, this type of terrorism—as both
advocates and critics called it—was largely employed in a
highly discriminate manner. This was especially true of Russian
revolutionary organizations such as People’s Will or Socialist
Revolutionary Party (SR): they held that it was morally justified to
assassinate a government official only if his complicity in the
oppressive regime was significant enough for him to deserve to die,
and the assassination would make an important contribution to
the struggle. Their violence steered clear of other, uninvolved or
insufficiently involved persons. Some instances of “propaganda by
the deed” carried out by French and Spanish anarchists in the
1880s and 1890s were indiscriminate killings of common citizens; but
that was an exception, rather than the rule. The perpetrators and some
of those sympathetic to their cause claimed those acts were
nevertheless morally legitimate, whether as retribution (exacted on the
assumption that no member of the ruling class was innocent) or as a
means necessary for the overthrow of the unjust order. Accordingly, in
their parlance, too, the term “terrorism” implied no
censure. When used by others, it conveyed a strong condemnation of the
practice.
The terrorism employed by both sides in the Russian Revolution and
Civil War was in important respects a throwback to that of the
Jacobins. The government set up in Russia by the victorious Bolsheviks
was totalitarian. So was the Nazi rule in Germany. Both sought to
impose total political control on society. Such a radical aim could
only be pursued by a similarly radical method: by terrorism directed
by an extremely powerful political police at an atomized and
defenseless population. Its success was due largely to its arbitrary
character—to the unpredictability of its choice of victims. In
both countries, the regime first suppressed all opposition; when it no
longer had any opposition to speak of, political police took to
persecuting “potential” and “objective
opponents”. In the Soviet Union, it was eventually unleashed on
victims chosen at random. Totalitarian terrorism is the most extreme
and sustained type of state terrorism. As Hannah Arendt put it,
“terror is the essence of totalitarian domination”, and
the concentration camp is “the true central institution of
totalitarian organizational power” (Arendt 1958: 464,
438). While students of totalitarianism talked of terrorism as its
method of rule, representatives of totalitarian regimes, sensitive to
the pejorative connotation of the word, portrayed the practice as
defense of the state from internal enemies.
However, state terrorism is not the preserve of totalitarian
regimes. Some non-totalitarian states have resorted to terrorism
against enemy civilians as a method of warfare, most notably when the
RAF and USAAF bombed German and Japanese cities in World War II (see
Lackey 2004). Those who designed and oversaw these campaigns never
publicly described them as “terror bombing”, but that was
how they often referred to them in internal
communications.
After the heyday of totalitarian terrorism in the 1930s and 1940s,
internal state terrorism continued to be practiced by military
dictatorships in many parts of the world, albeit in a less sustained
and pervasive way. But the type of terrorism that came to the fore in
the second half of the 20th century and in early 21st century is that
employed by insurgent organizations. Many movements for national
liberation from colonial rule resorted to it, either as the main method
of struggle or as a tactic complementing guerrilla warfare. So did some
separatist movements. Some organizations driven by extreme ideologies,
in particular on the left, took to terrorism as the way of
trying to destroy what they considered an unjust, oppressive economic,
social and political system. This type of terrorism is, by and large,
indiscriminate in its choice of target: it attacks men and women of
whatever political (or apolitical) views, social class, and walk of
life; young and old, adults and children. It shoots at people, or blows
them up by planting bombs, in office buildings, markets, cafes,
cinemas, places of religious worship, on buses or planes, or in other
vulnerable public places. It also takes people hostage, by hijacking
planes and in other ways.
As “terrorism” has by now acquired a very strong
pejorative meaning, no-one applies the word to their own actions or to
actions and campaigns of those they sympathize with. Insurgents
practicing terrorism portray their actions as struggle for liberation
and seek to be considered and treated as soldiers rather than
terrorists or criminals. They often depict their enemy—the
alien government, or the agencies of the social, political and economic
system—as the “true terrorists”. For them, the test
of terrorism is not what is done, but rather what the
ultimate aim of doing it is. If the ultimate aim is liberation
or justice, the violence used in order to attain it is not terrorism,
whereas the violence aiming at maintaining oppression or injustice, or
some of the “structural violence” embodying it, is. On the
other hand, governments tend to paint all insurgent violence with the
brush of “terrorism”. Government spokespersons and
pro-government media typically assume that terrorism is by definition
something done by non-state agents, and that a state can never be
guilty of terrorism (although it can sponsor terrorist organizations).
For them, the test of terrorism is not what is done, but
who does it. When a state agency uses violence, it is an act
of war, or reprisal, or defense of the security of the state and its
citizens; when an insurgent group does the same, it is terrorism. Under
these circumstances, one person’s terrorist is indeed
another’s freedom fighter, and public debate about terrorism is
largely conducted at cross purposes and to little effect. Attempts of
the United Nations to propose a definition of “terrorism”
that could be accepted by all states and embedded in international law
so far have been frustrated by the same sort of relativism. Islamic
countries would accept no definition that allowed national liberation
movements in the Middle East and Kashmir to be portrayed as terrorist,
whereas Western countries would accept no definition that allowed for
state agencies to be guilty of
terrorism.
The evaluative meaning of “terrorism” has shifted
considerably more than once. So has its descriptive meaning, but to a
lesser degree. Whatever else the word may have meant, its ordinary use
over more than two centuries has typically indicated two things:
violence and intimidation (the causing of great fear or terror,
terrorizing). The dominant approach to the conceptual question in
philosophical literature reflects this. Terrorism is usually understood
as a type of violence. This violence is not blind or sadistic, but
rather aims at intimidation and at some further political, social, or
religious goal or, more broadly, at coercion.
That is how (political) “terrorism” is defined by Per
Bauhn in the first philosophical book-length study in English:
Another good example of a mainstream definition is provided in
C.A.J. Coady’s article on terrorism in the Encyclopedia of
Ethics:
Yet another example is the definition proposed by Igor
Primoratz:
These definitions put aside both the question of who the actor is
and the question of what their ultimate objectives are, and focus on
what is done and what the proximate aim of
doing it is. They present terrorism as a way of acting that could be
adopted by different agents and serve various ultimate objectives
(most, but perhaps not all of them, political). It can be employed by
states or by non-state agents, and may promote national liberation or
oppression, revolutionary or conservative causes (and possibly pursue
some nonpolitical aims as well). One can be a terrorist and a
freedom fighter; terrorism is not the monopoly of enemies of freedom.
One can hold high government or military office and design or
implement a terrorist campaign; terrorism is not the preserve of
insurgents. In this way much of the relativism concerning who is and
who is not a terrorist that has plagued contemporary public debate (see
1.1.4 above) can be overcome.
Beyond concurring that violence and intimidation constitute the core
of terrorism, the definitions quoted above differ in several respects.
Does only actual violence count, or do threats of violence also
qualify? Must terrorist violence be directed against life and limb, or
does violence against (some) property also count? Does terrorism always
seek to attain some political goal, or can there be non-political (e.g.
criminal) terrorism? All these points are minor. There is also one
major difference: while Coady and Primoratz define terrorism as
violence against non-combatants or innocent people, respectively,
Bauhn’s definition includes no such restriction. Definitions of
the former type can be termed “narrow”, and those of the
latter sort “wide”. Philosophical literature on terrorism
abounds in instances of both types.
Should we adopt a wide or a narrow definition? A wide definition
encompasses the entire history of “terrorism” from the
Jacobins to the present, and is more in accord with current ordinary
use. A narrow definition departs from much ordinary use by restricting
terrorist violence to that directed at non-combatants or innocent
persons. Thus it leaves out most of 19th century “propaganda by
the deed” and political violence perpetrated by Russian
revolutionaries which they themselves and the public called
terrorist.
For these reasons, historians of terrorism normally work with a wide
definition, and social scientists do so much of the time. But
philosophers may well prefer a narrow definition. They focus on the
moral standing of terrorism and need a definition that is particularly
helpful in moral discourse. Morally speaking, surely there is a
difference—for some, a world of difference—between
planting a bomb in a government building and killing a number of highly
placed officials of (what one considers) an unjust and oppressive
government, and planting a bomb in a tea shop and killing a random
collection of common citizens, including children. While both acts
raise serious moral issues, these issues are not identical, and running
them together under the same heading of “terrorism” will
likely hamper, rather than help, discerning moral assessment.
Narrow definitions are revisionary, but (unlike those discussed in
the next section) not implausibly so. They focus on the traits of
terrorism that cause most of us to view the practice with deep moral
repugnance: (i) violence (ii) against non-combatants (or,
alternatively, against innocent people) for the sake of (iii)
intimidation (and, on some definitions, (iv) coercion). In highlighting
(ii), they relate the issue of terrorism to the ethics of war and one
of the fundamental principles of just war theory, that of non-combatant
immunity. They help distinguish terrorism from acts of war proper and
political assassination, which do not target non-combatants or common
citizens. It does not matter very much whether the victims of terrorism
are described as “non-combatants” or “innocent
people”, as each term is used in a technical sense, and both
refer to those who have not lost their immunity against lethal or other
extreme violence by being directly involved in, or highly responsible
for, (what terrorists consider) insufferable injustice or oppression.
In war, these are innocent civilians; in a violent conflict that falls
short of war, these are common citizens.
Talk of involvement of individuals and groups in injustice or oppression raises the question: is the injustice or oppression at issue, and thus the standing of
those implicated in it, to be determined by some objective criteria, or
from the point of view of those who resort to violence? Coady chooses
the former option. He approaches terrorism from the standpoint of just
war theory and its principle of noncombatant immunity.
“Combatants” is a technical term designating agents of
aggression or, more broadly, “dangerous wrongdoers” or
“agents of harm”; they are legitimate targets of
potentially lethal violence. All others are noncombatants, and enjoy
immunity from such violence (Coady 2004). This approach may not be
difficult to apply in war, where the wrong or harm at issue is either
aggression that needs to be repelled, or systematic and large-scale
violations of human rights that provide the ground for humanitarian
intervention. Issues of injustice or oppression that arise in an
internal conflict that falls short of war, however, tend to be highly
contentious: what some consider an imperfect, but basically morally
legitimate political and social order, others may see as the epitome of
injustice and oppression that must be overthrown, if need be by
violence. Under such circumstances, when a highly placed political
official is killed by insurgents, that may be characterized (and
condemned) by many as an act of terrorism, while the insurgents and
those sympathetic to their struggle may reject this characterization
and portray (and justify) the killing as political assassination.
In order to avoid this kind of relativism, Primoratz puts forward a
view that in one important respect takes on board the standpoint of the
terrorist. The direct victims of terrorism are innocent in the sense of
not being responsible, on any credible understanding of responsibility
and liability, for the injustice or oppression the terrorists fight
against—not responsible at all, or at least not responsible to
the degree that makes them liable to be killed or maimed on that
account. The injustice or oppression at issue need not be real; it may
be merely alleged (by the terrorists). Being responsible for a merely
alleged great injustice or oppression is enough for losing one’s
immunity against violence, as far as the type of immunity and innocence
relevant to defining terrorism is concerned. According to the traditional version of
just war theory one does not lose immunity against acts of war only by
fighting in an unjust war, but by fighting in any war. Similarly, one does not lose immunity against political
violence only by holding office in or implementing policies of a
gravely unjust government, but by holding office in or implementing
policies of any government: as King Umberto I of Italy said after
surviving an assassination attempt, such risk comes with the job.
Members of these two classes are not considered innocent and morally
protected against violence by those attacking them; the latter view
their acts as acts of war proper or of political assassination,
respectively. If the terrorists subscribe to a credible view of
responsibility and liability, then, when they attack common citizens,
they attack people innocent from their own point of view, i.e.,
innocent even if we grant the terrorists their assessment of the
policies at issue. (This is not to say that those who consider a
government to be gravely unjust have a moral license to kill its
officials, but only that if they do so, that will not be terrorism, but
rather political assassination. We can still condemn their actions if
we reject their judgment of the policies at issue, or if we accept that
judgment, but believe that they should have opposed those policies by
nonviolent means. But we will not be condemning their actions
qua terrorism.)
On this account, not only real, but also merely alleged injustice or
oppression counts in determining the innocence of the victims and
deciding which acts are acts of terrorism; thus such decisions are not
hostage to endless debates about the moral status of contested
policies. Nevertheless, a residue of relativity remains. The account
presupposes a certain understanding of responsibility and liability: a
person is responsible for a state of affairs only by virtue of that
person’s voluntary, i.e., informed and free, act or omission that
has a sufficiently strong connection with that state of affairs, and
thereby becomes liable to some proportionately unfavorable response.
Provided the terrorists accept some such understanding of
responsibility and liability, they kill and maim people they themselves
must admit to be innocent. To be sure, some militant organizations
resort to violence which we perceive as terrorist, yet object to the
label. They profess a view of responsibility and liability based on
extremely far-fetched connections between states of affairs and human
choices and actions, and argue that entire social classes or nations
are responsible for certain policies and practices and all their
members are liable to be attacked by deadly violence (for more on this, see 2.1 below).
Such arguments can only be regarded as preposterous. We should insist
on viewing their actions as terrorist, although they reject this
description. It is not clear how this residue of relativity could be
removed (Primoratz 2013: 16–21).
Some object to defining “terrorism” as violence against
non-combatants or innocent persons. They argue that doing so runs
together the question of the nature of terrorism and that of its moral
status, and begs the moral issue by making terrorism unjustified by
definition. We should rather keep these questions separate, and take
care not to prejudge the latter by giving a wrong answer to the
former.  What is needed is a morally neutral definition of terrorism,
and that means a wide one (Corlett 2003: 114–20, 134–35;
Young 2004: 57). But it is doubtful that “terrorism” can
be defined in some morally untainted way. The wide definitions these
philosophers adopt contain the word “violence”, which is
itself morally loaded. A narrow definition is not completely morally
neutral, as violence against the innocent is clearly morally
wrong. But what is clear is that such violence is prima facie
wrong. The definition implies a general presumption against terrorism,
not its sweeping moral condemnation in each and every instance,
whatever the circumstances and whatever the consequences of desisting
from it. The definition does not rule out that in certain
circumstances it might not be wrong, all things considered. Ethical
investigation is not preempted: a particular case of terrorism still
needs to be judged on its merits.
Another way of settling the issue of wide vs. narrow definition is
offered by Georg Meggle. He adopts a wide definition of terrorism, and
goes on to distinguish two different types: terrorism in the strong
sense, which deliberately, recklessly, or negligently harms innocent
people, and terrorism in the weak sense, which does not. Obviously, the
moral assessment of the two types of terrorism is going to be
significantly different (Meggle 2005).
The vast majority of cases almost anyone without an ax to grind
would want to classify as “terrorism” exhibit the two
traits implied in ordinary use and highlighted by mainstream
philosophical definitions such as those quoted above: violence and
intimidation. But philosophical literature also offers definitions that
leave out one or the other core component.
Some seek to sever the connection between terrorism and violence.
Carl Wellman defines terrorism as “the use or attempted use of
terror as a means of coercion”. Terrorism is often associated
with violence, but that is because violence is a very effective means
of intimidation. Yet “violence is not essential to terrorism and,
in fact, most acts of terrorism are nonviolent” (Wellman 1979:
250–51). The last claim seems false on any non-circular interpretation.
There may be many acts generally considered terrorist that do not
involve actual violence, but are meant to intimidate by
threatening it; but that is not enough to support the notion
of “non-violent terrorism”, which seems odd. So does
Wellman’s example of “classroom terrorism”: a
professor threatens to fail students who submit their essays after the
due date, causes panic in class, and thereby engages in terrorism.
Robert E. Goodin offers a similar account, emphasizing the political
role of terrorism: terrorism is “a political tactic, involving
the deliberate frightening of people for political advantage”
(Goodin 2006: 49). This, he claims, is the distinctive wrong terrorists
commit. Whereas on Wellman’s account one can commit an act of
terrorism without either engaging in or threatening violence, merely by
making a threat in order to intimidate, on Goodin’s account one
need not even make a threat: one acts as a terrorist by merely issuing
a warning about the acts of others that is meant to intimidate. This,
too, seems arbitrary, although it makes sense as a step in an argument
meant to show that “if (or insofar as) Western
political leaders are intending to frighten people for their own
political advantage, then (to that extent) they are
committing the same core wrong that is distinctively associated with
terrorism” (Goodin 2006:
2).
It has also been suggested that terrorism need not be understood as
inducing terror or fear. According to Ted Honderich, terrorism is best
defined as “violence, short of war, political, illegal and
prima facie wrong” (Honderich 2006: 88). This definition
might be thought problematic on several counts, but the idea of
“terrorism” without “terror” seems especially
odd. The two are connected etymologically and historically, and this
connection is deeply entrenched in current ordinary use. Intimidation
is not the morally salient trait of terrorism (pace
Goodin), but it is one of its core traits that cause most of us to
condemn the practice. We might consider severing the connection if
Honderich offered a good reason for doing so. But he supports his
highly revisionary definition by the puzzling claim that to define
terrorism as violence meant to intimidate is to imply that terrorism is
particularly abhorrent and thereby “in effect … invite a
kind of prima facie approval or tolerance of war”
(Honderich 2006: 93).
Can terrorism be morally justified? There is no single answer to
this question, as there is no single conception of what terrorism is.
If we put aside definitions that depart too much, and for no compelling
reason, from the core meaning of “terrorism” (such as those
cited in 1.2.3), we still need to decide whether the question assumes a
wide or a narrow understanding of terrorism. A narrow conception of
terrorism seems to be better suited to ethical investigation (1.2.2).
Moreover, philosophers who work with a wide definition typically hold
that terrorism that targets non-combatants or innocent persons is much
more difficult to justify than “selective” terrorism which
attacks only those who cannot plausibly claim innocence of the
injustice or oppression at issue (and which accordingly does not count
as “terrorism” on a narrow definition of the term). The
present discussion therefore focuses on terrorism understood as
violence against innocent civilians or common citizens, intended to
intimidate and thereby to achieve some further (political) objective
or, more broadly, to coerce.
One might try to justify some acts or campaigns of violence of this
kind in two ways. One could argue that the victims may be
non-combatants or common citizens, but nevertheless are not innocent of
the wrongs the terrorists are fighting against. Alternatively, one
could concede the innocence of the victims and argue that attacks on
them are nevertheless justified, either by their consequences on
balance, or by some deontological considerations.
If the former line of argument is successful, will it prove too
much? In showing that an instance of violence was justified because
those targeted were not really innocent, we will have shown that the
act or campaign of violence at issue was actually not a case of
terrorism. This may be merely a matter of semantics. There is a much
more damaging objection. A terrorist act is characteristically the
killing or injuring of a random collection of people who happen to be
in a certain place at a certain time. Arguments to the effect that
those people are not innocent of the wrongs the terrorist fights
against will therefore have a very wide reach, and accordingly
will be based on some simplistic conception of collective responsibility.
These arguments will be of the sort offered, for example, by the 19th
century anarchist Emile Henry. He planted a bomb at the office of a
mining company which, if it had exploded, would have killed or injured
a number of people who did not work for the company, but lived in the
same building. He also planted a bomb in a café that did go off,
injuring twenty people, one of whom later died of his injuries. At his
trial, Henry explained: “What about the innocent victims?
[…] The building where the Carmeaux Company had its offices was
inhabited only by the bourgeois; hence there would be no innocent
victims. The whole of the bourgeoisie lives by the exploitation of the
unfortunate, and should expiate its crimes together” (Henry 1977:
193). When commenting on the second attack, he said:
This is an utterly implausible view of responsibility and liability.
It claims that all members of a social class—men and women,
young and old, adults and children—are liable to be killed or
maimed: some for operating the system of exploitation, others for
supporting it, and still others for benefiting from it. Even if, for
the sake of argument, we grant the anarchist’s harsh moral
condemnation of capitalist society, not every type and degree of
involvement with it can justify the use of extreme violence. Giving the
system political support, or benefiting from it, may be morally
objectionable, but is surely not enough to make one liable to be blown
to pieces.
Another, more recent example, is provided by Osama Bin Laden. In an
interview in the aftermath of the attacks on September 11, 2001 he
said:
This, too, is a preposterous understanding of responsibility and
liability. For it claims that all Americans are eligible to be killed
or maimed: some for devising and implementing America’s policies,
others for participating in the political process, still others for
paying taxes. Even if, for the sake of argument, we grant Bin
Laden’s severe condemnation of those policies, not every type and
degree of involvement with them can justify the use of lethal violence.
Surely voting in elections or paying taxes is not enough to make one
fair game.
Attempts at justification of terrorism that concede that its victims
are innocent seem more promising. They fall into two groups, depending
on the type of ethical theory on which they are based.
Adherents of consequentialism judge terrorism, like every other
practice, solely by its consequences. Terrorism is not considered wrong
in itself, but only if it has bad consequences on balance. The
innocence of the victims does not change that. This is an instance of a
general trait of consequentialism often highlighted by its critics, for
example in the debate about the moral justification of legal
punishment. A standard objection to the consequentialist approach to
punishment has been that it implies that punishment of the innocent is
justified, when its consequences are good on balance. This objection
can only get off the ground because consequentialism denies that in
such matters a person’s innocence is morally significant in
itself.
Those who consider terrorism from a consequentialist point of view
differ in their assessment of its morality. Their judgment on terrorism
depends on their view of the good to be promoted by its use and on
their assessment of the utility of terrorism as a means of promoting
it. There is room for disagreement on both issues.
Kai Nielsen approaches questions to do with political violence in
general and terrorism in particular as a consequentialist in ethics and
a socialist in politics. The use of neither can be ruled out
categorically; it all depends on their utility as a method for
attaining morally and politically worthwhile objectives such as
“a truly socialist society” or liberation from colonial
rule. “When and where [either] should be employed is a tactical
question that must be decided … on a case-by-case basis …
like the choice of weapon in a war” (Nielsen 1981: 435). Nielsen
has a wide definition of terrorism, but his examples show that the
innocence of the victims of terrorism makes no difference to its
justification—that is, that his conclusions apply to terrorism
in both the wide and narrow sense. In his view,
Historical experience, in Nielsen’s view, tells us that
terrorism on a small scale, used as the sole method of struggle in
order to provoke the masses into revolutionary action, is ineffective
and often counterproductive. On the other hand, terrorism employed in
conjunction with guerrilla warfare in a protracted war of liberation
may well prove useful and therefore also justified, as it did in
Algeria and South Vietnam. (For an earlier statement of the same view,
see Trotsky 1961: 48–59, 62–65.)
Nicholas Fotion also uses a wide definition of terrorism. He, too,
is a consequentialist (although some of his remarks concerning the
innocence of many victims of terrorism might be more at home in
nonconsequentialist ethics). But he finds standard consequentialist
assessments of terrorism such as Nielsen’s too permissive. If
some types of terrorism are justifiable under certain circumstances,
such circumstances will be extremely rare. Terrorists and their
apologists do not perform the requisite calculations properly. One
problem is the “higher good” to be promoted by terrorism:
more often than not, it is defined in ideological terms, rather than
derived from settled preferences or interests of actual people. But for
the most part Fotion discusses the issue of means. If a terrorist act
or campaign is to be justified instrumentally, it must be shown (1)
that the end sought is good enough to justify the means, (2) that the
end will indeed be achieved by means of terrorism, and (3) that the end
cannot be achieved in any other way that is morally and otherwise less
costly. Terrorists not only, as a matter of fact, fail to discharge
this burden; Fotion argues that, with regard to terrorism that
victimizes innocent people, it cannot be discharged. All direct victims
of terrorism are treated as objects to be used—indeed, used 
up—by the terrorist. But
In reply, terrorists can claim that they advisedly sacrifice valued
human beings for a higher good. But for this claim to carry any
conviction, they would have to show that they have no alternative. Yet,
Fotion argues, they always have the alternative of taking on
the opponent’s military establishment, and often also have the
option of going after government officials responsible for the wrongs
they object to, instead of attacking innocent persons. That kind of
terrorism may sometimes be justified, whereas terrorism that targets
innocent people never is.
Within a nonconsequentialist approach to morality, terrorism is
considered wrong in itself, because of what it is, rather than only
because (and insofar as) its consequences are bad on balance. But this
is not to say that this approach leaves no room whatever for morally
justifying certain acts or campaigns of terrorism. Indeed,
nonconsequentialist discussions of terrorism also present a range of
positions and arguments.
A nonconsequentialist might try to justify an act or campaign of
terrorism in one of two ways. One might invoke some deontological
considerations, such as justice or rights, in favor of resorting to
terrorism under certain circumstances. Alternatively, one might argue
that the obvious, and obviously very weighty, considerations of rights
(of the victims of terrorism) and justice (which demands respect for
those rights) may sometimes be overridden by extremely weighty
considerations of consequences—an extremely high price that
would be paid for not resorting to terrorism. For the
rejection of consequentialism is of course not tantamount to denying
that consequences of our actions, policies, and practices matter in
their moral assessment; what is denied is the consequentialists’
claim that only consequences matter.
Virginia Held operates with a broad notion of terrorism, but her
justification of terrorism is meant to apply to terrorism that targets
common citizens. Her discussion of the subject focuses on the issue of
rights. When rights of a person or group are not respected, what may
we do in order to ensure that they are? On one view, known as
consequentialism of rights, if the only way to ensure respect of a
certain right of A and B is to infringe the same
right of C, we shall be justified in doing so. Held does not
hold that such trade-offs in rights with the aim of maximizing their
respect in a society are appropriate. Yet rights sometimes come into
conflict, whether directly or indirectly (as in the above
example). When that happens, there is no way we can avoid comparing
the rights involved as more or less stringent and making certain
choices between them. That applies to the case of terrorism
too. Terrorism obviously violates some human rights of its
victims. But its advocates claim that in some circumstances a limited
use of terrorism is the only way of bringing about a society where
human rights of all will be respected.
Even when this claim is true, that is not enough to make resort to
terrorism justified. But it will be justified if an additional
condition is met: that of distributive justice. If there is a society
where the human rights of a part of the population are respected, while
the same rights of another part of the population are being violated;
if the only way of changing that and ensuring that human rights of all
are respected is a limited use of terrorism; finally, if terrorism is
directed against members of the first group, which up to now has been
privileged as far as respect of human rights is concerned—then
terrorism will be morally justified. This is a justification in terms
of distributive justice, applied to the problem of violations of human
rights. It is more just to equalize the violations of human rights in a
stage of transition to a society where the rights of all are respected,
than to allow that the group which has already suffered large-scale
violations of human rights suffer even more such violations (assuming
that in both cases we are dealing with violations of the same, or
equally stringent, human rights). The human rights of many are going to be
violated in any case; it is more just, and therefore morally
preferable, that their violations should be distributed in a more
equitable way (Held 2008).
It might be objected that in calling for sacrificing such basic
human rights as the right to life and to bodily security of
individual victims of terrorism for the sake of a more just
distribution of violations of the same rights within a group
in the course of transition to a stage where these rights will be
respected throughout that group, Held offends against the principles of
separateness of persons and respect for persons (Primoratz 1997:
230–31). In response, Held argues that
An argument for achieving a just distribution of rights violations is
not necessarily about groups; it can be an argument about the rights
of individuals to fairness (Held 2008: 89–90). (For further
objections to Held’s argument, see Steinhoff 2007: 125–30; Nath
2011.)
In Held’s justification of terrorism, it is justice that
requires that inescapable violations of human rights be more evenly
distributed. There is a different way of allowing for the use of
terrorism under certain circumstances within a nonconsequentialist
approach to the ethics of violence. It could be argued that, as far as
justice and rights are concerned, terrorism (or, in Held’s
terminology, the kind of terrorism that targets the innocent) is never
justified. Furthermore, considerations of justice and rights carry much
greater weight than considerations of good and bad consequences, and
therefore normally trump the latter in cases of conflict. However, in
exceptional circumstances considerations concerning 
consequences—the price of not resorting to terrorism—may be
so extremely weighty as to override those of justice and rights.
Michael Walzer offers an argument along these lines in his discussion
of “terror bombing” of German cities in World War II. In
early 1942, it seemed that Britain would be defeated by Germany and
that its military could not prevail while fighting in accordance with
the rules of war. Britain was the only remaining obstacle to the
subjugation of most of Europe by the Nazis. That was “an
ultimate threat to everything decent in our lives, an ideology and a
practice of domination so murderous, so degrading even to those who
might survive, that the consequences of its final victory were
literally beyond calculation, immeasurably awful” (Walzer 2000:
253). Thus Britain was facing a “supreme emergency”: an
(a) imminent threat of (b) something utterly unthinkable from a moral
point of view. In such an emergency—a case of the “dirty
hands” predicament that so often plagues political action (see
Walzer 1973)—one may breach a basic and weighty moral principle
such as civilian immunity, if that is the only hope of fending off the
threat. So for more than three years, the RAF, later joined by the
USAAF, deliberately devastated many German cities, killed about
600,000 civilians and seriously injured another 800,000 in an attempt
to terrorize the German people into forcing their leadership to halt
the war and surrender unconditionally. By early 1943 it was clear that
Germany was not going to win the war, and all subsequent terror
bombing lacked moral justification. But in its first year, in Walzer’s
view, the terror bombing of Germany was morally justified as a
response to the supreme emergency Britain was facing.  Walzer then
expands the notion of supreme emergency to apply to a single political
community facing the threat of extermination or enslavement, and
eventually to a single political community whose “survival and
freedom” are at stake. For “the survival and freedom of
political communities—whose members share a way of life,
developed by their ancestors, to be passed on to their
children—are the highest values of international society”
(Walzer 2000: 254).
Here we have two different conceptions of supreme emergency. The
threat is imminent in both, but the nature of the threat differs: it is
one thing to suffer the fate the Nazis had in store for peoples they
considered racially inferior, and another to have one’s polity
dismantled. By moving back and forth between these two types of supreme
emergency under the ambiguous heading of threat to “the survival
and freedom of a political community”, Walzer seeks to extend to
the latter the moral response that might be appropriate to the former.
Yet whereas genocide, expulsion, or enslavement of an entire people
might be thought a moral disaster that may be fended off by
any means, its loss of political independence is, at most, a
political disaster. If a polity to be dismantled lacks moral
legitimacy, its demise may well be a moral improvement. But even if a
polity does have moral legitimacy, a threat to its “survival and
freedom” falls short of “an ultimate threat to everything
decent in our lives”. If so, its military cannot be justified in
waging war on enemy civilians in order to defend it. (On supreme emergencies generally see, for instance, Statman 2006.)
There is another, less permissive position constructed along similar
lines, but based on a more austere view of what counts as a moral
disaster that might justify resort to terrorism. Contrary to what many
fighters against social or economic oppression, colonial rule, or
foreign occupation believe, evils of such magnitude that they can
justify indiscriminate killing and maiming of innocent people are
extremely rare. Not every case of oppression, foreign rule, or
occupation, however morally indefensible, amounts to a moral disaster
in the relevant sense. Nor does every imminent threat to “the
survival and freedom of a political community” qualify, contrary
to what Walzer has argued. However, if an entire people is subjected to
extermination, or to an attempt at “ethnically cleansing” it
from its land, then it is facing a true moral disaster and may properly
consider terrorism as a method of struggle against such a fate. In view
of their enormity and finality, extermination and “ethnic
cleansing” of an entire people constitute a category apart. To be sure, resorting to
terrorism in such a case will be morally justified only if there are
very good grounds for believing that terrorism will succeed where
nothing else will: in preventing imminent extermination or “ethnic
cleansing”, or stopping it if it is already under way. Cases
where both conditions are met will be extremely rare. Indeed, history
may not offer a single example. But that does not mean that that no act
or campaign of terrorism could ever satisfy these conditions and thus
turn out to be justified. Accordingly, terrorism is almost
absolutely wrong (Primoratz 2013: chapter 6).
Both the “supreme emergency” and the “moral
disaster” view will justify a resort to terrorism only when that
is the only way to deal with the emergency, or to prevent the disaster,
respectively. Just how certain must we be that terrorism will indeed
achieve the goal, while no other method will? One might argue that when
in extremis, we cannot apply stringent epistemic standards in
deciding how to cope—indeed, if we cannot really know what will
work, we must take our chances with what might. This is Walzer’s
view: in such a predicament, we must “wager” the crime of
terrorism against the evil that is otherwise in store for us.
“There is no option; the risk otherwise is too great”
(Walzer 2000: 259–260). It may be objected that this position
highlights the enormity of the threat, while failing to give due weight
to the enormity of the means proposed for fending off the 
threat—the enormity of terrorism, of deliberately killing and maiming
innocent people. When that is taken into account, the conclusion may
rather be that even in extremis, if terrorism is to be
justified, the reasons for believing that it will work and that nothing
else will must be very strong
indeed.
Some hold that terrorism is absolutely wrong. This position, too,
comes in different versions. Some philosophers work with a wide
definition of terrorism, and argue that under certain circumstances
“selective” terrorism that targets only those seriously
implicated in the wrongs at issue may be justified (Corlett 2003, Young
2004). This seems to suggest that terrorism which is not selective in
this way—that is, terrorism in the narrow sense—is
never justified. Yet this does not follow: there is still room for
arguing that terrorism of the latter type can be justified by further
considerations, such as those of “supreme emergency” or
“moral disaster”.
Per Bauhn does not leave it at that. He attempts to show that
terrorism that targets non-combatants or common citizens can never be
justified by deploying a slightly amended version of Alan
Gewirth’s ethical theory. Freedom and safety are fundamental
prerequisites of action and therefore must be accorded paramount
weight. The need to protect them generates a range of rights; the right
pertinent here is “an absolute right not to be made the intended
victims of a homicidal project” all innocent persons have
(Gewirth 1981: 16). When the absolute status of this right is
challenged by invoking supreme emergency or moral disaster, Bauhn
argues that there is a moral difference between what we are positively
and directly causally responsible for, and what we are causally
responsible for only indirectly, by failing to prevent other persons
from intentionally bringing it about. We are morally responsible for
the former, but (except in certain special circumstances) not for the
latter. If we refuse to resort to terrorism in order not to target
innocent persons, and thus fail to prevent some other persons from
perpetrating atrocities, it is only the perpetrators who will be
morally responsible for those atrocities. Therefore we must refuse
(Bauhn 1989: chapter 5).
Stephen Nathanson seeks to ground the absolute immunity of civilians or
common citizens and the absolute prohibition of terrorism which it entails in a
rule-consequentialist ethical theory (Nathanson 2010:
191–208). Adopting civilian immunity, rather than adopting any other
rule regulating the matter or having no rule at all, is the best way
to reduce the killing and destruction in armed conflict. Moreover, the
best consequences will be achieved by adopting it as an absolute rule,
rather than as a rule allowing for exceptions in supreme
emergencies. The idea of supreme emergency is vague. The criteria for
proffering supreme emergency exemptions are liable to be applied in
arbitrary and subjective ways. Finally, there is the slippery slope
argument: “permitting [departures from the rule of civilian
immunity, including terrorism] even under the direst circumstances
will lower the bar for justifying such acts … broadcast the message
that such behavior may sometimes be justified and … thus lend its
weight to increasing the use of such methods” (Nathanson 2010:
207).
 

However, one can adopt rule-consequentialism as one’s ethical theory
and yet view the immunity of civilians or common citizens and the
attendant prohibition of terrorism as very stringent, but not absolute
moral rules. Thus Richard B. Brandt and Brad Hooker do not view this
immunity as absolute. They argue that a set of moral rules selected
because of the good consequences of their adoption should include a
rule that allows and indeed requires one to prevent disaster even if
that means breaking some other moral rule. Even such a stringent moral
rule as the prohibition of deliberate use of violence against innocent
people may be overridden, if the disaster that cannot be prevented in
any other way is grave enough. (See Brandt 1992: 87–88,
150–51, 156–57; Hooker 2000: 98–99,
127–36). There is thus some convergence at the level of
practical conclusions between their understanding of the immunity of
civilians or common citizens and the “moral disaster”
position outlined above (2.3.2).