The unintentional founder of the Kyoto School is
 Nishida Kitarō[1]
 (1870–1945). In the Meiji period (1868–1912), when Japan
reopened itself to the world after more than two centuries of national
isolation, a generation of scholars devoted themselves to importing
Western academic fields of inquiry, including
“philosophy.” After many years of studying Western
philosophy and Eastern classics, alongside a dedicated practice of Zen
Buddhism, Nishida was the first major modern Japanese thinker to
successfully go beyond learning from the West to construct his own
original system of thought. This he began to do in his maiden work,
An Inquiry into the Good, published in 1911 (Nishida 1990).
On the basis of this work he obtained a position in the Philosophy
Department of Kyoto University, where he went on to ceaselessly
develop his thought and to decisively influence subsequent generations
of original philosophers, including the two other most prominent
members of the Kyoto School, Tanabe Hajime (1885–1962)
and Nishitani Keiji (1900–1990).
As is reflected in the name of the School, its founding members were
associated with Kyoto University, the most prestigious university in
Japan next to Tokyo University. It is perhaps no coincidence that the
School formed in Kyoto, the ancient capital and center of traditional
Japanese culture, rather than Tokyo, the new capital and center of
modernization, which also meant, Westernization. While the Kyoto
School philosophers all devoted themselves to the study of Western
philosophy (indeed they made lasting contributions to the introduction
of Western philosophy into Japan), they also kept one foot firmly
planted in their native traditions of thought. One scholar of the
Kyoto School writes in this regard: “The keynote of the Kyoto
school, as persons educated in the traditions of the East despite all
they have learned from the West, has been the attempt to bring the
possibilities latent in traditional culture into encounter with
Western culture” (Minamoto 1994, 217).
It would be misleading, however, if we were to think of the Kyoto
School as merely putting a Western rational mask over Eastern
intuitive wisdom. Nor would it be entirely accurate to think of them
as simply using Western philosophical idioms and modes of thought to
give modern expression to East Asian Buddhist thought. For not only is
the Western influence on their thought more than skin deep, their
philosophies are far too original to be straightforwardly equated with
preexisting Eastern thought. Insofar as they can be identified as East
Asian or Mahāyāna Buddhist thinkers, this must be understood
in the sense of having critically and creatively developed
these traditions in philosophical dialogue with Western thought. It
should be kept in mind that their primary commitment is not to a
cultural self-expression, or even to a dialogue between world
religions, but rather to a genuinely philosophical search for
truth.
The Kyoto School has become most well known, especially in the West,
for its philosophies of religion. Indeed the initial reception of the
Kyoto School in North America in particular took place in university
departments of Religious Studies, where their philosophies of religion
have frequently been viewed as representative of Mahāyāna
Buddhism, specifically of the latter’s Zen and Shin (True Pure Land)
 schools.[2]
 While the exchange on these terms has been fruitful, this view can be
misleading in two respects. First of all, even if, for most of the
Kyoto School thinkers, a philosophy of religion is the ultimate
arche and telos of their thought, it is hardly their
sole concern. They address a full array of philosophical issues:
metaphysics, ontology, epistemology, logic, philosophical
anthropology, philosophy of history, philosophy of culture, philosophy
of language, ethics, political theory, philosophy of art, etc.
Secondly, even when their focus is on the philosophy of religion, they
approach this topic in a non-dogmatic and often surprisingly
non-sectarian manner, drawing on and reinterpreting, for example,
Christian sources along with Buddhist ones. Even Nishitani, who did in
fact come to identify his thought with “the standpoint of
Zen,” adamantly refused the label of a “natural theologian
of Zen.” He claimed that: “If I have frequently had
occasion to deal with the standpoints of Buddhism, and particularly
Zen Buddhism, the fundamental reason is that [the original form of
reality and the original countenance of human being] seem to me to
appear there most plainly and unmistakably” (NKC X, 288;
Nishitani 1982, 261).
Kyoto School philosophy, therefore, should be understood neither as
Buddhist thought forced into Western garb, nor as universal discourse
(which the West happened to have invented or discovered) dressed up in
Japanese garb. Rather, it is best understood as a set of unique
contributions from the perspective of modern Japan—that is, from
a Japan that remains substantially determined by its historical layers
of traditional culture at the same time as being decisively
conditioned by its most recent layer of contact with the West—to
a nascent worldwide dialogue of cross-cultural philosophy.
This article will proceed as follows. In the following section, I will
consider the preliminary issues of how to define the Kyoto School and
who to include as its members. The name “Kyoto School” has
been used in the past, in some cases rather loosely, to refer to a
variety of sets of thinkers. It is therefore necessary to begin by
discussing the question: Just who belongs to exactly what? The third
and central section of this article will treat what is generally
considered to be the central philosophical concept and contribution of
the Kyoto School, namely, its ideas of “absolute
nothingness.” After discussing the ostensible contrast between
“Western being” and “Eastern nothingness,” and
after looking at some of the Eastern sources of the idea of absolute
nothingness, I will discuss the topological, dialectical,
phenomenological, and existential philosophies of absolute nothingness
developed by Nishida Kitarō, Tanabe Hajime, Nishitani Keiji, and
the central figure of the third generation of the Kyoto School, Ueda
Shizuteru (b. 1926). The fourth section will address the political
controversy surrounding the wartime writings and activities of the
Kyoto School. The first wave of attention paid to the Kyoto School in
the West in the 1980s largely ignored the political debate that had
long surrounded the School in Japan. While this lacuna in Western
scholarship was amended in the 1990s, notably with the publication of
Rude Awakenings: Zen, the Kyoto School and the Question of
Nationalism (Heisig & Maraldo 1994), the political ventures and
misadventures of the Kyoto School remain a highly contentious subject
(see Maraldo 2006 and Goto-Jones 2008). In the final section of this
article I will return to the question of the cross-cultural legacy of
the Kyoto School as a group of thinkers that stood between—or
perhaps moved beyond—East and West.
There has been considerable discussion surrounding the question of how
to define the Kyoto School, and who to include as its members. By all
accounts Nishida Kitarō is the School’s originator. (See
the entry on
 Nishida Kitarō.) 
 Yet it was 
never his intention to institute a “school” based on his
own thought; in fact he is reported to have always encouraged
independent thinking in his students. Moreover, unlike Plato’s Academy
or the Frankfurt School’s Institute for Social Research, the Kyoto
School thinkers never founded an academic institution or formed an
official organization (at least until The Nishida Philosophy
Association was founded in 2003; see the website listed below). Their
association was initially based merely on the fact that they studied
and taught at Kyoto University and developed their thinking under the
influence of Nishida as well as in dialogue and debate with him and
with one another. Indeed the name “Kyoto School” only came
into use by the “members” themselves much later, when at
all.
Names do not only tell us who or what something is; they also tell us
who or what something is not. Definitions not only seek to reveal an
internal essence; they also draw a line of demarcation between inside
and outside. It is thus not surprising that names and definitions
often have their origin in labels appended from without. These labels
may subsequently degenerate into stereotypes; or, conversely, they may
be positively appropriated and redefined by the group itself. Both of
these processes can be seen in the history of the “Kyoto
School.”
The name “Kyoto School,” in fact, originated from without;
or, more precisely speaking, it originated from the fringes of the
School itself. Tosaka Jun (1900–1945), a student of Nishida
and Tanabe, coined the expression in 1932 in reference to Nishida,
Tanabe and Miki Kiyoshi (1897–1945) as purportedly
representative of the epitome of “bourgeois philosophy in
Japan” (see Heisig 2001, 4). Tosaka’s own developing thought had
an explicitly materialist and Marxist orientation, and in his article
he criticized the School as promulgating a bourgeois idealism that
ignores material historical conditions and issues of social praxis.
Tosaka’s critique had an impact on the subsequent development of the
Kyoto School’s philosophies, and ironically Tosaka himself is today
considered by some to belong, together with Miki, to the “left
wing” of the Kyoto School (see Hattori 2004).
The second significant moment in the naming (or
“labeling”) of the Kyoto School came more clearly from
without, and in an even more politically charged context. As Nishitani
was to recollect years later: “The name ‘Kyoto
School’ is a name journalists used in connection with
discussions that friends of mine and I held immediately before and
during the war” (NKC XI, 207; see Heisig 2001, 277). Nishitani
is referring here to a series of symposia that addressed the question
of the meaning and direction of the Pacific War and another symposium
on the question of “overcoming modernity.” These
controversial symposia will be discussed in subsection 4.3 of this
article. In his retrospective comments, penned in 1977, Nishitani goes
on to say that by that time the name “Kyoto School” had
come to be used by Americans and others to “indicate purely a
school of thought.”
Since the 1970s the name “Kyoto School” has gradually
recovered its underlying philosophical ring, which for several decades
in Japan (especially outside of Kyoto) had been drowned out by its
political overtones. This recovery happened first of all in the West,
where scholars neglected the political controversies in their
enthusiastic reception of the School’s philosophies of religion. While
the political controversies returned with a vengeance to Western
academia a couple of decades later, in a kind of pendulum swing to the
hypercritical, the initial positive attention from the West had by
then helped to rehabilitate the image of the Kyoto School back home in
Japan.
Fujita Masakatsu suggests that the question of defining the identity
of the Kyoto School has often been a more pressing issue for Western
scholars than for the Japanese themselves. He speculates that there
are two reasons for this. One is that the Kyoto School never really
had any noteworthy competing schools of original thought within Japan
with which to contrast itself, and over against which to explicitly
define its own identity. The second reason is that, while Westerners
tend to draw out and focus on the shared general characteristics of
the School’s thinkers, usually in contrast with the general
characteristics of Western thought, for Japanese scholars of the Kyoto
School the differences between the various thinkers often appear in
sharper relief than do their shared commonalities (Fujita 2001,
ii).
In any case, just as the formation of the Kyoto School’s ideas
took place between Western and Eastern horizons of thought, so has the
scholarly study and, to some extent, even the defining of the Kyoto
School taken place between scholars in Japan on the one hand and those
in Europe and North America on the other. Since one of the common
characteristics of the Kyoto School philosophers is their attempt to
set Japan and their own thought in the context of the wider world, it
is fitting that, with the increasingly international study of the
Kyoto School, their thought is finally becoming what it always
intended to be, namely, “Japanese philosophy in the world”
(see Heisig 2004; Fujita & Davis 2005; Davis & Schroeder &
Wirth 2011).
At the start of the twenty-first century, two important volumes
appeared in Japanese with the name “Kyoto School” in their
titles: The Philosophy of the Kyoto School, edited by Fujita
Masakatsu (2001; translated into English as Fujita 2018), which
consists of an anthology of texts by eight Kyoto School thinkers
together with an essay on each one by a contemporary scholar; and
The Thought of the Kyoto School, edited by Ōhashi
Ryōsuke (2004), which contains five essays detailing the
controversial history of the name “Kyoto School” as well
as seven essays on potential contributions of their thought to various
fields of contemporary philosophy. While the two books complement one
other in many respects, they nevertheless suggest somewhat different
approaches to defining the school.
Fujita agrees with Takeda Atsushi’s working definition of the Kyoto
School as: “the intellectual network that was centered on
Nishida and Tanabe, and mutually formed by those who were directly
influenced in both a personal and scholarly manner by them”
(Fujita 2001, ii and 234–35). Accordingly, Fujita’s book
features such thinkers as Tosaka and Miki, as well as unanimously
accepted figures such as Hisamatsu Shinichi (1889–1980) and
Nishitani. As Fujita points out, the relatively open definition of the
Kyoto School as such a scholarly and interpersonal
“network” has the advantage of highlighting the mutuality
of the flow of influence between its members, as well as the fact that
“membership” in the unofficial group did not preclude
serious disagreement with the thought of Nishida or Tanabe. While
critical exchanges did sometimes lead to severed personal relations
(Nishida and Tanabe infamously stopped speaking to one another), this
was not always the case (Nishitani and Tosaka remained on good
personal terms despite their political and philosophical differences).
In either case mutual criticism was philosophically taken seriously,
and it frequently provided impetus to further developments in each
member’s thought. In this sense, according to Fujita, an acceptance of
mutual criticism could well be considered one of the defining
characteristics of the School.
One point made by Tosaka early on, a point often repeated today, is
that without Tanabe’s critical appropriation of Nishida’s
thought there would be no tradition of the Kyoto School; we would have
only successors of “Nishida Philosophy” and not a genuine
school of mutually related yet independent thinkers. The question
remains, however, just how independent a thinker can be with respect
to Nishida’s thought and still be considered a member of the School.
For even when subsequent figures in the School sharply questioned
certain aspects of Nishida’s thought, they tended at the same time to
appropriate and creatively develop other shared concepts and motifs.
(A movement of self-critical development can in fact be seen in the
ceaseless progression of Nishida’s own thinking. Nishida considered
himself to be a “miner” who never managed to stay put in
one place long enough to “refine the ore” he had
unearthed.)
Hence the Kyoto School, like many other vibrant schools of thought, should
be seen as a cluster of original thinkers who, while not uncritically
subscribing to any prescribed dogma, nevertheless came to share, and
debate, a number of common motifs as well as basic concepts and
terminology. As we shall see, the most fundamental of their shared and
disputed concepts is that of “absolute nothingness,” a
concept that has, in fact, most often been used as a thematic axis for
defining the School.
In contrast to Fujita, Ōhashi explicitly questions the
appropriateness of defining the Kyoto School merely in terms of a
network of personal and scholarly relations. According to Ōhashi,
in order for a group of thinkers to form a genuine
“school” of philosophy, “there must be the common
possession or formation of a thought” (Ōhashi 2004, 9). For
Ōhashi, this common thought of the Kyoto School is that of
absolute nothingness, and he accordingly suggests the following as a
definition of the School: “a group of philosophers spanning
several generations who developed their thought in several areas of
philosophy with the idea of ‘nothingness’ as a
basis” (ibid., 10; see Ōhashi 2001, 13). While he does
include Hattori Kenji’s essay on the “left wing of the Kyoto
School” as the opening chapter of his The Thought of the
Kyoto School, previously Ōhashi explicitly excluded Miki
from the School on account of his principally Marxists orientations
(Ōhashi 1990, 12). (We might note here in passing that, in his
major later period work, The Logic of Imagination, Miki does
affirm the Nishida-inspired idea that “nothingness is what
transcends the subjective and the objective and envelopes them”
(quoted in Fujita 2011, 315).)
Among Western scholars, John Maraldo has most thoroughly probed the
question of Kyoto School identity and membership. He isolates six
criteria that scholars have used to include and exclude thinkers from
the Kyoto School: (1) connection with Nishida; (2) association with
Kyoto University; (3) stance toward Japanese and Eastern intellectual
traditions; (4) stance toward the interrelated matters of Marxism, the
nation state, and the Pacific War; (5) stance toward Buddhism and
toward religion in general; and (6) stance toward the notion of
absolute nothingness. Maraldo shows how each one of these criteria
have been used in various ways, consciously or unconsciously, since
the 1930s to either promote the philosophical significance or
disparage the political ideology of the Kyoto School (Maraldo 2005,
33–38).
I would add two more related and interrelated criteria. One is an
essentially ambivalent stance (i.e., neither simple rejection
nor simple acceptance) toward Western philosophy and the West in
general. For example, Nishida and others undertake a critical
reception of Western ontology in order to develop an Eastern
meontology or “logic of nothingness,” and attempt to
combine a Western “logic of things” with an Eastern
“logic of heart-mind.” I will discuss such issues in
section 3 of this article.
Another criterion that could be used to define the School is an
essentially ambivalent attitude toward Western modernity (or
toward modernization as Westernization). A critical stance toward a
unilateral globalization of Western modernity, a stance which at the
same time accepts in part its unavoidability and in some respects even
affirms its necessity, gave rise to the idea of “overcoming
modernity”—an overcoming that would take place not by
retreating from Western modernity, but by going through and
beyond it. This going through and beyond, moreover, would not simply
be a matter of going further down the road of linear progress; it
would entail a hermeneutical as well as ultimately a (me)ontological
and existential re-gress, a radical “step back.” For the
Kyoto School, a critical and creative retrieval of the traditions of
the East, those of East Asian Mahāyāna Buddhism in
particular, is thought to enable the radical religious and
philosophical “trans-descendence” necessary to move
through and beyond the limits and problems of Western modernity.
This idea of “overcoming modernity” has proven to be both
one of the more stimulating and one of the more controversial
aspects of their thought. For some it promises to contribute an
important East Asian perspective to debates over postmodernism in
philosophy and postcolonialism in culture studies. Yet because the
Kyoto School’s ideas of “overcoming modernity” developed
in conjunction with their wartime political theories, theories which
typically saw the nation of Japan as playing a key role in the
historical movement through and beyond Western modernity, it has also
proven to be one of the more often criticized aspects of their
thought. (It is noteworthy in this regard that contemporary Japanese
epigones of [Western] postmodernism have for the most part eschewed
making the connection between their adoption of recent Western
self-criticism of modernity/Eurocentrism and the Kyoto School’s
earlier critique of these.) In any case, it is true that even after
the Kyoto School ceased formulating the idea of overcoming modernity
in political terms, the idea lives on in their postwar philosophies of
religion and culture. Hence, a radical problematization of Western
modernity can be considered an important aspect of their identity as a
school of thought.
Another significant Western contributor to the question of the Kyoto
School’s identity is James Heisig, who succeeded Jan Van Bragt as the
head of the Nanzan Institute for Religion and Culture in Nagoya, an
institute which has for several decades now been at the center of
international research on the Kyoto School. In his book,
Philosophers of Nothingness: An Essay on the Kyoto School,
Heisig suggests that we follow the lead of Takeuchi Yoshinori
(1913–2002) and define the School by “triangulating”
it around the three leading figures of Nishida, Tanabe, and Nishitani
(Heisig 2001, 3–7 and 275–78).
It is indeed these three figures that form the core of what has become
known as the Kyoto School, and in this article I will accordingly
focus my attention primarily on them, if also at times on Ueda
Shizuteru as the current leading figure of the School. It should
nevertheless be kept in mind that these are only four of a much wider
group of original thinkers, some squarely within and some more or less
on the periphery of the Kyoto School.
Ōhashi Ryōsuke’s thesis, advanced already in his landmark
German anthology, Die Philosophie der Kyōto-Schule
(1990, revised edition 2012; see also Ōhashi and Akitomi 2018),
is that the Kyoto School should be understood as a group of thinkers
involved in a pluralistic yet cooperative and sustained attempt to
think on the basis of an idea of “nothingness” or
“absolute nothingness.” This distinguishes their thought
from that of traditional Western onto-logy based on the concept of
“being.” With this definition in mind, Ōhashi lists
the central members of the Kyoto School according to generation as
follows: Nishida and Tanabe make up the first generation; Hisamatsu,
Nishitani, Kōsaka Masaaki (1900–1969), Shimomura
Toratarō (1900–1995), Kōyama Iwao (1905–1993),
and Suzuki Shigetaka (1907–1988) make up the second generation;
and Takeuchi Yoshinori (1913–2002), Tsujimura Kōichi
(1922–2010), and Ueda Shizuteru make up the third generation.
Elsewhere he also suggests that the psychologist Kimura Bin (b. 1931)
could be considered part of the third generation of the School,
particularly if we shift the criterion of definition from
interpersonal relations to a genealogy of thought (Ōhashi 2004,
9).
Ueda, who has developed an original philosophy of Zen in relation to
Meister Eckhart and Nishida, is the most prominent figure of the third
generation. Takeuchi wrote important works on the philosophy of
religion from a Shin Buddhist perspective. Tsujimura, who studied
under Heidegger as well as under Hisamatsu and Nishitani, has
provocatively and influentially written on Heidegger’s thought from a
Zen and Kyoto School perspective. Abe Masao (1915–2006), a
former student of Hisamatsu’s, was an important representative of the
Kyoto School and contributor to inter-religious dialogue in North
America, although he is somewhat less well known in Japan itself. If
we were to view the Kyoto School as living past its third generation,
Ōhashi Ryōsuke (b. 1944), a prolific philosopher in his own
right, whose works in both Japanese and German address a broad range
of philosophical issues, would undoubtedly count as a central figure
of its fourth generation. Other recent affiliates of the School, who
could be seen as belonging to its fourth generation, include Hase
Shōtō, Horio Tsutomu, Ōmine Akira, Fujita Masakatsu,
Mori Tetsurō, Hanaoka (Kawamura) Eiko, Matsumura Hideo, Nakaoka
Narifumi, Okada Katsuaki, and Keta Masako. If the
School shows promise of living on to future generations, it is with
currently active Japanese scholars such as Akitomi Katsuya, Minobe
Hitoshi, Itabashi Yūjin, Uehara Mayuko, Inoue Katsuhito, Mine Hideki, Kosaka Kunitsugu, Tanaka Yū, and Tanaka Kyūbun,
and as well as with a number of Japanese and non-Japanese philosophers living outside of Japan, some of
whom have studied extensively with members of the third and fourth
generations of the School.
We appear to be at a turning point in the history of the Kyoto School,
as is reflected in current retrospective attempts to define it. With
Ueda’s and then Hase’s retirements from Kyoto University, on the one
hand, and with the creation in 1996 of a Department of the History of
Japanese Philosophy at Kyoto University (see the website listed below)
under the head of Fujita Masakatsu and now Uehara Mayuko on the other,
the Kyoto School is becoming as much an object of scholarship as it is
a living tradition. However, as with most schools of philosophy, the
line between critical scholarship and creative development is hardly a
clear one, and in practice the retrospective study of the Kyoto School
often blends together with its further unfolding as a still vibrant
school of thought.
It is also important to point out that today in Japan the Kyoto School
is not only studied in Kyoto. Since the appearance of Tokyo-based
philosopher Nakamura Yūjiō’s first book on Nishida in 1983,
Nishida and the Kyoto School have steadily begun to receive serious
attention once again from scholars and students in areas of Japan
beyond Kyoto. Worth special mention in this regard is Kosaka
Kunitsugu, whose lucid and prolific scholarship on Nishida and others
has done a great deal for the sympathetic yet sober textual analysis
of the Kyoto School. The creation of the Nishida Philosophy
Association in 2003 (see the website listed below) has helped
inaugurate a new era of cooperative exchange between scholars from
various areas of Japan as well as from abroad.
One final point on the question of membership: consideration should
also be given to those who could be referred to as “related
thinkers” or “associate members” of the Kyoto
School. The widest understandings (or
 misunderstandings[3])
 of the Kyoto School include in it a number of thinkers who have a
more or less peripheral relation to the inner circle of the School. On
the one hand, there is the case of the well-known Zen figure, D. T.
Suzuki (Suzuki Daisetsu) (1870–1966). Suzuki maintained a long
personal relationship with Nishida since their days as schoolmates.
Suzuki not only helped introduce the young Nishida to the practice of
Zen, his articulation of Mahāyāna Buddhist thought is also
acknowledged by Nishida as having influenced the formation of certain
key ideas in his last essay on the philosophy of religion. But
Suzuki—who is justifiably famous in his own right for, among
other things, helping introduce Zen to the West—was neither
trained as a philosopher nor was he associated with Kyoto University;
and thus he is perhaps best thought of as a “closely related
thinker” to the School.
Then there are the cases of Watsuji Tetsurō (1889–1960) and
Kuki Shūzō (1888–1941). Both of these philosophers
were brought to Kyoto University by Nishida, and both developed
philosophies which were more or less influenced by Nishida’s thought
(see Maraldo 2005, 34 and 52). And yet, both their thought and their
activities remained too independent to count them among the inner
circle of the School. It should be kept in mind, however, that these
two “associates” in particular are first rate philosophers
in their own right, whose original work outshines that of many of the
less original though full-fledged members of the School. Watsuji’s
novel theory of “culture and climate”
(fūdo), together with his major work on the ethics of
“betweenness” (aidagara), and Kuki’s combination
of logical rigor and existential insight in his major writings on the
problem of contingency, together with his provocative works on
Japanese aesthetics (notably his hermeneutical phenomenology of
“iki”), have each made lasting contributions to
philosophy and are worthy of international scholarly attention.
Finally, there is the matter of thinkers who have developed their
ideas more or less under the influence of Nishida and other members of
the Kyoto School. A complete list of this group of “influenced
thinkers” would be long, but it would include such names as
Takahashi Satomi, Takizawa Katsumi, Mutai Risaku, Yuasa Yasuo, Kimura
Bin, Sakabe Megumi, Nakamura Yūjirō, and Noe Keiichi. A
number of non-philosophers, such as the world-famous architect
Andō Tadao (Tadao Ando), who designed the Ishikawa Nishida Kitaro
Museum of Philosophy (see the website listed below), have also been
influenced by Nishida and the Kyoto School.
Having discussed issues of definition and membership of the Kyoto
School, we are now prepared to pursue the question of what unifies
their thought as a school of philosophy. I will here follow the
suggestion of Ōhashi, Nishitani, and other representatives of the
Kyoto School itself, and focus on the shared—and at times
disputed—idea of “absolute nothingness”
 (zettai-mu).[4]
Nishitani wrote the following with regard to Nishida and Tanabe:
“[Their] philosophies share a distinctive and common basis that
sets them apart from traditional Western philosophy: absolute
nothingness. … Clearly the idea of absolute nothingness came to
awareness in the spirituality of the East; but the fact that it has
also been posited as a foundation for philosophical thought represents
a new step virtually without counterpart in the history of Western
philosophy” (NKC IX, 225–26; Nishitani 1991, 161).
“First philosophy” in the Western tradition is ontology,
which asks the question of “being qua being,” and tends to
answer this question either in terms of the most universal
“being-ness” or in terms of the “highest
being.” For Aristotle, the primary category of being is
“substance,” ambiguously thought in its primary sense as
the particular entity (e.g. Socrates) and in its secondary sense the
universal that makes that entity what it is (e.g. human being), and
the highest being was the “unmoved mover.” Greek ontology
later influenced the Christian theological tradition to think of God
as the “highest being,” such that the dual threads of the
Western tradition as a whole took shape as what Heidegger calls
“onto-theology.” Hence, the fundamental philosophical
question of the onto-theological mainstream of the West is,
“What is being?” On the other hand, the counter-question
which the Kyoto School finds in the East is, “What is
nothingness?” In place of an ontology, first philosophy in the
East is more often a “meontology”: a philosophy of
non-being or nothingness.
Perhaps we should say “mu-logy” rather than
“meontology”; for, strictly speaking, the Greek
meon, “non-being,” should be translated into
Japanese as hi-u. What I am translating as
“nothingnesss,” mu, is written with a single
character rather than as a negation (hi) of being
(u). This is crucial since the nothingness with which they
are concerned is not the simple negation or privation of being. It is
closer to what Heidegger means by “being.” Attentive to
what he calls the “ontological difference” between being
(das Sein) and beings (das Seiende), Heidegger notes
that with respect to beings, understood as determinate things, being
can only appear as “no-thing.” We fail to attend to the
no-thing of being when we think only of things, and especially when we
think of thinking as a mere calculation of predetermined beings.
Heidegger thus calls “the nothing” (das Nichts)
the “veil of being.” Being cannot but appear to us as
nothing, insofar as we know only of beings. Yet it is das
Sein or das Nichts which grants an open place, a
clearing (Lichtung), for beings to show themselves in the
first place. But this clearing lets beings be by withdrawing itself
from view. Just as “nature (phusis) loves to
hide” (Heraclitus), being lets determinate beings come to
presence by withdrawing its indeterminate abundance into absence or
self-concealment (see Heidegger 1975, Vol. 9, 103–22; and Vol.
65, 246–47).
Tanabe studied with Heidegger in the early 1920s. (In fact, upon
returning to Japan in 1924, Tanabe was the first scholar in the world
to write an article on Heidegger’s thought.) When he later wrote the
following, Tanabe no doubt had Heidegger’s 1929 “What is
Metaphysics?” lecture in mind: “All science needs to take
some entity or other as its object of study. The point of contact is
always in being, not in nothing. The discipline that has to do with
nothingness is philosophy” (THZ VI, 156; see Heisig 2001,
121).
Heidegger was of course not the first Western philosopher to ask after
that which is radically other than beings or “beyond
being” as
 such.[5]
 For example, Tanabe could have also found support for the idea that
philosophy investigates nothingness in the following passage from
Hegel: “Das Erste der Philosophie aber ist, das
absolute Nichts zu erdenken” [Yet the first task of
philosophy is to conceive of absolute nothingness] (quoted
from Hegel’s “Glauben und Wissen” in Ōhashi 1984,
203). The Kyoto School might even be thought of as recovering a
suggestion from one of the first Presocratic philosophers,
Anaximander: namely, to think finite beings as determinations, or
delimitations, of “the indefinite” or “the
unlimited” (to apeiron).
Moreover, as Kyoto School thinkers frequently do point out, Christian
negative theologians and mystics, most notably Meister Eckhart, at
times make use of the notion of “the nothing” to refer to
that which transcends all concepts and all oppositions. For Eckhart,
“nothing” (niht) was one way of indicating the
“Godhead” (gōtheit) beyond “God”
delimited as a personal being (see Eckehart 1963, 328). Niht
here is an expression, at the limits of language, which attempts to
indicate “the nothingness of indistinct fullness from which flow
… all oppositions and relations” (Schürmann 1978,
168). Eckhart speaks of a breakthrough, not only beyond the ego, but
also beyond God Himself, a breakthrough, that is, to an abyssal
Godhead understood as “the silent desert into which no
distinction ever gazed, of Father, Son, or Holy Ghost” (Eckehart
1963, 316). Analogously, Nishida writes that “when we truly
enter thoroughly into the consciousness of absolute nothingness, there
is neither I nor God” (NKZ V, 182; see Nishida 1958, 137).
Nishitani affirms Eckhart’s intimations of a Godhead of absolute
nothingness, even though he notes that this is “markedly distant
from orthodox Christian faith,” which limits the concept of
nothingness to the relative nothingness expressed in the
nihilum of creatio ex nihilo, that is, to the
absolute privation of being out of which the highest being creates
lesser beings (NKC X, 75; Nishitani 1982, 66; also see NKC VII). Yet
Nishitani’s student and Eckhart scholar Ueda Shizuteru, despite
profound appreciation for Eckhart’s thought and its nearness to Zen,
argues in the end that Eckhart’s nothingness, like that of negative
theology in general, still points to an inexpressibly higher
being (see USS VIII, 146). Critically adapting Heidegger’s
expression, we might say that the nothing is still understood as
“the veil” of this inexpressibly higher being. Both
Nishitani and Ueda ultimately look to Zen for a nothingness so
absolute that, in thoroughly negating any traces of opposition to
beings (i.e., as a higher being transcending worldly beings), it is
paradoxically found fully in the concrete facts and activities of the
here and now (see USS VIII, 5ff.).
Ōhashi stresses, however, that neither the Buddhist tradition nor
the Kyoto School should be thought of as having a patent on the
radical “thinking of nothingness.” In fact, he argues,
“this thought slowly came to the fore within Western philosophy
itself,” a process that indeed set the stage for Kyoto School
contributions to contemporary philosophy (Ōhashi 2004,
12–13). Nishitani had already explored a number of resonant
notions of nothingness, not only in the Neoplatonic and Christian
mystical traditions, but also in 19th and 20th
century Western philosophers such as Nietzsche and Heidegger (see NKC
VIII; Nishitani 1990). And yet, here again Nishitani finds residues of
an ontological bias, where a kind of “relative
nothingness” is posited as either a simple negation of or as a
veil for being. Nishitani ultimately concludes that Nietzsche
succeeded only in expressing a “standpoint of relative absolute
nothingness”; and even in Heidegger, he critically suggests,
“traces of the representation of nothingness as some
‘thing’ that is nothingness still remain” (NKC X, 75
and 108; Nishitani 1982, 66 and
 96).[6]
In any case, it is fair to say that the Kyoto School thinkers
generally consider the purest sources for the idea of absolute
nothingness to lie in the traditions of the East. Hisamatsu went so
far as to speak of absolute nothingness as “oriental
nothingness” (Hisamatsu 1960); though it is important to bear in
mind that his claim is that this idea was first clearly
discovered in the traditions of East. Absolute nothingness is
by no means only relevant to Eastern cultures, anymore than in 1500 CE
the earth was only round in the West. Moreover, if the idea
of absolute nothingness “came to awareness in the spirituality
of the East,” as Nishitani says, the philosophy of
absolute nothingness is generally considered to be the Kyoto School’s
own contribution to the contemporary world of thought opened up by the
meeting of East and West.
Nishida—who could hardly be accused of underestimating what
Japan had to learn from Western philosophy—also spoke at times
in very general terms of Eastern nothingness in contrast with Western
being. In his essay, “The Types of Culture of the Classical
Periods of East and West Seen from a Metaphysical Perspective,”
he wrote: “How then are we to distinguish between the types of
culture of the West and East from a metaphysical point of view? I
think we can do this by dividing them into that [i.e., the culture of
the West] which considers the ground of reality to be being, and that
[i.e., the culture of the East] which considers this ground to be
nothingness.” In Greek philosophy, he goes on to say,
“that which has form and determination was regarded as the
real”; or even, as in Plato, reality, that which has true being,
was understood as the Forms. Judeo-Christian culture, however
radically different in various ways it was from Greek culture, and
despite negative theology’s indications of a Deus absconditus
as a kind of nothingness, nevertheless primarily considered the
person of God as “the most perfect being” to be
the basis of reality. In radical contrast to both the Greek and
Judeo-Christian origins of Western culture, Indian culture, like that
of China and Japan, took “the profoundest idea of nothingness as
its basis” (NKZ VII, 429–33; see Nishida 1970,
237–40).
In the closing lines of the preface to his 1926 book, From That
Which Acts to That Which Sees, a book many scholars view as the
beginning of “Nishidan Philosophy” proper, we find the
following famous and programmatic lines: “It goes without saying
that there is much to admire, and much to learn from, in the
impressive achievements of Western culture, which thought form as
being and the giving of form as good. However, does there not lie
hidden at the base of our Eastern culture, preserved and passed down
by our ancestors for several thousand years, something which sees the
form of the formless and hears the voice of the voiceless? Our hearts
and minds endlessly seek this something; and it is my wish to provide
this quest with a philosophical foundation” (NKZ IV, 6).
Before looking more specifically at how Nishida and other members of
the Kyoto School attempt to give philosophical form to the formless,
it will be helpful to look at some of the threads in Eastern
traditions on which the Kyoto School thinkers are explicitly and
implicitly drawing as they weave their texts on absolute
nothingness.
Their explicit references are primarily to Mahāyāna
Buddhism, especially to the East Asian Buddhist schools of Zen
(predominantly the Rinzai tradition but also notably Dōgen of
Sōtō) and Pure Land (predominantly Shinran’s Shin)
Buddhism. The key Sanskrit term in Mahāyāna Buddhism here is
śūnyatā (“emptiness”;
kū in Japanese). With the noteworthy exception of the
later Nishitani, however, the Kyoto School tends to favor the Chinese
glyph mu (“nothingness”; wu in Chinese),
which is found predominantly in Zen, and which reflects the early
attempt to “match terms” with Daoism in the translation
and interpretive development of Buddhism in China. Let us briefly
examine both of these Asian sources for the Kyoto School’s
philosophies of absolute nothingness, śūnyatā
and
 wu/mu.[7]
In Mahāyāna Buddhism śūnyatā refers
first of all to the fact that all things come into being in
“interdependent origination” (Sanskrit:
pratītya-samutpāda; Japanese: engi), and
they are therefore “empty” of any independent substantial
self-nature or “own-being” (Sanskrit:
svabhāva). This thought is closely tied to the basic
Buddhist thesis of “no-self” or “non-ego”
(Sanskrit: anātman; Japanese: muga). All
beings, including the ego, are interconnected and in flux.
Psychologically, śūnyatā refers also to the
releasement from all attachment to beings, from all
reification and willful appropriation of them. Such attachments are
both based on and in turn support the primary attachment to the
fabricated ego, since the ego both strives to possess and is
unwittingly possessed by its reification of beings. To awaken to the
emptiness of all things, to their lack of substantial own-being or
egoity (Japanese: shogyōmuga), therefore, is to free oneself from both an ego-centered and reified view of things as well as from the illusion of
the substantial ego itself.
Yet, if the movement of negation stops here at a one-sided
negation of being (i.e., at negation of the illusory independent
substantial reality of things and the ego), then the idea of
“emptiness” is not itself
 emptied.[8]
 That would leave us with either a pessimistic nihilism or, ironically,
a reified view of śūnyatā itself. These
are what the Buddhist tradition calls
“śūnyatā-sickness” (Japanese:
kūbyō). True śūnyatā must
be understood to dynamically negate the very opposition of being and
(relative) nothingness (see Nakamura 1975, Vol. 1, 278). Hence, in
Mahāyāna we find an explicit return—through a
“great negation” of a reified misunderstanding of
being—to a “great affirmation” of a non-reified
understanding of being. Emptiness thoroughly understood is nothing
separate from or opposed to “being” properly understood.
As the often chanted lines of the Heart Sutra put it:
“[phenomenal] form is emptiness; emptiness is also [phenomenal]
form; emptiness is no other than form; form is no other than
emptiness” (see Bercholz & Kohn 1993, 155). The famous
Mahāyāna Buddhist philosopher of
śūnyatā Nāgārjuna (ca. 150–250
CE) went so far as to provocatively state: “The limits (i.e.,
realm) of nirvāna are the limits of
samsāra. Between the two, also, there is not the
slightest difference whatsoever” (Inada 1993, 158). In other
words, nirvāna is neither a nihilistic extinction of nor
a transcendent escape from the phenomenal world
(samsāra); it is rather an enlightened manner of
being-in-the-world here and now (see Garfield 1995, 332). This radical
reaffirmation of the phenomenal world was particularly stressed in
East Asian developments of Mahāyāna Buddhism, where we find
such remarkably affirmative phrases as: “true emptiness,
marvelous being” (Japanese: shinkū-myōu).
In his mature writings Nishitani explicitly employs the
Mahāyāna term śūnyatā (even though
he never disavows the term Nishida coined, “absolute
nothingness”) in his attempt to think a way beyond both the
exacerbated attachment to being and the reactive nihilism that
together plague the modern world (see Ueda 2011a). Nishitani writes as
follows: On the one hand, śūnyatā or emptiness
can be termed “an absolute negativity, inasmuch as it is a
standpoint that has negated and thereby transcended nihility, which
was itself the transcendence-through-negation of all being.” In
this sense, “emptiness can well be described as
‘outside’ of and absolutely ‘other’ than the
standpoint shackled to being, provided we avoid the misconception that
emptiness is some ‘thing’ distinct from being and
subsisting ‘outside’ it.” On the other hand, then,
emptiness is truly emptiness “only when it empties itself even
of the standpoint that represents it as some ‘thing’ that
is emptiness. … [True emptiness] is to be realized as something
united to and self-identical with being” (NKC X, 109–10;
Nishitani 1982, 97). Following in the wake of Nishida’s topological
thinking of absolute nothingness (see subsection 3.3 below), Nishitani
also thinks of śūnyatā as a
“place” or “field” wherein beings can appear
as they truly are in their proper basis or “home-ground”
(moto).
The idea of a nothingness that radically transcends, or underlies,
both being and its simple negation can also be traced back to
pre-Buddhist Chinese thought. A recent Chinese scholar laments the
philosophical ambiguity inherent in the Chinese character wu
(nothingness). He writes that “in Chinese
‘wu’ can mean both the contrasting pair of
‘you’ [i.e., ‘being’] and the
metaphysical source of both ‘you’ and
‘wu’” (Zhang 2002, 150). In the terminology
of the Kyoto School, the former sense of wu (mu in
Japanese) is a matter of “relative nothingness,” while the
latter sense is akin to what they call “absolute
nothingness.” The latter sense of wu is expressed in
chapter 40 of the Laozi (Daodejing) as follows:
“The myriad things under heaven are generated from being. Being
is generated from nothingness (wu).” This unnamable
non-dualistic source of all being and relative non-being is also
referred to as the Way (dao). Of the latter it is said, in
chapter 14 of the Laozi: “It is called the shapeless
shape, the image of no-thing” (see Izutsu 2001, 50–51 and
104). It is not hard to link this thought with Nishida’s professed
intention of giving philosophical foundation to the “form of the
formless” that lies at the heart of the traditions of the
East.
In the Daoist tradition we also find an idea of nothingness used in
the context of radically emptying the mind in order to attune the
finite self to the
 in-finite[9]
 rhythm of the Way. The Zhuangzi speaks in this regard of the
practice of “sitting down and forgetting everything” and
of “being empty like a mirror” (see Watson 1968, 90 and
97). When Zen talks of returning to one’s “original face before
one’s parents were born,” we find the Daoist ideas of
“forgetting the ego” and “returning to the
root” linked together with the Mahāyāna Buddhist
notion of the “original purity of the mind.” The original
brightness and purity of the mind, which lies hidden beneath the
clouds of defiling passion, is also frequently expressed in
Mahāyāna texts with the analogy of a mirror that is able to
spontaneously reflect the world without egoistic discriminations.
Zen presumably inherits this analogy of the original mind as mirror
from both Mahāyāna and Daoist sources. In the traditional
edition of The Platform Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch,
however, all residues of dualistic discrimination—including
those that remain even in the notion of a mirror that needs to be
continually wiped clean of impurities—are swept away in the
famous lines: “Originally there is not a single thing”
(Chinese: benlai wu-yi-wu; Japanese: honrai
mu-ichi-motsu). In this quintessential Zen expression are wedded
together the meontological and psychological senses of
wu/mu: a rejection of an ontology of independent
substances, a declaration of an originary (self-negating) nothingness,
and an expression of a radical freedom from egoistic attachment as well as freedom for spontaneous creativity and compassion.
In Zen we find the Mahāyāna Buddhist notion of emptiness and
the Daoist notion of nothingness fully intertwined and developed into
a practice of living both completely unattached and completely engaged
in the world of “true emptiness, marvelous being.” In the
famous wu or mu kōan that opens the
Gateless Barrier, Wumen (Mumon) urges those who wish to reach
enlightenment, that is, those who wish to pass through the
“barrier of the gate of nothingness,” to concentrate their
entire life force on this wu (mu), taking care to
understand it neither as “nihilistic nothingness” nor
“in terms of being and non-being” (Nishimura 1994, 22; see
Cleary 1999, 71). This was the kōan that Nishida finally
passed after nearly a decade of intense practice of Zen (see Yusa
2002, 45ff.). And as Nishida confided many years later to Nishitani,
it was from early on his “impossible desire” to somehow
bring Zen and philosophy together (NKZ XIX, 224–25; see Davis
2004b, 256ff.).
Besides contrasting Western being with Eastern nothingness, in his
later writings Nishida also at times makes a broad distinction between
a Western “logic of things” and an Eastern “logic of
the heart-mind (kokoro).” While Western thought tends
to begin with an objective logic of substances (be these physical or
mental), he claims that in Buddhism one can find the germ of a logic
of the heart-mind, even if traditionally this remained largely at the
level of an expression of personal experience rather than being fully
developed into a genuinely philosophical logic (see Nishida 1964,
356). (Scholars of Buddhism may want to argue that it was Nishida’s
own knowledge of Buddhism that remained too much at the level of
personal experience, rather than the sophisticated teachings of the
Mādhyamaka, Yogācāra, Tiantai, and Huayan traditions of
Mahāyāna philosophy.)
In any case, in the development of Nishida’s thought,
“being” is thought of in terms of the objectivity of
determinate things, “relative nothingness” is understood
as a mere privation or simple negation of being, and an enveloping
sense of “nothingness” is provisionally associated with a
kind of transcendental subjectivity of consciousness or the
heart-mind. Ultimately, however, Nishida comes to posit absolute
nothingness as the “place” (basho) that embraces
both subjective (noetic) and objective (noematic) dimensions
of reality. Thus, he relegates not only privation of being but also
subjective nothingness, in the sense of the “field of
consciousness,” to a type of “relative
 nothingness.”[10]
In 1934 Nishida writes: “Reality is being and at the same time
nothingness; it is being-and-nothingness [u-soku-mu],
nothingness-and-being; it is both subjective and objective, noetic and
noematic. Reality is the unity of subjectivity and objectivity, and
thus the self-identity of what is absolutely contradictory. Or rather,
it is not that [the separate spheres of] subjectivity and objectivity
come to unite, and then we first have reality. [The opposition of]
subjectivity and objectivity must instead be thought from out of a
dynamically dialectical reality that is self-determining” (NKZ
VII, 441; see Nishida 1970, 29). Reality, as the dialectical
“self-determination of absolute nothingness,” is in
Nishida’s later works understood as a dynamic “identity of the
absolute contradiction” between subjective (relative)
nothingness and objective being. Absolute nothingness is the temporal
and spatial “place” wherein individual persons and things
determine one another in their mutual interactions.
The “place of absolute nothingess” (zettai-mu no
basho) first became the central concept of Nishida’s thought in
the mid-1920s, though he continued to develop and rethink the idea up
until his last completed essay in 1945, “The Logic of Place and
the Religious World-View.” Nishida first explicitly worked out
an idea of absolute nothingness in his 1926 book, From That Which
Acts to That Which Sees (NKZ IV), a book which inaugurated his
middle-period of thought. In this work, which includes an important
essay entitled “Place” (“Basho”),
Nishida’s topological reasoning develops in rough outline as
 follows[11]:
Just as all events must “take place” somewhere, all beings
must be situated in some place. Beings always exist in relation to
other beings, and any relation requires a third term, namely, the
place or medium wherein they are related. In other words, for A and B
to be related, there must be some place, C, in which their relation is
situated. To begin with, we can understand this C as the spatial
“context” in which objects are situated in relation to one
another. But the context in which things are defined is more than
spatial; a thing is not only here as opposed to there. Things are
determined according to a number of criteria, each of which operates
within its own field of judgment. Hence, the place C can be further
understood as a “category” of judgment, such as the
quality “color.” Red and blue are revealed, and contrasted
with one another, as colors within the same color field.
In order to let concrete things reveal themselves yet more fully,
however, we should think of C as “consciousness.” Our
minds are able to correlate various categories of judgment, such as
color, size, shape, location, etc., and therefore to perceive
individual things as composed of unique combinations of various
qualities and relations. For example, we are conscious of a certain
thing as a round, soft, red, sweet, apple sitting on a table. The
field of consciousness is the field in which these different
categories are unified in the perception and judgment of the qualities
of a particular thing in relation to other particular things and their
qualities.
Ultimately, however, there is a crucial limit to the subjective
“field of consciousness.” As Kant demonstrated, subjective
consciousness cannot reflect things as they are in themselves, but
only as they appear when schematized according to subjective
categories. What, then, is the ultimate place wherein the encounter
between subjects and objects takes place, wherein persons and things
coexist? According to Nishida, this must be the place wherein persons
and things not only undergo changes in accidental categorical
qualities, but wherein they essentially and existentially “come
to be and pass away.” It is the place, not just of intellectual
judgments, but of birth and death. This ultimate “groundless
ground,” which “envelopes” all beings, yet which
does so in such a way that lets them contain their own principle of
self-determination, Nishida calls “the place of true
nothingness.” Although in no sense a determinate being, neither
is this place of true or absolute nothingness a mere static vacuity.
It must be thought of as both the epistemic source of consciousness
and the ontological origin of beings.
Although Nishida comes to the idea of the place of absolute
nothingness most directly through his confrontations with Kant and
Neo-Kantianism, he does not shy from thinking this place in
metaphysical as well as epistemological terms: nothingness is not
merely a reflective, but is also a creative principle (NKZ IV,
238–39). As he writes much later, “absolute nothingness at
once transcends everything and is that by which everything is
constituted” (NKZ IX, 6). And yet, Nishida repeatedly tells us
that, as no-thing outside of or other than the place of the coming to
be and passing away of truly individual beings, absolute nothingness
is not to be thought of as a “transcendent
being.” Nor is it to be understood as the processional unfolding
of a “potential being,” that is to say, as a kind of
Hegelian “world Spirit” with its own cunning reason at
work behind the scenes of its historical march toward
self-realization. The absolute, according to Nishida, must be thought
of as nothingness in order to distinguish it from all ontologies that
would reduce the uniqueness and autonomy of truly individual beings
either to a transcendent being or to an underlying teleological
process.
One of the driving concerns behind Nishida’s repeated insistence that
the absolute be thought of in the meontological terms of a formless,
indeterminate place of absolute nothingness, is that only therein can
self-determining and irreducibly singular individuals be given their
due (see Davis 2011b). All ontologies of universal being fail to allow
for the existence of the “true individual,” or for the
genuine encounter between such individuals. Since “there is no
universal [of being] whatsoever that subsumes the I and the
thou” (NKZ VI, 381), the locus of genuine interpersonal
encounter must be thought of in terms of the place of absolute
nothingness (see Davis 2014).
It should be pointed out that the Japanese term for
“absolute,” zettai, literally means a
“severing of opposition,” which implies the sense of
“without an opposing other.” The contrasting term is
sōtai, which indicates “relativity” in the
literal sense of “mutual opposition.” The true absolute
must embrace, rather than stand over against, the relative. The
absolute, therefore, must not oppose itself to relative beings;
rather, its self-determination must be such as to allow their mutually
autonomous relations to take place. According to Nishida, it is only a
philosophy of the place of absolute nothingness that can do justice to
the notion of the absolute as well as account for both the autonomy
and the mutual relativity of individuals.
While on the one hand Nishida becomes increasingly concerned with
allowing for radical interpersonal alterity within the place of
absolute nothingness, on the other hand he also consistently argues
from early on that “consciousness” should not be thought
to entail an unbridgeable epistemological subject-object split.
Although he initially adopted, and adapted, the notion of “pure
experience” from William James to express this nondual basis of
knowledge (see Nishida 1990), Nishida later drops this expression in
favor of the notion of “self-awareness” (jikaku).
According to Nishida, self-awareness can be defined as a “self
reflecting itself within itself” (NKZ IV,
 215).[12]
 Since absolute nothingness is not a “self” in the sense
of a subject standing over against an object, any more than it is an
ego with its own interested categories of perception, the
self-awareness of absolute nothingness must be that of a “seeing
without a seer” or a “knowing without a knower.”
“Since there is no-thing that reflects, it is like a mirror
reflecting the mirror itself” (ibid., 181).
In Nishida’s middle period, the paradigm for knowing is a “pure
seeing” (tada miru) beyond all acting and volition.
Nishida claims that as finite individuals we can approach this ideal
by way of thoroughly negating or emptying the ego. “By truly
emptying the self, the field of consciousness can reflect an object
just as it is” (NKZ IV, 221). The self reaches the place of
absolute nothingness, and therefore first truly comes into contact
with other beings, by way of thoroughly emptying itself in a movement
of “immanent transcendence” that takes it back
through the depths of the field of consciousness.
In his last completed text, “The Logic of Place and the
Religious Worldview,” Nishida most fully developed the religious
implications of the idea of absolute nothingness. There he suggests
that absolute nothingness is the best way to understand God or the
absolute, which he defines as that which “contains its own
absolute self-negation within itself” (NKZ XI, 397). As absolute
nothingness, God is the dynamic principle of affirmation by way of
absolute self-negation. The true absolute essentially negates its
transcendent divinity and expresses itself in the forms of the
 relative.[13]
Nishida insists that this idea of God can be understood no more in
terms of an immanent pantheism than in terms of a transcendent theism.
It may perhaps best be called “panentheism”; but for
Nishida this too remains a static term of “objective
logic” and fails to capture the necessity of thinking God as
both irreducibly transcendent and thoroughly immanent. As
Nishida is fond of saying, God or the Buddha is “immanently
transcendent.” It is the paradoxical logic one finds in the
Prajñāpāramitā Sutras of
Mahāyāna Buddhism (i.e., what D. T. Suzuki called the
“logic of soku-hi,” a logic of “is and is
not”) that Nishida thinks most profoundly expresses the
“absolute dialectic” of the divine as the dynamic
principle of absolute nothingness (NKZ XI, 399; see Nishida 1987,
69–71).
If we as finite relative beings can and do touch the infinite
absolute, it is only by way of a mutual self-negation. Nishida calls
this mutual self-negation “inverse correspondence”
(gyakutaiō). By way of radically emptying ourselves, we
can touch that which is the radical origin of self-emptying, the
absolute as an essentially self-negating absolute nothingness.
According to Nishida, an immanent principle of self-negation is, in
fact, the very essence of life. “True life (seimei)
must contain within itself an absolute nothingness, a [principle of]
absolute negation” (NKZ VIII, 341). It is such a life that can
truly be self-determining as a “creative element of a creative
world.”
In his middle period, inaugurated by the first formulations of the
idea of “the place of absolute nothingness” in From
That Which Acts to That Which Sees, Nishida’s thought was
characterized by a shift from his earlier voluntarism to a kind of
intuitionism of pure seeing without a seer (see NKZ IV, 3–6). In
his later period, however, Nishida’s epistemology became much more
dynamic and dialectical; rather than “pure seeing,” his
key epistemological phrase then becomes “action-intuition”
(kōi-teki chokkan). Although self-emptying still plays a
vital role, this is understood not as preparation for a passive
intuition, but rather as an active process of “seeing a thing by
becoming it.” In other words, intuition happens only in the
midst of the dialectical process of acting upon and in turn being
acted upon by things.
In his later period, the place of absolute nothingness is accordingly
reconceived much more dynamically as the “self-determination of
the dialectical world,” a world which continually moves
according to the principle of “from created to creating.”
The absolute finds expression now only in the midst of the mutual
interaction of individuals and things, and true individuals are both
determined by and “counter-determine” (gyaku-gentei
suru) the movement of the dialectical world (see NKZ VII, 305ff.;
VIII, 313–14). Although one can trace an immanent unfolding of
Nishida’s thought in this direction, it is also clear that a major
impetus for his dialectical development of the idea of absolute
nothingness can be found in the criticism he received from his junior
colleague, Tanabe Hajime.
It is Tanabe’s declaration of partial independence from Nishida’s
thought in an essay written in 1930, “Requesting Instruction
from Professor Nishida” (THZ IV, 305–328), that many see
as the origin of the Kyoto School as more than a group of disciples of
“Nishidan Philosophy.” In this essay Tanabe sharply
criticizes Nishida’s middle-period philosophy of the “place of
absolute nothingness,” claiming that it falls into kind of
Plotinian “emanationism” that ultimately rests on a
religious or mystical intuition. For Tanabe, this posed two serious
problems for a genuine philosophy of absolute nothingness.
To begin with, in crossing the line between philosophical reason,
based on ordinary experience, and supra-rational intuition, based on
extra-ordinary religious experience, Nishida had purportedly committed
a methodological transgression. Here Tanabe poses a question that
still resounds through (some would say haunts) the halls of Kyoto
School studies to this day. As James Heisig puts it, the Kyoto School
thinkers in general do not share an important assumption of Western
philosophy as a whole, namely, a “clear delineation between
philosophy and religion” (Heisig 2001, 13–14). This is a
complex issue, since the Western concept of “religion” was
just as much an import to Japan as was “philosophy.” The
problems faced and the possibilities opened up by a Zen Buddhist
“philosophy of religion” in particular differ in
significant ways from a Judeo-Christian one, insofar as the former
calls for extending rational thought in the direction of a
“practice of awakening” rather than in the direction of a
leap of faith.
I have addressed the provocative methodological ambivalences involved
in Nishida’s and Nishitani’s philosophies of Zen in detail elsewhere
(Davis 2004b). Let it suffice to point out here that Tanabe too later
crisscrosses the line between philosophy and religion as much as any
Kyoto School thinker, although his Shin Buddhist inclinations took him
in the direction of “faith” rather than
 “intuition.”[14]
 After this religious turn in his thinking, Tanabe claimed that
philosophy and faith must be mediated by a personal act of metanoesis
(Tanabe 2000, 34; Tanabe 1986, 29) and that, in order to develop a
genuine philosophy of religion, “in the end one must have faith
and become self-aware by means of religious faith” (Tanabe 2003,
27).
For his part, Nishida responded to Tanabe’s early critique by
affirming that his idea of the self-awareness of absolute nothingness
does indeed entail the profound significance of religious experience.
Yet he claims that this is neither mystical in the sense of
“religious ecstasy” nor “is it thought in the
direction of substance, as is Plotinus’ One.” He denied the
charge of emanationism, claiming that in his thought “it is not
a matter of the self-determination of being, but rather the
self-determination of nothingness” (NKZ VI, 154). For Nishida,
only if the absolute is thought in terms of a self-negating
nothingness, rather than in terms of a transcendent plenum of the One,
is it possible to truly affirm the world of the many. The absolute is
found in the very midst of beings, not beyond them. It is
“because this is absolute nothingness,” Nishida writes in
the parlance of Zen, “that the mountain is mountain, the river
is river, and all beings are just as they are” (NKZ V, 182; see
Nishida 1958, 137).
But the other major concern of Tanabe’s critique of Nishida was that,
insofar as absolute nothingness is made into an unchanging basis or
enveloping “place” of a system of reality, and insofar as
it is seen as transcending the dialectical interactions among beings,
then such a philosophy ends up falling back into a metaphysics of
being after all. In order to radically think the idea of absolute
nothingness, Tanabe argues, we must conceive of it rather in terms of
“absolute mediation” or “absolute dialectic.”
absolute nothingness must be thought, not as an enveloping place, but
as the very movement of “absolute negation,” a movement
which originates in the self-negation of absolute nothingness itself.
Tanabe writes: “Since the absolute, as nothingness, must act as
an absolute mediating force, it presupposes relative being as its
medium. In contrast with the doctrine of the creation of the world
maintained by the theist, or the theory of emanation propounded by the
pantheist, [for] historical thinking the absolute and the relative,
nothingness and being, are interrelated each with the other as
indispensable elements of absolute mediation” (Tanabe 2000, 27;
Tanabe 1986, 23).
In this later text, Philosophy as Metanoetics, written around
the same time as Nishida was elaborating his own kenotic idea of a
self-negating absolute nothingness, Tanabe, in a putative critique of
Nishida, also writes: “Because the absolute subject of
Other-power is absolute nothingness … it must be thoroughly
mediated by the relative self. In contrast to a mere
‘self-identity of absolute contradictories’, only that
which entails the absolute existential mediation of the death and
resurrection of the self can be called absolute nothingness”
(Tanabe 2000, 13; Tanabe 1986, 8). Tanabe’s passing dismissal of
Nishida’s terminology here is hardly convincing, since in fact Nishida
too speaks of the absolute self-negation of absolute nothingness and
of the existential death and resurrection of the finite self. In any
case, Tanabe’s philosophy as the “way of metanoetics”
(zangedō) entails a ceaseless movement of what he calls
“absolute critique,” where the self-power of finite reason
again and again runs up against antinomies, and is reborn only by way
of absolute nothingness as what he calls, in the parlance of Shinran’s
Shin Buddhism, the workings of Other-power (tariki).
As Nishitani and others have pointed out (see NKC IX, 212ff.;
Nishitani 1991, 161ff.), Tanabe’s criticisms often fail to do justice
to Nishida’s thought, and we should not forget the impetuses Tanabe
acknowledges having received from his erstwhile mentor. Yet, on the
other hand, his criticisms were not without their point, and his
provocations certainly did serve as counter-impetuses that spurred
Nishida on, not just to clarify, but also to further develop his
philosophy of absolute nothingness (see Sugimoto 2011; Kopf 2004). No
doubt in large part due to the persistent attention given by Tanabe to
the historical world, to the irrational element of the specific
through which the individual and the universal must be mediated, and
to the dialectical relations between finite beings, Nishida gradually
moved toward a much more dynamic conception of absolute nothingness as
the self-determination of the dialectical world, a self-determination
which takes place only by way of the mutual interactions between
individual persons and things.
In the tradition of the Kyoto School, Tanabe’s role has often been
seen, justly or unjustly, as more of a dialectical counterpoint than
an independent alternative to Nishida. Following the lead of Nishida’s
own creative appropriation of Tanabe’s critique of his middle-period
philosophy of place, subsequent Kyoto School figures have often tended
to incorporate Tanabe’s dialectical thinking into, rather than seeing
it as a replacement for, Nishida’s topological thinking of absolute
nothingness. To be sure, such thinkers as Takeuchi Yoshinori and Hase
Shōtō were profoundly influenced by Tanabe who, inspired by
Shin Buddhism, understands absolute nothingness in terms of the
absolute mediation of Other-power. Yet many others, including
Nishitani, Ueda, Abe, and Ōhashi, received their primary impetus
from Nishida who, inspired by Zen (as well as Shin) Buddhism, thinks
in terms of a kenotic and dialectical self-determination of the place
of absolute nothingness.
Tanabe’s method of thinking, as we have seen, was intensely
dialectical, a method he developed through his prolonged study of
Hegel. Nishitani, on the other hand, began his study of Western
thought by focusing on Bergson, Schelling, Nietzsche and the German
mystics. Between 1937 and 1939 Nishitani studied with Heidegger, who
was at the time beginning to grapple with the question of nihilism,
and whose phenomenology had developed into a thinking of the
“clearing of being” or what he would later characterize as
a “topology of being” (Heidegger 1975, Vol. 15, 335).
Influenced no doubt in part by his contact with Heidegger (and perhaps
in turn influencing Heidegger, who frequently invited him to his house
to learn about Zen), Nishitani developed, in his own highly original
manner, existential and phenomenological aspects of Nishida’s topology
of absolute nothingness.
The problem of nihilism gradually became the major focus of
Nishitani’s personal and scholarly attention. Nishitani understood the
historical phenomenon of nihilism as a vacuous nothingness that
assaults the modern world, a world bereft of its ethical and religious
moorings. Despite the profundity of his mentor Nishida’s philosophy,
it failed to adequately address this crucial modern problem (see Ueda
2011a). According to Nishitani, Nishida’s philosophy, whether it be
his early thought of “pure experience” or the later notion
of “action-intuition,” begins already from a standpoint
where the dualistic consciousness of the ego has already been broken
though (see NKC IX 247–48; Nishitani 1991, 184–85). For
his part, Nishitani was concerned with the question of how to think
the topological pathway leading to such a breakthrough to
non-duality.
The question of how to open up an existential path to the place of
absolute nothingness was particularly acute given the prevalence of
the pendulum swing between two extremes endemic to modernity: on the
one hand, an extreme reification of the subjective ego together with a
corresponding objectification and technological manipulation of
things; and, on the other hand, a reactive nihilism which threatens to
nullify the very reality of both the self and things. For Nishitani,
humanism and science were incapable of overcoming this dilemma of
reification vs. nullification; in fact, they had helped create it. In
an age of secular egoism and nihilism, how could an experience of the
place of absolute nothingness take place?
To begin with, Nishitani says we must heed the call of Nietzsche’s
madman and cease fleeing from the experience of nihilism. God as the
highest being is dead, and it remains an open question whether he can
be reborn as absolute nothingness. In any case, the venture of
Nishitani’s philosophy of Zen is more concerned with the existential
imperative of letting go of attachments than it is with immediately
grasping hold of a new concept for God. In order to finally free
humans from their egoistic obsessions and manipulative
objectifications in the dualistic “field of being and
consciousness,” Nishitani argued for the necessity of first
boldly stepping back into the “field of nihility.”
Yet the real breakthrough to a non-dualistic reaffirmation of self and
world only occurs when the relative nothingness of nihility is in turn
broken through to a genuine experience of absolute nothingness or true
emptiness on the “field of
śūnyatā.” Nishitani thus explained the
personal encounter with nihilism as an experience of the extreme
relative nothingness of “nihility” or “vacuous
nothingness” (kyomu), and for him the central task of
“overcoming nihilism by way of passing through nihilism”
entailed transgressing beneath (i.e., “trans-descending”)
the “field of nihility” to the “field of
śūnyatā” (see NKC X, 109 and 122ff.;
Nishitani 1986, 97 and
 108ff.).[15]
 As mentioned earlier (subsection 3.2), the “field of
śūnyatā” is not a vacuum of relative
nothingness that assaults beings from without; it is an open clearing
wherein beings are neither nullified nor reified but rather let be in
the mutual freedom of their coming to be and passing away. It is also
the place in which a genuine interpersonal encounter can take place
(Nishitani 2004; Davis 2017).
While Nishitani’s “field of
śūnyatā” (kū no
ba) corresponds in many respects to what Nishida calls the
“place of absolute nothingness” (zettai-mu no
basho), Nishitani takes the peculiar problems that beset the
modern secular and technological world, as well as postmodern
critiques of metaphysics and subjectivity (especially those of
Nietzsche and Heidegger), far more seriously than did Nishida.
Nishitani also connects his thought much more explicitly with the
tradition of Mahāyāna Buddhism than did Nishida, writing on,
and writing from, what he calls the “standpoint of Zen”
(see NKC XI; and Nishitani 2009).
Ueda Shizuteru—a student of Nishitani’s who has since the 1980s
been at the center of the revival of Nishida studies—also takes
a topological, phenomenological, and existential approach to the idea
of absolute nothingness; and he also explicitly orients himself to and
from the standpoint of Zen (Ueda 2011c). Following in the tradition of
the Kyoto School’s dialogue with Western philosophers, in one of his
influential works Ueda engages the work of Husserl, Heidegger and
other phenomenologists to articulate a religiously charged philosophy
of what he calls “twofold being-in-the-world”
(nijūsekainaisonzai) (USS IX; see also Döll
2010).
While the first layer in which the self is located is the historical
horizon of the everyday life-world, this horizon itself is ultimately
found to rest in an absolutely “empty-expanse,” a place of
absolute nothingness that both enfolds the everyday world as well as
grounds the radical freedom of the individual “self-negating
self” (see USS IX, 22–24 and 324ff.). Ueda finds this idea
of returning, by way of absolute self-negation, to a primordial
wellspring of existence that is “empty and free”
(ledig und frei) in Meister Eckhart, and, in an even more
rarified form, in Zen Buddhism (see Davis 2008a). It is from the
latter that he borrows the term “empty-expanse”
(kokū) as a topological expression for
śūnyatā.
For Ueda, then, the two-layered-world is inhabited by a
two-layered-self, or, more precisely, by a “self that is not a
self.” The self, as being-in-the-world, ultimately realizes
itself in a moment of absolute self-negation where it dies to itself
and stands as a “non-ego” or “hollow-being” in
the “hollow-expanse” which envelopes the horizonal
life-world. The true self, as a self that becomes itself by passing
through the absolute negation of its ego, is a two-layered
being-in-and-beyond-the-world; it stands in the horizon of the world
which, in turn, rests in the empty-expanse of absolute
nothingness.
This hollow-expanse is, to be sure, beyond conceptual understanding,
insofar as concepts have as their medium the world of language and its
determinations of meaning. Nevertheless, what lies beyond the reach of
language is not to be understood as an ineffable mystical realm to
which one ascends and remains, but rather is to be experienced in
extreme moments from the limits of language as that which at once
tears through and mends, exceeds and encompasses, transcends and
transforms our linguistic horizons of intelligibility. Insofar as we
do not close in on ourselves and rigidify our linguistic delimitations
of the world, we can open ourselves up to the silence of this
surrounding expanse of unlimited openness, which in turn allows us to
speak and act more freely and responsibly in the world of linguistic
significance (see Ueda 2011b; Davis 2019a).
Ueda argues that both the ego of the Cartesian cogito, as
well as the non-ego (Sanskrit: anātman; Japanese:
muga) of Buddhism, must ultimately be comprehended on the
basis of an understanding of the self as a repeated movement
through a radical self-negation to a genuine self-affirmation. Ueda’s
formula for this movement is: “I, not being I, am I.” Even
when one says “I am I,” if we listen closely there is a
pause, a breath, between the first and the second “I.”
Precisely that opening—which necessarily occurs as a moment in
the ceaseless movement by which the identity of the self is
constituted—is the “ecstatic space” wherein an open
encounter with another person is possible.
Such a genuine encounter with another person no longer takes place
simply within my, or your, or even our world-horizon. Ueda uses the
greeting of the bow as a concrete example to illustrate how mutual
self-negation—the emptying of all ego-centered presumptions and
agendas—returns us to a communal place where we, paradoxically,
share “nothing” in common. “There, by way of making
oneself into a nothingness, one returns into the infinite depths of
that ‘between’ where there is neither an I nor a you.
… Then, when we rise again so as to come back to life anew and
face one another, this becomes a matter of, as Dōgen puts it:
thus am I; thus are you” (Ueda 1991, 67; see USS X, 107ff.).
Open to others, and to the hollow-expanse in which together we dwell,
I am I (USS X, 23–24).
Nishitani had earlier used the expression, “the self that is not
a self,” to characterize the shared endeavor of Nishida and
Tanabe to think “a ‘self that is not a self’ turning
on the axis of absolute nothingness” (NKC IX, 238; Nishitani
1991, 175). The idea of the true self as a “self that is not a
self” expresses an essential aspect of what Nishida and other
Kyoto School thinkers call—following D. T. Suzuki, who in turn
gleaned the idea from the Diamond Sutra—the
“logic of soku-hi,” a logic of “is and is
not” or affirmation by way of negation (see Akizuki 1996,
109–152; NKZ XI, 398–99; Nishida 1987, 70). The self finds
its most originary freedom, and its most open engagement with others,
through a radical self-negation which returns it, not to a higher Will
or encompassing Being, but to an essentially self-negating absolute
nothingness that, in turn, finds expression only in the interaction of
truly self-determining individuals. For Nishida, the true individual
is an interpersonal self-determining focal point of the
self-determination of absolute nothingness, in other words, an
interactive and creative element of a creative world (see NKZ VIII,
343ff.).
Nishitani’s first book, The Philosophy of Radical
Subjectivity, sought a more originary conception of the human
subject than had been developed in modern Western philosophy. In
general, for Nishitani, modern “subjectivity” remains
bound by a reifying attachment to things and ultimately to the ego.
Nishitani did recognized certain advances in the direction of a truly
“radical subjectivity” in modern ideas such as that of
individual “autonomy.” For example, the Kantian idea of
the ethical “person,” which opens itself to a universal
standpoint by way of a negation of the self-will of the ego, suggested
for Nishitani a “kind of standpoint of
‘non-ego’” (see NKC I, 60). However, the autonomy of
the Kantian ethical subject can also be seen as asserting a sublated
form of self-will, namely in its will to form as well as to conform to
the universal. Nishitani finds profounder intimations of a truly
radical subjectivity in both Meister Eckhart’s mystical theology and
Nietzsche’s radical atheism, which each in their own way go beyond, or
dig beneath, attachments to and sublations of egoity. Ultimately
Nishitani returns to the language of Zen Buddhism to express his
conception of the “radical subjectivity of non-ego
[muga]” as a “subjective nothingness”
(shutai-teki mu) (NKC I, 88).
This radical subjective nothingness is not to be confused with the
relative nothingness of a “subjective consciousness” which
sets itself over against, and objectifies, the world. As with Zen’s
kōan of nothingness (mu), a realization of the
radical subjectivity of non-ego (mu-ga) entails breaking
through the dualistic barrier that artificially separates self and
world. For Nishitani, this breakthrough is expressed as “the
self-awareness of the bottom dropping out” (NKC I, iii). It is a
radical return, or “trans-descendence,” to “the
background of our own selves,” to the Ungrund on which
we originally possess “not a single thing”
(mu-ichi-motsu) (NKC XI, 243).
With Nishitani’s conception of a radical “subjective
nothingness,” understood as a “standpoint of
śūnyatā” realized on the “field of
śūnyatā,” we find an explicit
appropriation of both the psychological and the meontological (or
mu-logical) paradigms of nothingness found in the traditions
of East Asia. The notions of non-ego (muga) and
“no-mind” or “mind of nothingness”
(mushin) are thought in terms of the spontaneous openness of
the heart-mind that stands within the field of emptiness, an open
place which grants beings the free space needed for their unobstructed
(muge) interactivity.
As we have seen, Nishida, Nishitani, and Ueda each conceived of
absolute nothingness in both an existential and a topological sense.
Although Tanabe eschewed the topological conception of absolute
nothingness, by understanding both the relative self and the absolute
in terms of a ceaseless movement of affirmation by way of radical
negation, he too, in his own way, philosophically appropriated the
East Asian paradigms of psychological and meontological
nothingness.
It should be clear by this point that the philosophical stakes
involved in the Kyoto School’s thought are high—indeed they
invite us to rethink many of our most basic concepts and ways of
experiencing the world and ourselves. For this very reason Kyoto
School thinkers promise to be especially valuable partners in any
post-Eurocentric forum of philosophical dialogue. Genuine philosophy,
after all, thrives on the opportunity to call its fundamental
presuppositions into question, even if stubbornly Eurocentric
philosophers fail to heed this crucial calling of their discipline.
Unfortunately, the world of politics tends to be a far less
self-critical and thus less genuinely dialogical forum of
intercultural relations. The history of Western imperial domination of
Asia is well documented (see Panikkar 1969), and post-colonial
critique of Western imperialism plays a prominent role in contemporary
academia. At the same time, in the field of East Asian studies, Kyoto
School thinkers are frequently accused of contributing to the
political ideology of Japanese imperialism in the 1930s and early
1940s. However, we need to carefully examine the sense in which and
the extent to which the political thought of the Kyoto School is
deserving of its tainted reputation in this regard.
The political ventures and misadventures of philosophers—from
Socrates and Plato to Marx and Heidegger in the West, and from
Confucius and Hanfeizi to Gandhi and Nishida in the
East—represent an often enduring though hardly always endearing
aspect of their legacies. Relating the “ideal” world of
philosophy to the “real” world of political action is a
perilous, if arguably obligatory, undertaking.
The pitfalls of political intervention are particularly deep when
philosophers find themselves in a nation headed down a road toward
injustice and disaster. What is a philosopher to do in such a
situation? Barring straightforward complicity, there appear to be
three choices: withdraw into reclusion, stand up in overt
resistance, or attempt to negotiate a reorientation by means
of immanent critique or cooperative correction.
While many intellectuals in wartime Japan took the first course, some
courageous Leftists braved the second course. Both Tosaka Jun and Miki
Kiyoshi, the key figures of what is sometimes called the “left
wing of the Kyoto School,” died in prison in 1945 as a result of
their intellectual resistance. The majority of the Kyoto School
thinkers, however, including Nishida, Tanabe, and Nishitani, took the
third course of action.
In retrospect Nishitani wrote: “My attempt was, on the one hand,
to explain where Japan was situated within the world to those
intellectuals remaining on the sidelines [of politics]; and, on the
other hand, with respect to the extremely nationalistic thought that
was becoming increasingly prevalent at the time, I attempted from
within to open up a path for overcoming this extreme
nationalism” (NKC IV, 384). Rather than either stand up and die,
or sit out and wait, Nishitani and other members of the Kyoto School
attempted to walk the razor’s edge of what Ōhashi Ryōsuke
has called “anti-establishment cooperation” or
“cooperative resistance” (hantaiseiteki
kyōryoku) (see Ōhashi 2001, 20ff.).
To be sure, the question of how successfully the Kyoto School managed
to carry out this “cooperative resistance” (and the
question of whether they cooperated more than resisted, or vice versa)
is debatable, especially given the fact that they hardly succeeded in
altering the disastrous orientation of the regime. Their intentions of
cooperative resistance notwithstanding, the fact is that their
political writings were more or less successfully co-opted by the
extreme nationalism that they were trying to reorient or overcome from
within. Nevertheless, we must take care to separate their ideals from
the reality they were attempting to influence, and bear in mind the
constraints of their chosen path of immanent critique.
Whatever the political failings of the Kyoto School thinkers may be,
it is clear that certain crudely one-sided condemnations are at least
as simplistic and misleading as are the occasional attempts of
overzealous acolytes to whitewash everything they ever said or wrote.
It is, for example, highly misleading to refer to the Kyoto School’s
philosophy of history as “a thinly disguised justification
… for Japanese aggression and continuing imperialism,” or
to claim that “no group helped defend the state more
consistently and enthusiastically … and none came closer
… to defining the philosophic contours of Japanese
fascism” (Najita & Harootunian 1998, 238–39; for a severe
critique of such polemical claims, see Parkes 1997 and 2011). The
latter dishonor, namely that of attempting to give quasi-philosophical
expression to Japanese fascism, surely goes to the proponents of
“Imperial Way Philosophy,” who in fact harshly attacked
the “world-historical philosophy” of the Kyoto School for
being insufficiently Japan-centric (see Ōhashi 2001,
71–72).
Judicious critics of the wartime political writings of the Kyoto
School must surely try to steer a middle course between and beyond
what James Heisig aptly calls the “side-steppers and the
side-swipers” (see Heisig 1990, 14). With this balance in mind,
in the following sections let me highlight some of the key points and
episodes of the Kyoto School’s wartime political ventures and
misadventures.
In 1943 Yatsugi Kazuo, a member of the Center for National Strategy,
approached Nishida and asked him to contribute a scholarly account of
Japan’s role in East Asia, that is, to help provide a rationale for
the creation of the so-called “Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity
Sphere.” Nishida is said to have burst out in anger, shouting
something like: “What on earth do government officials and
militarists think these days, that scholars are like artisans from
whom they can order something to be tailor made?” And yet
Yatsugi apparently countered to the effect that not only prominent
Japanese scholars, such as Fukuzawa Yukichi, but also Western
philosophers, such as Kant and Adam Smith, did not neglect to apply
their theoretical insights to practical social and political
circumstances (see Ōhashi 2001, 47). In the end Nishida did agree
to write an essay, “Principles for a New World Order” (NKZ
XII, 426–434; see Arisaka 1996), though his original text was
edited and “simplified” by a sociologist serving as a
go-between. Nishida was even then disappointed that his attempt to
“bring out the dimension of universality present in the Japanese
spirit” seemed to have had no effect on Prime Minister
Tōjō Hideki and his bellicose regime (see Yusa 1994,
124).
From today’s vantage point, Nishida’s political writings appear highly
ambivalent. On the one hand, his resistance to fascism and
totalitarianism is unmistakable. Indeed it comes as no surprise that
he was in danger of being arrested—and apparently only his
public stature and the fact that he had influential sympathizers
within the moderate ranks of the government kept this from
happening—when one reads the warning given in his 1941 speech
delivered directly to the emperor: “Any totalitarian system that
negates outright the role of the individual is but an
anachronism” (NKZ XII, 271; see Yusa 1994, 111). Even in his
most compromised text, “Principles for a New World Order,”
Nishida urgently claims that the “co-prosperity sphere”
must not entail either ethnocentrism, expansionism,
imperialism, colonialism, or totalitarianism (see NKZ XII,
432–33). Elsewhere Nishida made clear that his vision was of a
multicultural world where neither the West would subsume the East nor
vice versa (NKZ XIV, 404–5), where “various cultures,
while maintaining their own individual standpoints, would develop
themselves through the mediation of the world” (NKZ VII,
452–53).
On the other hand, Nishida did think that nations—and in
particular the Japanese nation with the emperor at its spiritual
center—had a special role to play in the historical formation of
this truly “worldly world” (sekai-teki sekai).
Moreover, in his writings he did affirmatively employ such problematic
phrases as “all the world under one roof”
(hakkō-ichiu) and the “imperial way”
(kōdō). While there is certainly room for criticism
here in light (and hindsight) of the historical record of Japan’s
political and cultural “leadership” (in fact, domination)
of East Asia at this time, the issue of how to critically evaluate
Nishida’s theoretical interventions is complicated by the
hermeneutical fact that today we read such catchwords and phrases
through the semantic lenses of the right wing ideologues who in the
end succeeded in carving their definitions into the annals of history.
It must be kept in mind that, at the time, the precise meaning of
these phrases was still in dispute. Ueda Shizuteru has aptly spoken of
Nishida’s “tug-of-war over meaning,” a struggle which he
ultimately lost (Ueda 1994, 97; also see Goto-Jones 2005). Yusa
Michiko writes in this regard: “Rather than invent a new
vocabulary that would rise above the fray, [Nishida] took up the
jargon and slogans of the day and sought to redeem them from their
petty provincialism by opening them up to a more universal
perspective” (Yusa 1994, 131).
Nevertheless, even after we have carried out a hermeneutically
sensitive reconstruction of the context, and after we have finished
reading between and behind the lines of his political texts, there
undoubtedly remain a number of controversial aspects of Nishida’s
political thought. Affirming the central place of the emperor in Japan
as “an identity of contradictions,” Nishida cryptically
writes: “Our [i.e., Japan’s] national polity is not simply a
totalitarianism. The Imperial House is the beginning and the end of
our world, as the absolute present that embraces past and
future” (NKZ XII,
 430).[16]
 And with regard to the central role of Japan in East Asia, he claims
that “in order to build a particular world, a central figure
that carries the burden of the project is necessary. In East Asia
today there is no other but Japan” (NKZ XII, 429; Arisaka 1996,
102).
Critics may argue that Nishida’s universalism is still plagued by an
exemplary
 particularism,[17]
 and that he succeeds in questioning Eurocentrism only by way of
shifting the locus of the concrete universal to Japan. Yoko Arisaka
argues that “the chief claim of the defenders—that
Nishida’s philosophical ‘universalism’ is incompatible
with nationalist ideology—fails because universalist discourse
was used both as a tool of liberation and oppression in Japan’s
case” (Arisaka 1999, 242). Arisaka critically adds, however,
that “the idea that a particular nation may be the bearer of a
universal principle, such as freedom or democracy, and that,
therefore, its actions in history serve a higher end, should be
familiar from recent American experience” (ibid., 244; also see
Maraldo 1994, 355).
To be fair to Nishida, we should confess that we today have yet to
solve the post-Enlightenment aporia of how to reconcile universal
humanism with cultural particularity (a debate we inherit in part from
the Kant-Herder controversy). In other words, the question remains of
how to configure a multicultural world of dialogue instead of either
an imperialistic monoculture or a clash of civilizations. In our
search for an answer to this urgent question, we may still have much
yet to learn from a critical appropriation of Nishida’s thought (see
Feenberg 1995; Maraldo 1995; Kopf 2011; Davis 2013b; Elberfeld 1999;
and Goto-Jones 2002, 2005, 2008, 2009).
Nishida’s ambivalent political stance—between a
post-imperialistic vision of a multicultural new world order on the
one hand and an assertion of Japan’s destined world-historical role in
realizing this vision on the other—was carried forth into even
more controversial political engagements by his students Nishitani
Keiji, Kōyama Iwao, Kōsaka Masaaki, Suzuki Shigetaka, and to
a lesser extent Shimomura Toratarō. As mentioned in subsection
2.1, a significant, if stigmatizing, stage in the formation of the
identity of the Kyoto School involved the participation of several of
its members in two wartime symposia, the Literary World’s
1942 symposium on “Overcoming Modernity” (reprinted in
Kawakami & Takeuchi 1979; English translation in Calichman 2008) and the
1941–43 roundtable discussions published serially in the journal
Chūōkōron and later as a monograph, The
Standpoint of World History and Japan (Kōsaka et al 1943;
English translation in Williams 2014).
The Overcoming Modernity symposium has been aptly
characterized as “a premature challenge to the questions that
have yet to be answered today” (Minamoto 1994, 200). Even one of
the most critical accounts of this symposium—an account which
argues that the “only destination reached by the symposium on
overcoming modernity was the place where Japan itself had been
overcome by modernity”—concedes that: “It is,
nevertheless, important to point out that the very critique mounted by
Japanese against modernity prefigured precisely all of those doubts
and obsessions concerning subjectivity, cultural difference, and even
racism that have become the signatures of a Western and putatively
global discourse that marks our own historical conjuncture
today” (Harootunian 2000, 94).
As discussed in subsection 2.2, the Kyoto School participants spoke of
an overcoming of modernity that can take place only by way of passing
through modernity, a stance that represented a
countertendency to the rejection of modern Western rationality by the
Japanese Romantic School and other participants in the symposium. In
other words, the Kyoto School participants did not lament the
modernization/Westernization of Japan, nor did they nostalgically plea
for a return to a pre-modern age; rather, they called for a further
step forward, but one that would involve creatively recovering viable
elements of Japanese tradition at the same time as building on the
best of what could be learned from the West. This stance shows up
clearly in Nishitani’s debate with Kobayashi Hideo, who argued for a
rejection of modernity and a return to the pre-modern Japanese
classics (see Kawakami & Takeuchi 1979, 217ff.). Throughout his career
Nishitani consistently spoke of overcoming modernity only by way of
passing through it, and in this process tradition was to be creatively
appropriated, not conservatively retreated to. He wrote: “There
is no turning back to the way things were. … Our tradition must
be appropriated from the direction in which we are heading, as a new
possibility” (NKC VIII, 183; Nishitani 1990, 179); and:
“Simply put, the backward looking return to tradition is
straightaway to be forward looking” (NKC XIX, 104). Later in
life Nishitani continued to stress that Japanese Buddhist
organizations need to embrace their historcality, which means to
modernize and then postmodernize; only in this way can they continue
to play a vital role in Japanese society as well as offer the
possibilities of their ways of life to the wider world (Nishitani
2006, 36–38).
In the Chūōkōron discussions as well the Kyoto
School resolutely attempted to think from the “standpoint of
world history.” Problematically, however, they asserted a
leadership role for Japan in the present moment, which they viewed as
a turning point in world history. If the standpoint of world history
had indeed been first opened up by both Western universalism
and imperialism, they argued, it was the non-Western nation
of Japan that was in a unique position to free the world from the
chains of the latter in order to realize the true potential of the
former.
In his book written around the same time, View of the World and
the Nation, Nishitani went so far as to claim that this was the
moment in time when the “focal point of world history” was
to become the Japanese nation, just as previously world history had
centered on the Roman Empire and then later on the British Empire.
However, Nishitani argued, unlike the former two empires Japan’s
historical mission was to bring about a world that has “no
specific center” but rather consists of various
“politically and culturally unified spheres” (NKC IV,
298–300). The Japanese nation would be able to carry out this
mission, he crucially adds, only if it incorporates a religious spirit
of self-negation, thus becoming what he calls a “nation of
non-ego” rather than a self-centered aggressive empire (NKC IV,
285–86). In this idealistic vision, which unfortunately had
little to do with the cruel realities of Japanese expansionism, Japan
was to be an altogether new kind of empire, a self-negating and
compassionate one that would help other nations to cooperatively form
their own identities, rather than an aggressive and
“imperialistic” one that would remold others into inferior
replicas of itself. (It remains for us to ask how best to characterize
today’s political superpowers and economic empires, and how to relate
their ideologies to their realities.)
If there is a lasting merit to Nishitani’s wartime political writings
and the Chūōkōron discussions, it might be
found in part in their critique of the contradictions and hypocrisies
of Western imperialism (see, for example, Kōsaka et al. 1943,
348ff.), together with their insistence that Japan’s “leading
role” in Asia not become that of an imperialist or colonizer
(see ibid., 204–5; also see Nishitani’s “My View of
‘Overcoming Modernity’,” reprinted in
Kawakami & Takeuchi 1979, 32). The lasting infamy of the
Chūōkōron discussions, on the other hand, can
be found not only in their idealistic political naïveté,
but also in their idealization and even whitewashing of political
realities (such as Japanese aggression in China and other parts of
Asia), as well as in such disturbing specific suggestions as that of
“Japanizing” or “half-Japanizing” some of the
“more superior” ethnic groups in Asia in order to assist
in instituting the Japanese led “Co-Prosperity Sphere”
(Kōsaka et al. 1943, 262–63, 337).
It is now evident that the political activities of the Kyoto School
during the war were even more involved—and even more filled with
ambiguity—than was previously thought. Ōhashi Ryōsuke
discovered and published in 2001 some wartime notebooks of Ōshima
Yasuma, a student of Tanabe’s (Ōhashi 2001). These notebooks
document in detail secret meetings regularly held by Kyoto School
members at the bequest of the Japanese navy between February 1942 and
just before the end of the war. While on the one hand the existence of
these secret meetings demonstrates an even more intimate connection
between the Kyoto School and the military than was previously known,
on the other hand it is crucially significant that they were in
cooperation with a certain moderate faction of the navy, a faction
that was opposed to the extremists that dominated the army. There had
long existed a considerable tension between the bellicose arrogance of
the army and the comparatively more moderate and worldly stance of the
navy. As the politically more powerful army was setting a war-bound
course for Pearl Harbor, some reticent navy officials evidently
petitioned the Kyoto School to shed light on the political situation
from their “world-historical standpoint,” presumably in
order to sway public sentiment in a more prudent direction.
In short, the “Ōshima Memos” help reveal how the
Kyoto School found themselves in a position where they were called on
to fight a “war of thought” on two fronts: against Western
imperialism, they felt called on to delineate a world-historical role
for Japan in freeing itself and other Asian peoples from colonization
and exploitation by the Western empires; and, against Japanese
ultra-nationalism, they felt that it was up to them to convince the
public and the military of the illegitimacy of an imperialistic
response to Western imperialism.
Ōshima Yasuma had himself published, in 1965, an often overlooked
account of these meetings under the title, “The Pacific War and
the Kyoto School: On the Political Participation of
Intellectuals” (Ōshima 2000, 274–304; also see Horio
1994, 301ff.). In this article, Ōshima summarized the evolving
purpose of the secret Kyoto School meetings in three stages: In the
very first meetings (which apparently took place prior to those
documented in the recovered notebooks), the main theme was “how
to avoid the outbreak of war.” Since war in fact broke out very
soon thereafter, the theme quickly switched to “how to bring the
war to a favorable end as soon as possible, by way of rationally
persuading the army.” To do this they reportedly agreed that it
would be necessary to overthrow the cabinet of Tōjō Hideki.
However, according to Ōshima, all criticism of Tōjō and
the army had to be expurgated in the discussions published in the
pages of Chūōkōron, and the statements of the
Kyoto School had to be “veiled in two or three layers of
cloth” in order to avoid censorship and persecution. Towards the
end of the war, the theme of the secret meetings is said to have
changed to that of “how to handle the postwar
situation.”
Among these three themes only the second is recorded in any detail in
the notebooks that were recently discovered and published by
Ōhashi as the “Ōshima Memos.” Although there may
well have been preliminary discussions on how to avoid war, more
explicit references to overthrowing Tōjō Hideki, and more
lengthy discussions about postwar issues, these do not in fact show up
in the recovered notebooks. Nevertheless, the “Ōshima
Memos” do show us a more detailed and uncensored account of the
Kyoto School’s “war of thought” on two fronts during a
tumultuous and tragic time of what was, in fact, Japan’s imperialistic
response to Western imperialism.
Their ambivalent wartime stance between supporting the nationalistic
ideology and subjecting it to critique from a pluralistic and global perspective—in other words, their attempt to walk a razor’s edge of
“cooperative resistance”—ironically earned the Kyoto
School a suspect reputation in Japan both before and
after the end of the war. As Nishitani confided later to a
student: “During the war we were struck on the cheek from the
right; after the war we were struck on the cheek from the
left.”
During the war, the stance of the Kyoto School was considered too
cosmopolitan and insufficiently nationalistic, even anti-war. The
discussions published in The Standpoint of World History and
Japan were branded by the Imperial Way ideologues as
“ivory-tower speculations that risked reducing the Empire to
simply one more category of world history,” and further
printings of the book were reportedly stopped by the government
censors (see Horio 1994, 291). After the war, the Kyoto School’s
idealistic attempts to impart meaning and direction to Japan’s
“world historical mission” were seen—especially by
liberals and leftists that had at long last been freed from repression
and persecution—as support for its de facto
militaristic fascism. Nishitani and others were purged for several
years from their university positions. Even when they were later
reinstated, the stigma of the Kyoto School as having “cooperated
in the war” was hardly erased. Their political thought in
particular was dismissed in toto, and it was not until
decades later that the topic of “overcoming modernity” was
once again given serious critical attention (see Kawakami &
Takeuchi 1979; Hiromatsu 1989; and Ōhashi 1992, 143ff.).
The Kyoto School thinkers rarely responded directly to their critics
after the war, and we can only speculate on the reasons for this (see
Horio 1994, 300). They accepted suspension from their posts without
comment or complaint, and continued on with their philosophizing,
albeit without the overtly political element of their thought.
Nishitani, for example, came into his own as a philosopher of religion
in the postwar era. He continued to philosophically develop Eastern
ideas, those of Zen Buddhism in particular, in dialogue with medieval
Christian mysticism as well as postmodern existentialism and
phenomenology and in response to what he saw as the central problem of
modernity, namely, nihilism. In his mature attempts to “overcome
nihilism by way of passing through nihilism” (NKC XX, 192), we
find a significant thread of continuity with his pre-war and wartime
attempts to overcome (Western) modernity by way of passing through it.
But it is nevertheless possible to mark a crucial and self-critical
“turn” in his thinking with regard to the question of the
political role—or, as it turns out, the lack of one—to be
played by the Japanese state in this overcoming of modernity and
nihilism by way of passing through them (see Davis 2008b).
Tanabe got a head start on the postwar critics and toward the end of
the war began thinking his way through a radical crisis of
self-critique. Hardly less controversial than the roundtable
discussions of the younger members of the Kyoto School have been
Tanabe’s application—or misapplication—of his “logic
of the specific” to a discourse on the legitimacy of the
self-assertion of the Japanese nation-state as an archetype for
others. The “logic of the specific” had originally been
conceived, in critique of Bergson and Nishida, as a reappraisal of the
logical and ethical role that ethnic specificity plays in mediating
the particular individual and universal humanity. Adapting Hegel’s
political philosophy, Tanabe thought that the nation-state could both
embody the ethnic specificity of the people and raise it out of its
inherent irrationality. As a concrete universal, the nation-state was,
if not the absolute itself, in some sense the dialectical
manifestation of the absolute on earth.
The critical lapse came when Tanabe irrationally proposed that the
“relative absolute” of the Japanese nation-state could
serve as a kind of “supreme archetype” for other nations
(see THZ VI, 232–33). James Heisig writes that, in so doing,
Tanabe “took a step that was fatal but really unnecessary, if
not outright inconsistent with the principles of his logic….
According to his own logic, the community of the human race is to be
made up of a community of nations that have found a way to transcend
their specificity without transcending time and culture. Each nation
may come about as an instance of the generic universal, but nothing in
the logic of the specific allows any one instance to become an
archetype for the others. It is as if Tanabe were quoting himself out
of context” (Heisig 2001, 136–37; also see Heisig
1994).
Tanabe finally came to his senses and, in a striking metanoetic turn,
renounced these political assertions and dove into the philosophy of
religion. Philosophy as Metanoetics, the first parts of which
were delivered as lectures in 1944 before the end of the war, was
composed not only as a personal self-critique, but also as a call to
self-critique on the part of the entire nation, and indeed ultimately
as a call for an “absolute critique” of human rationality
as such (see the Preface to THZ X; Tanabe 1986). It is the last of
these that is the central theme of the book: the idea that the human
reason is inevitably driven to antinomies through which it must
repeatedly die to its own self-power in order to be reborn again
through the workings of an Other-power. It is nevertheless true that
“one looks through that work in vain for any admission of guilt
for particular actions or statements that he had made” (Heisig
2001, 151). In any case, Tanabe’s public (if vague) repentance was no
more successful than the silence of other Kyoto School thinkers in
convincing the majority of postwar Japanese academics to refrain from
throwing the baby of their philosophical insights out with the
bathwater of their political misadventures.
Only in the past few decades has the reputation of the Kyoto School
been significantly rehabilitated in Japan, due in part to a general
recovery of the nation from immersion in the march of postwar economic
progress and evasion of unresolved cultural aporias, in part to a
general reaffirmation of cultural identity (including all too often a
pendulum swing back to ethnocentric reassertions of “Japanese
uniqueness”), and in part to the positive attention the School
has received from Western scholars. It is worthwhile noting, as Fujita
Masakatsu does in his preface to The Philosophy of the Kyoto
School, that prior to 2001 surprisingly few articles or books had
appeared in Japan with a thematic focus on the “Kyoto
School” as such, even though hundreds of studies had treated
“Nishida Philosophy.” Yet there are promising signs that
we are standing on the brink of a new academic era in which critical
yet appreciative work on the Kyoto School can be cooperatively
undertaken in Japan, in the West, and recently even in other parts of
East Asia (see Fujita et al. 2003; Heisig 2004; Synthesis
Philosophica 2004; Fujita & Davis 2005; Hori & Curley
2008; Heisig & Uehara 2008; Lam & Cheung 2009; Bouso &
Heisig 2009; Davis, Schroeder, & Wirth 2011; Elberfeld &
Arisaka 2014; Yusa 2017; Davis 2019b).
Despite the persistence of a faction of polemical intellectual
historians, perhaps we are reaching a point where philosophers
worldwide are beginning to see the political misadventures of the
Kyoto School as questionable footnotes to their central philosophical
endeavors, rather than the other way around. While research into their
political thought—regarding what it tried to say then and
regarding what it can or cannot help us to think now—remains
necessary and important, at the end of the day many are likely to
agree with James Heisig when he emphatically writes: “One
has … to ignore the greatest bulk of the writings of these
thinkers to arrive at the conclusion that anything approaching or
supporting the imperialistic ideology of wartime Japan belongs to the
fundamental inspiration of their thought” (Heisig 2001, 6).
The philosophical and cross-cultural legacy of the Kyoto School lies
elsewhere.
In this concluding section, let us return to the question of the
legacy of the Kyoto School with regard to comparative or
cross-cultural philosophy. As mentioned at the outset, the Kyoto
School thinkers were all dedicated scholars of various fields and
figures of Western philosophy; and yet, at the same time they kept one
foot firmly in touch with their native East Asian traditions, those of
Mahāyāna Buddhism in particular. This bipedal stance placed
them in an extraordinary position “between East and
West.”
However, their philosophies do not simply drift impartially on the
seas of academic comparison, nor do they see themselves primarily as
mediators of inter-religious dialogue. As existentially engaged
philosophers, they are above all seekers after truth, and they argue
passionately for the validity of seeing the self and the world in
certain ways. As we have seen, while each member of the Kyoto School
has his own vision of the truth, they share certain fundamental ideas,
such as one or another version of the core notion of absolute
nothingness and the idea of coming to a genuine self-awareness by way
of emptying the ego. And however much their texts reflect an intimate
dialogue with and critical appropriation of ideas from Western
philosophers, it can be said that many of their main theses
nevertheless reflect a distinctly Eastern influence.
Nevertheless, this does not mean that they merely gave modern
expression to traditional East Asian Buddhist thought. It would be
more accurate to say that their philosophies are critical and
creative developments of that tradition. But even this way of
putting it would not do justice to the influence exerted on their
thought by the Western philosophies with which they grappled so
intensely. Although Hisamatsu, Nishitani, Ueda and others do
explicitly philosophize from the standpoint of Zen, and although
Takeuchi, Hase, and others do so from the standpoint of Shin Buddhism,
it would be misleading to simply and without qualification
characterize either Nishida’s or Tanabe’s multifaceted philosophies as
“Eastern” or “Buddhist.”
For example, Tanabe’s early “logic of the specific,” with
its concern for the manner in which ethnic specificities mediate
particular individuals and universal humanity, can be read more as a
critical appropriation of Hegelian dialectical logic and political
philosophy than as any straightforward development of East Asian or
Buddhist thought. And in his various later writings on the philosophy
of religion, Tanabe wanders between a preference for Shin Buddhism,
Christianity, and finally Zen Buddhism (see Himi 1990, 129–341).
With regard to Nishida, an acute concern with questions of
epistemology, logic, individual autonomy, creativity, and the
historicity of the world are essential to his thought in ways that are
more “modern Western” than “traditional
Eastern”; and Nishida at times explicitly indicates his
dissatisfaction with what he sees as related weaknesses in traditional
Eastern thought.
Of course, one might respond: even if Nishida methodologically takes
his questions from Western philosophy, his responses to these
questions reflect his East Asian roots at least as much as his Western
studies. To the Western ontological question of being, his answer is a
meontology of absolute nothingness. And even if his systematic
philosophical articulations of the idea of absolute nothingness owe
more to Western than Eastern texts, he nevertheless understands
himself to have autonomously (i.e., in the process of engaging in a
nonsectarian philosophical search for truth) given expression to the
formless origin that is harbored in the traditions of the East. In
retrospect Nishida wrote: “It is not that I conceived of my way
of thinking in dependence on Mahāyāna Buddhism; and yet it
has come into accord with it” (NKZ XIV, 408). Nishitani could
have said something similar of his career path through the study of
Western philosophy and mysticism and “back” to the
standpoint of Zen. Other Kyoto School thinkers took even less of an
Occidental excursion before making what Hölderlin called a
“homecoming though the foreign.” And some, like Hisamatsu
and Takeuchi, began their scholarly pursuits with a self-understanding
as a Zen or Shin Buddhist thinker.
What is perhaps most controversial, from a cross-cultural political
point of view, is Nishida’s and other Kyoto School thinkers’
suggestion that it is modern Japanese culture and philosophy in
particular that has the potential to be developed so as to make room
for the cooperative meeting of the strengths of East and West (see NKZ
XIV, 416–17; also Nishida 1964, 365). What are we to make of
such bold claims? There appear to be two problematical assertions
involved: first, an overly generalized, if not at times hypostatized,
split of cultural spheres into “East” and
“West”; and second, a claim that an idea with deeper roots
in the East, namely absolute nothingness, can be developed so as to
provide the philosophical meeting place of both East and
 West.[18]
Even sympathetic readers of the Kyoto School are often highly critical
of this type of comparative thinking in terms of “East”
and “West.” Although he affirms that “the
Kyoto-school philosophers give the west a way into the east like none
other,” James Heisig complains that “the East” which
the Kyoto School sets up over against “the West” is
something of an invention: “At best, it is one constellation of
a heritage too long and too plural to be represented fairly by
Japan” (Heisig 2001, 271–72). John Maraldo goes further
and claims that “the problems Nishida deals with are universal,
and his way of dealing with them contrasts as much with other Asian
philosophers as with philosophers of the so-called West”
(Maraldo 1995, 196). Is it necessary and are we ready to do as Maraldo
suggests, and “put ‘East’ and ‘West’ to
rest”?
I myself am somewhat ambivalent regarding this complex issue. While I
certainly agree with the wish to avoid overgeneralizations and
politically charged polarizations, and while I think the writings of
the Kyoto School do need to be read critically in this regard, I am
equally wary of a “globalization of thought” that amounts
to a colonization of “non-Western” traditions by
“Western” methods and categories of thinking. I also
continue to believe that the threads of the
Greco-Roman-Judeo-Christian-Euro-American traditions and cultures are
woven tightly enough together to warrant provisionally
and in certain contexts speaking of “the West.”
It is true that “the East” is a more problematic concept
since it is a less tightly woven set of traditions and cultures,
especially from the perspective of India (which, of course, did not
appropriate any Chinese tradition the way China appropriated
Buddhism). From Japan’s perspective, however, especially from a
Japanese Buddhist perspective which intimately weaves together
Indo-Sino-Japanese threads, it may still make some sense
provisionally and in certain contexts to speak in
terms of “the East.”
As Thomas Kasulis reminds us (Kasulis 2018, 36 and 41),
generalizations are not universalizations; by definition there are
exceptions to any general definition of something. The bigger the
generalization, the more exceptions will it have. Nevertheless, we
cannot think without generalities, and it is no doubt a matter of
“practical wisdom” (phronesis) to know when to
construct and when to deconstruct them. Thus, even though we must be
careful to discern the appropriate contexts in which it makes sense to
speak in such vast and abstract terms, it is no more advisable to
unequivocally annihilate the concepts of “West” and
“East” than it is to narrowly define or absolutize their
respective coherences and mutual differences.
With regard to the hermeneutics of modern cross-cultural thinking, in
general I believe that the attempt to obliterate the borders that
separate cultural spheres is as pernicious as is the attempt to
hermetically seal them up. Of course, this goes for intra- as well as
inter-traditional differences. Needless to say, defining, comparing,
contrasting, and above all evaluating the relative worth of various
traditions, remain undertakings fraught with theoretical, ethical and
political pitfalls. The theoretical and cultural legacies of
colonialism and Orientalism remain with us long after the political
Empires have receded. Moreover, in these postcolonial times we all too
often experience reactive fabrications of homogeneous cultural
identity and assertions of counter-superiority, reactions which
ironically reinforce the same kind of colonial divisions and
obsessions with unadulterated self-identity that were in part imposed
by, or imported from, the worst of the West.
In Japan, certain retroactive constructions of identity and reactive
counter-assertions of superiority have taken the form of what is
called nihonjin-ron: theories of “Japaneseness”
or “Japanese uniqueness” (see Dale 1986). In modern
Japanese history, such reactive cultural self-obsession and
self-assertion has taken either the form of denying Japan’s
deep-rooted traditional connections with its East Asian neighbors, or
the form of claiming that Japan has uniquely embodied and perfected
“the essence of the East.” If the former type of claim is
most in evidence in postwar and contemporary Japan, the latter is
found, for example, in the Meiji thinker Okakura Tenshin’s declaration
that, while “Asia is one,” Japan alone is “the real
repository of the trust of Asiatic thought and culture” (Okakura
2000, 1 and 5).
Where do the Kyoto School thinkers stand with respect to such culture
wars? To be sure, the Chūōkōron discussions in
particular often asserted that modern Japan was uniquely suited to
institute and represent the “Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity
Sphere,” and this undoubtedly reflected a widespread post-Meiji
Japanese conflation of political, industrial, and military development
with cultural superiority. Nishida also felt that modern Japan was in
a unique political and cultural position to host a fruitful marriage
of East and West, and Tanabe went so far as to set the nation of Japan
up as an archetype for others. In the Kyoto School’s wartime political
writings, there indeed remains much grist for the mills of
contemporary cultural critics, especially for those with hermeneutical
blindfolds or purportedly perfect hindsight vision. Yet a critique of
their political misadventures, as necessary as it is, may in fact
reveal something more peripheral than central to the cross-cultural
thinking of the Kyoto School. It is at least necessary to keep both
eyes open: one ready to criticize and the other willing to learn.
We should note that even when Nishida broadly contrasts “Western
being” with “Eastern nothingness,” he in fact
immediately goes on to explore finer distinctions between the Greek,
Roman, and Judeo-Christian threads of the Western tradition, and
between the Indian, Chinese, and Japanese threads of the Eastern
tradition. If his essentializing or overgeneralizing of these threads
does remain in various respects problematic, it is nevertheless hardly
the case that he and the other Kyoto School thinkers never questioned
the homogeneity of either “the East” or “the
West.” Secondly, although they have been accused both of
contributing to the “myth of Japanese uniqueness” and of
“reverse Orientalism” (see Dale 1986 and Faure 1995), the
case is far from this simple. In a time of uncritical cultural
self-adulation by the Japanese ultranationalists in power, Nishida
boldly urged that “both the strong points and weaknesses of our
culture should be openly and honestly pointed out,” for
“we cannot take any one culture and call it the
culture” (Nishida 1964, 351 and 353).
Fighting a conceptual war simultaneously on two fronts, against
Western and Japanese ethnocentrisms, Nishida wrote that
“until now Westerners have thought that their own culture is the
most superior human culture that exists, and that human culture
inevitably develops in the direction of their own culture—hence,
as Easterners and other peoples who are lagging behind advance
forward, they must become the same as [Westerners].” Even some
Japanese, he regrets, think this way. And yet, he objects,
“there is something radically different in [the culture of] the
East.” According to Nishida, the development of the West will
subsume this difference no more than the East will subsume the West.
Even if humanity does share a common root (what he calls, adapting an
expression from Goethe, an “ur-culture” of multiple
possibilities), the development of its branches and leaves is a matter
of diversification, not homogenization. Globalization should thus be
thought of, in Nishida’s vision, as many branches of the same tree
supplementing one other on the basis of both their deep-rooted
commonality and their irreducible diversity (NKZ XIV,
402–6 and 417).
To be sure, there inevitably remains for us the question of the
“place” and manner in which this global communication
between cultures should take place. But without a “view from
nowhere,” can we not only ever attempt to critically and
creatively take up ideas that have particular genealogies and
dialogically develop them into what are provisionally more universally
viable forms? Just as concepts of democracy, hermeneutics, and indeed
philosophia itself have particular cultural lineages, so do
the ideas of śūnyatā, mu, and the
true self as a non-ego that opens itself to an encounter with others
by radically emptying itself. Nevertheless, all of these ideas may
very well contribute something to an intercultural dialogue concerning
the very place and manner in which a genuine encounter between
cultures and individuals can and should take place.
It is not, therefore, necessarily ethnocentric for Japanese thinkers
to suggest the potential efficacy of introducing into a global
philosophical dialogue ideas that derive from Japanese or Eastern
traditions. The “Japanese philosophy” of the Kyoto School
is best understood as a contribution to such an intercultural
conversation, and not merely as a reactive opposition to philosophical
Eurocentrism. In any case, we must be careful in how we understand the
noun “philosophy” and the modifier “Japanese”
when we speak of “Japanese philosophy.”
The Kyoto School has never doubted that “philosophy,” in
the historically specific sense, is originally a cultural product of
the Western tradition. But they also recognize that it, like Western
science and technology, has universal implications that can be
developed by peoples around the globe. This does not mean that they
think Western philosophy is free of unrecognized cultural biases and
limitations, or that traditional Eastern thought has nothing essential
to offer the development of philosophy in a post-Eurocentric world.
They recognize the difference between the global potentialities and
the still parochial actualities of philosophy, and their Japanese
contributions aim to make philosophy more, not less, worldly.
In an illuminating study of the debates surrounding the concept of
“philosophy” in Japan since the Meiji period
(1868–1912), John Maraldo has isolated four senses in which the
notion of “Japanese philosophy” has been used: (1) Western
philosophy as it happens to be practiced by Japanese scholars; (2)
traditional Japanese thought (Confucian, Nativist, Buddhist, etc.) as
it was formulated prior to the introduction of Western philosophy; (3)
a form of inquiry which has methods and themes that are Western in
origin, but that can be applied to pre-modern, pre-Westernized,
Japanese thinking; and (4) a kind of reverse Orientalism that asserts
the superiority of specifically Japanese ways of thinking.
Maraldo argues for the superior viability of the third of these
conceptions, in part because it pays due hermeneutical attention to
the Greek origins of the heretofore prevailing methods and themes of
“philosophy.” And yet, crucially, he also stresses that
the very methods and themes of philosophy are essentially always
“in the making,” and that the production of
“Japanese philosophy” will have to “strike a balance
between reading (pre-defined) philosophy into [Japan’s traditional]
texts and reading alternatives out of them, constructing contrasts to
that [pre-defined] philosophy [of the West]” (Maraldo 2004,
238–44). The Kyoto School in particular can be understood to
have taken up the challenge of critically and creatively appropriating
philosophy so as to free up for questioning many of its pre-defined
Western conceptions.
A text by Ueda on Nishitani’s philosophy insightfully addresses the
question of the adjective, “Japanese,” as follows:
“If we are to use the characterization ‘Japanese’,
this does not signify merely a particularity of Japan, but rather must
be understood in the sense that a certain area of universal primal
human possibility has been historically realized particularly in
Japan. Hence, ‘European’ does not straightaway mean
‘global’, but rather that a certain area of universal
primal human possibility has been historically realized particularly
in Europe. … If we understand ourselves as the
particularization of something universal, this means, at the same
time, that we can understand others as different particularizations of
something universal. Only then, with the communication between
particular and particular, can something universal come to be
realized” (Ueda 1996, 309).
In this passage, which recalls Nishida’s vision of communication
between diversely determined branches of a shared yet essentially
indeterminate root ur-culture, Ueda gives us a clue as to how we might
best understand the cross-cultural contributions of the Kyoto School.
They are philosophers who strive to express something universal from a
particular standpoint. But this does not at all mean that they attempt
to reduce universality to their own particularity; for the latter is
in turn understood as one particular expression of the formless
ur-culture, the indeterminate source of possibilities for individual
and cultural determination, that is to say, the originary nothingness
that we all share. The Kyoto School thus presents us with a unique set
of attempts to give philosophical form to this formless wellspring of
both commonality and singularity.
The degree to which the Kyoto School thinkers were successful in their
boldly paradoxical quest to give philosophical form to the formless
can be debated. It is less easy to deny the exigency of the quest
itself. If philosophy today is to mature beyond its Eurocentric
pubescence, then it is necessary to deepen its quest for universality
by way of radically opening it up to a diversity of cultural
perspectives. If cultural pluralism, for its part, is to avoid falling
into a relativistic antagonism or isolationism, it must entail a
metamorphosis rather than an abandonment of the philosophical quest
for universality (see Fujita 2013; Maraldo 2013). In any case, we
should understand the thought of the Kyoto School, not as exclusively
Japanese versions of philosophy, but rather as Japanese contributions
to the content of—and indeed to the very formation of the forum
of—a global dialogue of philosophy in the making.