For most of this entry, I focus on “pure” or
“absolute” music—instrumental music that has no
non-musical aspects, elements, or accompaniments. Most of the
philosophers whose work is discussed below also put the focus here,
for at least three reasons. The first is that pure music often
presents the most difficult philosophical problems. It is less
puzzling how a musical setting of a maudlin text could be expressive
of sadness, for instance, than how a piece of music without even a
programmatic text could be, since the emotional expression could
somehow be transferred to the music from the text. The second reason
is that, though the problems are more difficult, the solutions are
likely to be more easily evaluated in the pure case. Just as
apportioning blame is easier when one person is responsible for a
crime than when the blame must be divided between a number of
conspirators, the success of a solution to the problem of musical
expressiveness may be clearer if it can explain the expressiveness of
pure music. Thirdly, it is certain that the expressiveness of pure
music will play a role in the expressiveness of “impure”
music. Though its text may contribute to the expressiveness of a song,
for instance, the musical aspects of the song must play some role. A
maudlin text set to a jauntily upbeat melody will clearly not have the
same overall expressiveness as the same text set to a plodding dirge.
Though I have used expressiveness as an example here, these same
points will apply to discussions of musical understanding and value.
There may also be interesting questions about the ontology of
“impure” music, but it is not clear they will be of the
same kind as those about the expressiveness, understanding, and value
of such music. (For a sustained critique of this general approach, see
Ridley 2004.)
Given the global prevalence of rock music, broadly construed, it is
plausible that song is the most common kind of music listened to in
the contemporary world. Film and other motion pictures, such as
television and video-games, are also ubiquitous. There has been some
significant work done on the aesthetics of song (Levinson 1987; Gracyk
2001; Bicknell & Fisher 2013; Bicknell 2015), music drama (Kivy
1988b, 1994; Goehr 1998), and film music (Carroll 1988: 213–225;
Levinson 1996b; Kivy 1997a; Smith 1996). (See also the chapters in
part V of Gracyk & Kania 2011; on hybrid art forms more generally,
see Levinson 1984 and Ridley 2004.) However, it seems that there is
plenty of room for further work on the aesthetics of impure music.
“Muzak” is another musical phenomenon that is ubiquitous,
yet has received little serious attention from aestheticians, being
used primarily as an example to elicit disgust. Whether or not there
is anything interesting to say about Muzak philosophically, as opposed
to psychologically or sociologically, remains to be seen.
Explications of the concept of music usually begin with the idea that
music is organized sound. They go on to note that this
characterization is too broad, since there are many examples of
organized sound that are not music, such as human speech, and the
sounds non-human animals and machines make. There are two further
kinds of necessary conditions philosophers have added in attempts to
fine tune the initial idea. One is an appeal to “tonality”
or essentially musical features such as pitch and rhythm (Scruton
1997: 1–79; Hamilton 2007: 40–65; Kania 2011a). Another is
an appeal to aesthetic properties or experience (Levinson 1990a;
Scruton 1997: 1–96; Hamilton 2007: 40–65). As these
references suggest, one can endorse either of these conditions in
isolation, or both together. It should also be noted that only Jerrold
Levinson and Andrew Kania attempt definitions in terms of necessary
and sufficient conditions. Both Roger Scruton and Andy Hamilton reject
the possibility of a definition in terms of necessary and sufficient
conditions. Hamilton explicitly asserts that the conditions he defends
are “salient features” of an unavoidably vague
phenomenon.
The main problem with the first kind of condition is that every sound
seems capable of being included in a musical performance, and thus
characterizing the essentially musical features of sounds seems
hopeless. (We need only consider the variety of “untuned”
percussion available to a conservative symphonist, though we could
also consider examples of wind machines, typewriters, and toilets, in
Ralph Vaughan Williams’s Sinfonia Antartica, Leroy
Anderson’s The Typewriter, and Yoko Ono’s
“Toilet Piece/Unknown”.) Defenders of such a condition
have turned to sophisticated intentional or subjective theories of
tonality in order to overcome this problem. If the essentially musical
features of a sound are not intrinsic to it, but somehow related to
how it is produced or received, we can classify just one of two
“indiscernible” sounds as music. The details of
one’s theory of essentially musical features will determine how
much avant-garde “sound art” counts as music.
If one endorses only an aesthetic condition, and not a tonality
condition, one still faces the problem of poetry—non-musical
aesthetically organized sounds. Levinson, who takes this approach,
excludes organized linguistic sounds explicitly (1990a). This raises
the question of whether there are further distinctions to be made
between arts of sound. Andy Hamilton defends a tripartite distinction,
arguing that sound art, as opposed to both music and
literature, was established as a significant art form in the twentieth
century (2007: 40–65). This is one reason that Hamilton endorses
both tonal and aesthetic conditions on music; without the former,
Levinson is unable to make such a distinction. On the other hand, by
endorsing an aesthetic condition, Hamilton is forced to exclude scales
and Muzak, for instance, from the realm of music. Kania (2013a)
suggests that it is a mistake to think that music is necessarily an
art, any more than language. He argues that we should distinguish
music simpliciter from its artistic uses, just as we do in
the cases of language and literature, depiction and painting, and so
on. By means of a disjunctive condition, Kania also adds a further
distinction to Hamilton’s set. Kania argues that music is 
(1) any event intentionally produced or organized (2) to be heard, and
(3) either (a) to have some basic musical feature, such as
pitch or rhythm, or (b) to be listened to for such features.
(2011a: 12) 
The latter disjunct allows for two indiscernible works, neither of
which strictly possesses basic musical features, yet one of which is
music and the other sound art because of the complex way in which the
former is intended to be approached. Kania’s approach thus draws
on some of the machinery of recent definitions of art in place of an
appeal to an aesthetic condition. In doing so, however, it may be that
Kania has slipped back into defining music as essentially artistic.
For trenchant criticisms of the attempt to give necessary and
sufficient conditions for music, see Kingsbury & McKeown-Green
2009 and McKeown-Green 2014. Stephen Davies (2012) suggests that an
adequate definition would have to deflect the complex nature of music,
appealing at least to its intentional, structural, historical, and
cultural aspects.
Having discussed complications, it’s worth returning to the
basic idea of “organized sound”. Most theorists note that
music does not consist entirely of sounds. Most obviously, much music
includes rests. You might think that silence can function only to
organize the sounds of music. One counterargument is that an
understanding listener listens to the rests, just as she
listens to the sounds (Kania 2010). Another is to provide putative
cases of music in which the silences are not structural in the way
ordinary rests are. John Cage’s 4′33″ is
frequently discussed, though there is broad agreement that this piece
is not silent—its content is the ambient sounds that occur
during its performance. Anyway, both Stephen Davies (1997a) and Andrew
Kania (2010) argue that Cage’s piece is not music—Davies
because those sounds fail to qualify as organized, Kania because they
fail to meet a tonality condition. Kania considers several other
contenders for the label of “silent music”, arguing that
there are indeed extant examples, most notably Erwin Schulhoff’s
“In Futurum” from his Fünf Pittoresken,
which predates Cage’s 4′33″ by some 33
years.
Musical ontology is the study of the kinds of musical things there are
and the relations that hold between them. The most discussed issues
within this field have been the metaphysical nature of works of
classical music (the “fundamentalist debate”), and what it
is to give an “authentic performance” of such works.
Recently there has been growing interest in the ontologies of other
musical traditions, such as rock and jazz, and discussion of the
methodology and value of musical ontology. (For a more detailed
overview of these debates, see Kania 2008a,b, 2013b, and Matheson
& Caplan 2011.)
Musical works in the Western classical tradition admit of multiple
instances (performances). Much of the debate over the nature of such
works thus reads like a recapitulation of the debate over the
“problem of universals”; the range of proposed candidates
covers the spectrum of fundamental ontological theories. We might
divide musical ontologists into the realists, who posit the existence
of musical works, and the anti-realists, who deny their existence.
Realism has been more popular than anti-realism, but there have been
many conflicting realist views. I begin with three unorthodox realist
views before moving on to more orthodox Platonist and nominalist
theories, concluding with a consideration of anti-realism.
Idealists hold that musical works are mental entities. Collingwood
(1938) and Sartre (1940) respectively take musical (and other) works
to be imaginary objects and experiences. The most serious objections
to this kind of view are that (i) it fails to make works
intersubjectively accessible, since the number of works going under
the name The Rite of Spring will be as multifarious as the
imaginative experiences people have at performances with that name,
and (ii) it makes the medium of the work irrelevant to an
understanding of it. One might have the same imaginative experience in
response to both a live performance and a recording of The Rite of
Spring, yet it seems an open question whether the two media are
aesthetically equivalent. But see Cox 1986, and Cray & Matheson
forthcoming, for recent attempts to revive idealism.
David Davies argues that musical works, like all works of art, are
actions, in particular the compositional actions of their
composers (2004). Thus he revives what we might call an “action
theory” of the ontology of art. (An earlier defender of such a
view is Gregory Currie (1989), who argues that artworks are
types of action, rather than the particular actions
with which Davies identifies them.) Although deciding between theories
of musical ontology is always to some extent a matter of finding a
balance between the benefits of a theory and its cost in terms of our
pre-theoretic intuitions, action theories have a particularly hard row
to hoe since they imply that an instance of a work is some action
performed by a composer, rather than a performance. In order to make
up for such damage to our intuitions the theoretical benefits of an
action theory would have to be quite extensive.
Guy Rohrbaugh has proposed a new ontological category for musical, and
other multiple works of art (2003). He argues that since the kinds of
things we attribute to musical and other art works, such as modal and
temporal flexibility, cannot be accounted for by any extant
ontological theory and, moreover, that these problems arise not just
for artworks, but such things as “species …, clubs, sorts
of artifact, and words” (199), we are justified in positing a
new kind of entity: a historical individual that is
“embodied in”, but not constituted by, physical things
such as scores and performances. (For criticism of this view, see Dodd
2007: 143–66.)
Most theorists think that some kind of Platonist or nominalist theory
of musical works is more plausible than those so far considered.
Nominalists hold that musical works are collections of concrete
particulars, such as scores and performances (Goodman 1968; Predelli
1995, 1999a,b, 2001; Caplan & Matheson 2006). While this view is
attractive because it appeals only to the least problematic kinds of
entities, it faces serious challenges. Though many of our claims about
musical works may be paraphrasable into claims about sets of possible
performances, some seem to make intractable reference to works. For
instance, most performances of The Rite of Spring—even
including the possible ones—include several wrong notes. Thus it
is difficult to imagine how the paraphrase schema will avoid the
nonsensical conclusion that The Rite of Spring contains
several wrong notes. The solution to this problem seems to lie in an
appeal to the work as independent of its various performances, but
such an appeal seems unavailable to the nominalist. (For a recent
defense of nominalist theories against some standard objections, see
Tillman 2011.)
Platonism, the view that musical works are abstract objects, is
perhaps the currently dominant view, since it respects more of our
pre-theoretic intuitions about musical works than any of the other
theories. On the other hand, it is the most ontologically puzzling,
since abstract objects are not well understood. Nonetheless, Platonism
has been tenacious, with much of the debate centering around what
variety of abstract object musical works are. What we might call
“simple Platonism” (known simply as
“Platonism” in the literature), is that works are eternal
existents, existing in neither space nor time (Kivy 1983a,b, Dodd
2007). According to “complex Platonism”, musical works
come to exist in time as the result of human action. The view is
motivated by a number of features of musical practice, including the
intuition that musical works are creatable, the attribution of various
aesthetic and artistic properties to works, and the fine-grained
individuation of works and performances (e.g., in terms of who
composed them, or what instruments they are properly performed upon)
(Ingarden 1961; Thomasson 2004; Wolterstorff 1980; Wollheim 1968:
1–10, 74–84; Levinson 1980, 1990b, 2013a; S. Davies 2001:
37–43; Howell 2002; Stecker 2003a: 84–92).
In contrast to all these realist views stand those of the
anti-realists, who deny that there are any such things as musical
works. An early proponent of such a view is Richard Rudner (1950),
though it is difficult to say whether he is best interpreted as an
eliminativist or a fictionalist, the two anti-realist views currently
on the table. According to eliminativists, there are no such things as
musical works, and thus we ought to stop trying to refer to them. Ross
Cameron (2008) defends such a view, but only with respect to
“Ontologese”—the language we speak when we do
ontology. He argues that ordinary English locutions such as
“there are many musical works” can be true without there
being any musical works. (For critical discussion, see Predelli 2009
and Stecker 2009.) According to fictionalists, the value of discourse
about musical works is not truth, and thus we ought not to abandon the
discourse despite the non-existence of its subject matter, but rather
adopt a different, make-believe attitude towards it (or perhaps we
already do so). (See Kania 2008c, 2013b; for criticism, see Letts
2015.)
Much of this debate over the fundamental ontological category to which
musical works belong has turned on “technical” issues,
that is, controversial general metaphysical claims about the nature of
properties, causation, embodiment, and so on (e.g., Howell 2002;
Trivedi 2002; Caplan & Matheson 2004, 2006; Dodd 2007; Cameron
2008). In the face of this, some theorists have pointed out that
musical works are cultural entities, and thus the methodology
appropriate to uncovering their ontological status might be quite
different from that of general metaphysics (Goehr 1992; S. Davies
2003a; D. Davies 2004; Thomasson 2006, Kania 2008c). There currently
seems to be as much interest in the methodological questions as in
first-order theorizing. (For recent examples, see Kania 2008c; D.
Davies 2009, 2017; Predelli 2009; Stecker 2009; Dodd 2010, 2013; and
Mag Uidhir 2013.)
It might seem that, since musical works are ontologically multiple,
once we have figured out their true nature, we will know what relation
holds between the work and its instances. However, since the
fundamentalist debate is about the basic ontological category to which
works belong, resolving that debate may leave open many questions
about the instantiation relation. For instance, is the use of a
harpsichord required to instance Bach’s Brandenburg Concerto
No. 5 in performance? Would producing harpsichord-like sounds on
a synthesizer do just as well? What about using another keyboard
instrument from Bach’s time, or a modern piano? Learning that
musical works are, say, eternal types will not necessarily help settle
this issue of “authentic performance”, which is perhaps
the most discussed ontological issue, of interest to philosophers,
musicologists, musicians, and audiences alike.
There have been two sources of widespread confusion in the debate over
authenticity in performance. One is a failure to recognize that
authenticity is not simply a property, but a relation that comes in
degrees and along different “vectors”. Something may be
more authentic in one regard and less authentic in another (S. Davies
2001: 203–5). Another is the assumption that authenticity is an
evaluative concept, in the sense that “authentic” implies
“good”. That this is not the case is clear from the fact
that an authentic murderer is not a good thing (S. Davies 2001: 204).
Thus, our value judgments will be complex functions of the extent to
which we judge performances authentic in various regards, and the
values we assign to those various kinds of authenticity.
The central kind of authenticity that has been discussed is
authenticity with respect to the instantiation of the work. Most agree
that the fullest such authenticity requires the production of the
right pitches in the right order. Pure sonicists argue that
this is sufficient (e.g., Kivy 1988a). Timbral sonicists
argue that these pitches must also have timbres reflecting the
composer’s instrumentation (e.g., Dodd 2007: 201–39).
Instrumentalists argue that such sounds must be produced on
the kinds of instruments specified in the score (e.g., Levinson
1990c). Much of the debate is over what kinds of aesthetic or artistic
properties are essential to musical works. If the limpid textures of
Bach’s Brandenburg Concerto No. 5 are essential to it,
then one cannot authentically instance the work using a grand piano
instead of a harpsichord. As such, the debate reflects a wider one in
aesthetics, musical and otherwise, between formalists (or
empiricists, or structuralists), who believe that the most important
properties of a work are intrinsic ones, accessible to listeners
unaware of the historical and artistic context in which it was
created, and contextualists, who believe that a work is
essentially tied to its context of creation. Stephen Davies has argued
for a strong contextualism, claiming that one cannot give a single
answer to the question of whether particular instrumentation is
required for the fully authentic instantiation of a work. Works can be
ontologically “thicker” or “thinner” as a
result of the specifications of a composer working within certain
conventions (1991, 2001). The more properties of an authentic
performance a particular work specifies, the thicker it is. Thus for
some works (typically earlier in the history of Western music)
instrumentation is flexible, while for others (for example, Romantic
symphonies) quite specific instrumentation is required for fully
authentic performances.
In addition to the question of what constitutes authenticity, there
has been debate over its attainability and value. Those who question
its attainability point to our historical distance from the creation
of some works (Young 1988). We may no longer be able to read the
notation in which the work is recorded, or construct or play the
instruments for which it was written. If so, full authenticity is not
attainable. But we rarely have no idea about these matters, and thus
we might achieve partial authenticity (S. Davies 2001: 228–34).
Those who question the value of authenticity often target kinds other
than work-instantiation. For instance, one might question the value of
producing a performance that authentically captures the sound of
performances as they took place in the context of a work’s
composition, on the basis that musicians were not as highly skilled
then as now, for instance (Young 1988: 229–31). Such arguments,
though, have no consequences for the value of work-instantiation. Some
argue that although we might attain an authentic instance of a work,
the idea that we might thereby hear the work as its contemporaries
heard it is wishful thinking, since the musical culture in which we
are immersed enforces ways of listening upon us that we cannot escape
(Young 1988: 232–7). Thus the point of such authenticity is
questioned. In response, we may consider not only the possibility that
we are in a better position to appreciate historical works than
contemporary ones, but also the remarkable flexibility people seem to
show in enjoying many different kinds of music from throughout history
and the world (S. Davies 2001: 234–7).
(For an excellent overview of the authentic performance debate, see S.
Davies 2001: 201–53. For an investigation of authenticity with
respect to things other than instantiation of the work, see Kivy 1995,
Gracyk 2001, and Bicknell 2015. Some recent work has, like the
fundamentalist debate, taken a methodological turn, e.g., S. Davies
2008; Dodd 2010, 2015.)
A second area that may be independent of the fundamentalist debate is
that of comparative ontology. (For dispute over this framing issue,
see Brown 2011, 2012, and Kania 2012.) Just as classical works from
different historical periods may be ontologically diverse, so may
works from different contemporary traditions. Theodore Gracyk has
argued that instances of works of rock music are not performances.
Rather, the work is instanced by playing a copy of a recording on an
appropriate device (1996). Stephen Davies has argued that rock is more
like classical music than Gracyk acknowledges, with works for
performance at the heart of the tradition, albeit works for a
different kind of performance (2001: 30–6). Gracyk’s view
has been amplified and defended in attempts to find a place for
composition, live performance, and performance skill within his basic
framework (Kania 2006, Bruno 2013, Bartel 2017).
Work on the ontology of jazz has centered around the nature of
improvisation, particularly the relation between improvisation and
composition (Alperson 1984, 1998; Valone 1985; Brown 1996, 2000;
Hagberg 1998; Gould & Keaton 2000; Sterritt 2000; and Young &
Matheson 2000; Bresnahan 2015; Love 2016; Magnus 2016). This has been
a useful reminder that not all music is the performance of
pre-composed works (Wolterstorff 1987: 115–29). However, it must
be noted that improvisation can occur within the context of such a
work, as in the performance of an improvised cadenza in a classical
concerto. Some have argued that there is not as significant a
distinction between improvisation and composition as is usually
thought (Alperson 1984). Others have argued that all performance
requires improvisation (Gould & Keaton 2000). Yet others restrict
the possibility of improvisation to certain kinds of musical
properties, such as “structural” rather than
“expressive” ones (Young & Matheson 2000). However,
the arguments are not compelling. Usually they turn on equivocal use
of terms such as “composition” and
“performance”, or beg the question by defining
improvisation in terms of deviation from a score or variation of a
limited set of “expressive” properties.
Though jazz is not necessarily improvisational, and very few jazz
performances lack any sort of prior compositional process, the
centrality of improvisation to jazz presents a challenge to the
musical ontologist. One might argue that jazz works are ontologically
like classical works—composed for multiple, different
performances—but that they tend to be thinner, leaving more room
for improvisation (Gould & Keaton 2000; Young & Matheson
2000). The difficulty is to specify the work without conflating one
work with another, since tokening the melody is not required, and many
works share the same harmonic structure. As a result, some argue that
the performance is itself the work (Alperson 1984; Hagberg 2002; S.
Davies 2001: 16–19). One problem here is parity with classical
music. If jazz performances are musical works in their own right, it
is difficult to deny that status to classical performances of works.
This seems to multiply works beyond what we usually think is
necessary. A third possibility is that in jazz there are no works,
only performances (Brown 1996, 2000: 115; Kania 2011b). This is
counterintuitive if “work” is an evaluative term, but it
is not obvious that this is the case.
Julian Dodd (2014a) argues that the kinds of considerations adduced in
favor of these views confuse questions of ontology with questions of
value. Jazz is ontologically like early classical music, according to
Dodd: the focus of critical attention is the improvisatory performance
rather than the composition it instantiates, but that composition is
no less a musical work for that difference in critical emphasis.
Similar considerations might be adduced against the increasingly
complicated ontologies of rock referred to above. Such arguments
return us to debates about the methodology of musical ontology.
A third topic of ontological discussion at the “higher”
level is the nature of the elements of musical works, such as
melodies, harmonies, and rhythms, and how they come together to form
complex wholes. At present only Roger Scruton (1997: 19–79;
2007) and Stephen Davies (2001: 47–71) have addressed these
questions in depth from a philosophical perspective, but they will be
important to understanding the very nature of music, if an appeal is
made to such “basic musical features” as pitch and rhythm
in the definition of music (see
 section 1.2,
 above).
The most widely discussed philosophical question concerning music and
the emotions is that of how music can express emotions. (For a more
extensive introduction, see part II of Gracyk & Kania 2011; for a
thorough treatment, see S. Davies 1994.) There is a second group of
questions centered around listeners’ emotional responses to
music. These include questions about why and how we respond
emotionally to music, the value of such responses, and why we choose
to listen to music that elicits “negative” responses from
us, such as sadness. Theorists typically restrict themselves to
“pure” or “absolute” music for simplicity,
though it is surprising how many central examples fall outside this
boundary through being program music or song. The reason given for the
restriction is usually that it is easier to understand how music with
an accompanying text, say, could express the emotions evident in the
text. On the other hand, an important criterion for the evaluation of
such music is how appropriately the composer has set her chosen text
to music. So an accompanying text is clearly not sufficient for the
musical expression of an emotion. Thus, a better reason for initially
putting such music to one side is that the interrelation of music and
text, or other elements, is likely to be highly complex, and best
approached with as well-developed a theory of the more basic phenomena
in hand as possible.
Pieces of music, or performances of them, are standardly said to be
happy, sad, and so on. Music’s emotional expressiveness is a
philosophical problem since the paradigm expressers of emotions are
psychological agents, who have emotions to express. Neither pieces of
music, nor performances of them, are psychological agents, thus it is
puzzling that such things could be said to express emotions. One
immediately helpful distinction is that between expression and
expressiveness, or expressivity. Expression is something persons do,
namely, the outward manifestation of their emotional states.
Expressiveness is something artworks, and possibly other things,
possess. It is presumably related in some way to expression, and yet
cannot simply be expression for the reason just given.
An obvious way to connect expressiveness with expression is to argue
that pieces of music or performances of them are expressions
of emotion—not the piece’s or performance’s
emotions, but rather those of the composer or performer. There are two
major problems with this “expression theory”. The first is
that neither composers nor performers often experience the emotions
their music is expressive of as it is produced. Nor does it seem
unlikely that a composer could create, or a performer perform, a piece
expressive of an emotion that she had never experienced. This is not
to deny that a composer could write a piece expressive of her
emotional state, but two things must be observed. The first is that
for the expression theory to be an account of musical expressiveness,
at least all central cases of expressiveness must follow this model,
which is not the case. The second is that if a composer is to express
her sadness, say, by writing a sad piece, she must write the right
kind of piece. In other words, if she is a bad composer she might fail
to express her emotion. This brings us to the second major problem for
the expression theory. If a composer can fail to express her emotions
in a piece, then the music she writes is expressive independently of
the emotion she is experiencing. Thus music’s expressiveness
cannot be explained in terms of direct expression.
Those usually cited as classic expression theorists include Tolstoy
(1898), Dewey (1934), and Collingwood (1938). (A classic critique is
Tormey 1971: 97–127.) These theorists have been defended in
recent discussions, however, from accusations that they hold the
simple view outlined above. See, for example, Ridley 2003 and Robinson
2005: 229–57. Jenefer Robinson has attempted to revive the
expression theory, though she defends it as an interesting and
valuable use of music’s expressiveness, rather than an
account of expressiveness itself (2005: 229–347; 2011).
A second way to link music’s expressiveness with actual felt
emotions is through the audience. The “arousal theory” is,
at its simplest, the claim that the expressiveness of a passage of
music amounts to its tendency to arouse that emotion in an
understanding listener. Some problems with this simple version can be
overcome. For instance, some emotions, such as fear, require a
particular kind of intentional object (something threatening), yet
there is no such object at hand when we hear fearful music. Thus it
seems implausible to claim the music’s fearfulness resides in
its arousal of fear in us. But the arousalist can broaden the class of
aroused emotions to include appropriate responses to the
expressed emotion, such as pity. It can also be objected that many
understanding listeners are not moved to respond emotionally to music.
But the arousalist can simply restrict the class of listener to which
his theory appeals to those who are so moved. The main problem with
the theory seems more intractable. Essentially it is that in order for
a listener to respond appropriately to the music, she must discern the
emotion expressed therein. This is most obvious when the response is a
sympathetic, rather than empathetic, one. The listener’s
response depends upon the emotion expressed, and thus the
expressiveness of the music cannot depend upon that response. (A
sophisticated defense of the arousal theory is to be found in
Matravers 1998: 145–224, though see the second thoughts in
Matravers 2011.)
Despite the problems of the arousal theory as the whole story of
musical expressiveness, there is a growing consensus, thanks largely
to the work of Jenefer Robinson (1994, 2005), that our lower-level,
less cognitive responses to music must play some role in the emotional
expressiveness we attribute to it. However, this role is likely to be
a causal one, rather than part of an analysis of what it is for music
to be emotionally expressive.
At the other end of the spectrum from the expression and arousal
theories is “associationism”—the theory that
music’s expressiveness is a matter of conventional association
of certain musical elements, such as slow tempi, with certain
emotional states, such as sadness. Again, though associations must
play some role in some cases of expression—for instance, cases
of particular musical instruments (e.g., the snare drum) being
associated with particular situations (e.g., war)—this role is
likely to be a peripheral one. The main reason is the logical-priority
problem, already encountered by the arousal theory. The expressiveness
of music seems closely related to the resemblance between the dynamic
character of both the music and the emotions it is expressive of. It
is implausible that funeral dirges might just as easily have been in
quick-paced compound time. Even in such cases as the snare drum, it
seems possible that the instrument was chosen for the battlefield in
part due to the expressive character of its sonic profile.
The cliché that music is “the language of the
emotions” is often considered as a possible starting point for a
theory of musical expressiveness. The idea combines the attractive
simplicity of conventionality that associationism makes the basis of
music’s meaning with the formalist notion that music’s
order is to be understood in terms of syntax. (See Lerdahl &
Jackendoff 1983 for a theory along the latter lines.) However,
although Deryck Cooke (1959) and Leonard Meyer (1956) are often cited
as proponents, it is not clear that anyone holds a full-blown version
of the theory. The central problem is the great disparities between
language and music, in terms of the ways in which each is both
syntactic and semantic (Jackendoff 2011). A serious subsidiary problem
is that even if music were about the emotions in the way that
language can be, that would not account for music’s
expressiveness. The sentence “I am sad” is about
the emotions, but it is not expressive of sadness in the way
a sad face is, though I could use either to express my sadness. Most
people agree that music’s relation to emotion is more like that
of a sad face than that of a sentence. (This last criticism is also
applicable to Susanne Langer’s theory (1953) that music is about
the emotions in a symbolic yet non-linguistic way.)
Several theorists have defended accounts of musical expressiveness
known variously as resemblance, contour, or appearance theories (e.g.,
Kivy 1989, though see Kivy 2002: 31–48 for recent qualms; Budd
1995: 133–54; S. Davies 1994: 221–67). The central idea is
that music’s expressiveness consists in the resemblance between
its dynamic character and the dynamic character of various aspects of
people experiencing emotions. The aspects appealed to include the
phenomenology of the experience of the emotion, the emotion’s
typical facial expression, the contour of vocal expression typical of
a person experiencing the emotion, and the contour of bodily behavior
typical of such a person, including “gait, attitude, air,
carriage, posture, and comportment” (S. Davies 2006: 182).
Stephen Davies argues that such theories hold music to be expressive
in a literal albeit secondary sense of the term. We say that a piece
of music is sad in the same sense in which we say that a weeping
willow is sad (S. Davies 2006: 183). Such uses are no more
metaphorical than a claim that a chair has arms.
Jerrold Levinson agrees that there is an important resemblance between
the contour of music expressive of an emotion and the contour of
typical behavioral expressions of that emotion. He objects, however,
that such an account cannot be the whole, or even the most fundamental
part of the story (Levinson 1996a, 2006b). He drives in a wedge
precisely at the point where an appeal is made to the resemblance
between the music and typical behavioral expressions. He asks what the
manner and extent of the resemblance between the two must be,
precisely, in order for the music to count as expressive of some
emotion. After all, as is often said, everything resembles everything
else in all sorts of ways, and so one could point out many
resemblances between a funeral march and an expression of joy, or for
that matter a cup of coffee and sadness. The resemblance theorist must
give some account of why the funeral march, and not the cup of coffee,
is expressive of sadness and not joy. Levinson claims that the obvious
answer here is that the funeral march is
“readily-hearable-as” an expression of sadness. If this is
correct, then the resemblance the music bears to emotional behavior is
logically secondary—a cause or ground of its expressiveness. The
expressiveness itself resides in the music’s disposition to
elicit the imaginative response in us of hearing the music as a
literal expression of emotion. As a logical consequence, the
imaginative experience prompted must include some agent whose
expression the music literally is.
In reply to this kind of objection, Stephen Davies has emphasized the
role of the listener’s response in resemblance theories. Such
responses have always been appealed to by such theories, as evidenced
by Malcolm Budd’s talk of “hearing as” (1995:
135–7), and Peter Kivy’s discussion of our tendency to
“animate” that which we perceive (1980: 57–9). But
Davies now makes the appeal quite explicit and central, devoting as
much space to explication of the response-dependent nature of
expressiveness as to the role of resemblance (2006). To the extent
that the response is one of imaginative animation, there will be
agreement between Levinson and the resemblance theorist. But Davies,
at least, continues to resist Levinson’s theory of imagined
literal expression on two fronts.
The first is in his refusal to accord a role to imagination in our
response to expressive music. For Davies, the response of the
appropriate listener upon which the expressiveness of the music
depends is one of an experience of resemblance (2006:
181–2). In other words, the answer to the question of the manner
and extent to which music must resemble some behavioral expression in
order to qualify as expressive of a particular emotion is simply
“in whatever manner and to whatever extent leads us to
experience the music as resembling the emotion”. No further
attempt at analysis is given, presumably because Davies believes this
is the end of the philosophical line. Further explanation of our
tendency to respond in this way to music will be in some other domain,
such as the psychology of music. Since Davies’s theory posits at
base a contour-recognition experience while Levinson’s posits an
imaginative experience of expression, the link between literal
expression and musical expressiveness looks closer in Levinson’s
theory than in Davies’s. An empirical consequence seems to be
that Davies’s theory will predict weaker emotional responses to
music than Levinson’s. Whether or not this is an advantage or
disadvantage of the theory depends on the empirical facts about how we
respond emotionally to music.
On the second front Davies is more aggressive. He attacks the idea
that we imagine a persona inhabiting the music, or giving rise to it
in some way as the literal expression of its emotional experiences
(1997b; 2006: 189–90; see also Kivy 2002: 135–59; 2006;
Ridley 2007). The simplest objection is that there is empirical
evidence that understanding listeners do not engage in any such
imaginative activity. This is decisive if true, but there is plenty of
room to quibble about our ability to test for the right kinds of
imaginative activity, the selection of the subjects, and so on. A
different kind of objection is that if the persona theory were true,
expressive music could not constrain our imaginative activity in such
a way as to yield convergent judgments of expressiveness among
understanding listeners. That is, different people, or the same person
on different occasions, could imagine a single passage as the
expression of an imagined agent’s anger, excitement, passionate
love, and so on. The problem is compounded when we consider the
narrative(s) that we might imagine to explain the agent’s (or
agents’) emotional progress in an extended work. It is not clear
even how we might individuate one such agent from another, re-identify
an agent over time, and so on. These criticisms seem a little
uncharitable. As mentioned above, Levinson is open to a resemblance
account’s playing an important role in our identification of the
particular emotions expressed in a passage. So Levinson can simply
help himself to whatever level of specificity of emotions expressed
the best resemblance account has to offer. As for the individuation
and re-identification of the imagined agents, no mention has been made
of such complexities so far and, as Levinson says, these “are
matters on which the account of basic musical expressiveness can
remain agnostic” (2006b: 204).
Since both the resemblance and ready-hearability theories make
music’s expressiveness a matter of response-dependence, both
must answer the question of whose responses are to be taken into
account. Both appeal to listeners with understanding of the kind of
music under discussion. This raises the question of what counts as
understanding (a matter considered in
 section 4,
 below). One thing that cannot be appealed to in this connection,
though, is an ability to hear the right emotional expressiveness in
music, for this would render any account circular. Levinson points out
that one can appeal to everything but such understanding of
expressiveness, and thinks that sensitivity to expressiveness will
come along with the rest (1996a: 109). Aside from this, though, there
is the fact that some apparently understanding listeners simply deny
that music is expressive of emotion. Levinson thinks we can reasonably
exclude such listeners from the class whose responses are appealed to
in the analysis of expressiveness, since only those generally disposed
to hear expressiveness are reasonably appealed to in determining the
specific expressiveness of a particular passage, which are the terms
in which he puts his theory.
This suggestion raises the specter of an “error theory” of
music’s expressiveness, that is, a theory that all claims of
emotional expressiveness in music are strictly false. A major burden
of such a theory is to explain away the widespread tendency to
describe music in emotional terms. This has been attempted by arguing
that such descriptions are shorthand or metaphor for purely sonic
features (Urmson 1973), basic dynamic features (Hanslick 1854), purely
musical features (Sharpe 1982), or aesthetic properties (Zangwill
2007). There are many problems with such views. For one thing, they
seem committed to some sort of scheme for reduction of expressive
predicates to other terms, such as sonic or musical ones, and such a
scheme is difficult to imagine (Budd 1985a: 31–6). For another,
anyone not drawn to this theory is likely to reject the claim that the
paraphrase captures all that is of interest and value about the
passage described, precisely because it omits the expressive
predicates (Davies 1994: 153–4). Perhaps Levinson, Davies,
et al., are right that most people hear most music as
emotionally expressive. It is a nice question, however, whether, if
our musical culture fell into the grip of anti-expressivist
formalism—in the future or the past—it would be
appropriate to exclude ourselves from the reference class of listeners
appealed to by such theories as those of Davies and Levinson. If so,
this would point to a kind of high-level contextualism or cultural
relativity about the expressiveness of music, making it a more
contingent matter than most theorists imply. On the other hand, such
an occurrence may be unlikely if our tendency to “animate”
non-sentient objects is deeply rooted in our biology.
There are two main questions asked about our emotional responses to
pure music, apart from what role they play in expressiveness. The
first is analogous to the “paradox of fiction”. It is not
clear why we should respond emotionally to expressive music when we
know that no one is undergoing the emotions expressed. The second is a
variant of the “paradox of tragedy”. If some music arouses
“negative” emotional responses in us, such as sadness, why
do we seek out the experience of such music? I address these questions
in turn.
One might simply deny that we respond emotionally to music. R.A.
Sharpe (2000: 1–83), while stopping short of outright denial,
suggests that our emotional responses to music are a much smaller
component of our understanding experience of it than the philosophical
literature on the topic would suggest (see also Zangwill 2004). Peter
Kivy (1999) goes almost all the way, arguing that those who report
emotional reactions to music are confusing the pleasure they take in
the beauty of the music, in all its expressive individuality, with the
feeling of the emotion expressed.
Though most philosophers appeal to typical experience and empirical
data to reject the plausibility of Kivy’s position, they admit
the problem that motivates it, namely, the conceptual tension between
the nature of music and the nature of the emotions we feel in response
to it. To elaborate, there is some consensus that emotions are
cognitive, in the sense that they take intentional objects—they
are about things—and that the nature of a given
emotion’s intentional object is constrained. For instance, in
order to feel fear, one must believe that there is something
that is threatening (the “intentional object” of
the emotion). When one listens to a sad piece of music, however, one
knows there is nothing literally feeling an emotion of sadness, and
thus it is puzzling that one should be made sad by the experience.
Part of the puzzle can be resolved by acknowledging that not all
emotional responses (broadly construed) are cognitive (Robinson 1994;
2005: 387–400). For instance, it is no more puzzling that one
could be startled by a fortissimo blow to a bass drum than
that one could so respond to a thunderclap. Similarly, we might
respond non-cognitively to basic musical elements such as tension and
release just as we do to the tension we observe in a balloon being
over-inflated, or to the release of doves into the air.
As for higher-order emotional responses, there are at least two
possible explanations. One appeals to the phenomenon of
“emotional contagion” or “mirroring responses”
(S. Davies 1994: 279–307; 2006: 186–8). When surrounded by
moping people, one tends to become sad. Moreover, such a
“mood” is not about some intentional object. One
is not necessarily sad for the mopers, nor whatever they are
sad about, if anything. Similarly, when “surrounded” by
music that presents an appearance of sadness, one might become sad,
but not sad about the music, or anything else (Radford 1991). Jenefer
Robinson has objected that such contagion is only well documented as a
form of non-cognitive response, and in response to restricted cues:
“After all, if living with a basset hound were like living with
a depressed person, would normal folk choose a basset hound as their
life’s companion?” (2005: 387–8). But it may be that
music’s dynamic character is enough for it to cross the
threshold into the realm of resemblances that elicit mirroring
responses from us.
The ready-hearability theorist is at a slight advantage in accounting
for our emotional responses to music’s expressiveness, since
according to that theory one imagines that the music is a
literal expression of emotion. This means that emotional responses to
music’s expressiveness are no more puzzling than emotional
responses to other imagined expressive agents, such as fictional
characters in novels. The advantage is only slight because the
question of how and why we respond emotionally to fictions is itself a
philosophical problem of some magnitude. Nonetheless, there are
several theories available (see entry on
 imagination, section 5.3).
 One difficulty with appealing to a solution to the paradox of fiction
is that it is not clear that our emotional responses to the
expressiveness of music are the same as those to emotionally
expressive characters. For instance, the standard example of an
emotional response to music is being made sad by a funeral march,
while the standard example of emotional response to fiction is
(something like) to feel pity for a sad character. If the former is to
be explained in the same way as the latter, we would expect listeners
to feel pity in response to the funeral march (pity for the
persona imagined to be expressing herself through it). However, it
seems reasonable to ask for more detailed examples since, on the one
hand, we surely do feel sad (in some sense) in response to tragedy
and, on the other, it is not obvious that we do not feel pity
(or imagined pity, or whatever one’s preferred theory of
emotional response to fiction posits) in response to tragic music.
Leaving behind the topic of how and why we respond emotionally to pure
music, I turn to the question of why we seek out music that arouses
“negative” emotions in us, such as sadness, assuming
henceforth that we are in fact aroused to such emotions. (Since this
problem is a close analog of the “paradox of tragedy”,
some of the references below are to literature not explicitly about
music, but the transposition of the arguments to music is not
difficult to imagine. See also
 imagination, section 5.4.
 One obvious suggestion is that our negative emotional response is a
price we are willing to pay for the benefits of engaging with the
piece in question, such as “positive” emotional responses.
While this sort of reasoning may play a role, it cannot be a complete
solution, since for most pieces that elicit negative responses there
are many others that elicit fewer or less intense negative responses
for the same positive payoff. More sophisticated versions of the same
suggestion argue for a more intimate link between the negative
emotional response and the payoff. One such is that we cannot
understand the work we are engaging with without understanding its
expressiveness, which brings the negative response with it (Goodman
1968: 247–51; S. Davies 1994: 311–20; Goldman 1995: 68;
Robinson 2005: 348–78). Closely related is the benefit of an
aesthetic or artistic appreciation of the expressiveness responsible
for the negative response.
Shifting focus from benefits located in the expressive work to those
located in the emotional listener, the oldest suggestion is
Aristotle’s theory of catharsis, according to which our
negative emotional response to negatively expressive art results in a
(positive) psychological purgation of the negative emotions
(Poetics, 6, 1449b21–1450b20). A less therapeutic
approach is the suggestion that, since these emotions are without
“life implications” (that is, as discussed above, we are
not sad about any actual tragic events), we are able to take
advantage of our responses to savor these emotions, gain an
understanding of them, and be reassured that we have the capacity to
feel them (Levinson 1982). A question that must be answered by any
defender of this kind of response is the extent to which it explains,
first, our persistence in seeking out music that elicits negative
emotional experiences and, second, the enjoyment we seem to take in
these negative responses, as opposed to putting up with them for their
related benefits.
A different kind of solution to the problem argues that responses such
as sadness that are evoked by expressive music are not really
negative. Hume (1757) argues, with respect to tragedy, that the
pleasure we take in the mode of presentation of the content of an
artwork does not simply counterbalance the negative emotion evoked,
but rather subsumes and transforms it into a pleasurable feeling.
Kendall Walton argues (also with respect to tragedy) that sadness is
not in itself negative. Rather, it is the situation to which sadness
is the response that is negative. Thus, though we would not seek out
the death of a loved one, given the death we
“welcome” the sorrow (Walton 1990: 255–9).
Similarly, we cannot affect the sadness of a musical work by not
listening to it, and so we welcome our sorrowful response to it as
appropriate. Walton’s approach has the advantage over
Hume’s of not positing a rather obscure psychological process. A
difficulty for both, however, is the extent to which they accord with
our emotional experience in rejecting the characterization of our
sadness as negative.
Stephen Davies (1994: 316–20) argues that the kinds of solutions
given above construe the problem too narrowly. Though he agrees that
we accept the negative responses some music elicits because we are
interested in understanding it, he points out that this gives rise to
the further question of why we should be so interested in
understanding something that brings us pain. His short answer is
“We are just like that” (1994: 317) and he begs off giving
the long answer, since it seems to be the equivalent of giving an
account of human nature or the meaning of life. However, he points out
that human life is suffused with activities that people willingly
engage in despite, or indeed partially because of, the difficulties
they bring about. Many things, from watching the news, through
mountain-climbing, to raising children, are fraught with well-known
difficulties, including negative emotional responses. Yet we
enthusiastically engage in such activities because that is the kind of
creature we are.
Finally, it must be noted that though I have spoken baldly of
“emotions” above, there is, first, a consensus that we do
not respond to music with fully-fledged emotions and, second,
increasing sophistication in philosophical theories of emotions.
Regarding the first point, our emotional responses to music lack many
of the behaviors characteristic of the supposedly felt emotion. Some
take our responses instead to be weaker versions of ordinary emotions
(Davies 1994: 299–307), others take them to share some aspects
of ordinary emotions, such as their characteristic affective states,
but to lack others, such as a specific intentional object (Levinson
1982: 319–22; Radford 1989). A third option is that we respond
to expressive music with “quasi-emotions”, that is, the
affective components of fully-fledged emotions that we
imagine to be fully-fledged (Walton 1990: 240–55).
Apart from debate over which of these proposals most closely matches
our experience, there is the question of how well each of them fits
with the various solutions discussed above to the problem of our
negative responses to music, and with empirical work on the emotions,
which leads me to the second point: There is growing interest in both
the variety of emotions and affective states more broadly, and
non-cognitive aspects of, or alternatives to, cognitive theories of
the emotions (e.g., Robinson 2005; Bicknell 2007, 2009; Cochrane
2010a,b; Budd 2011; S. Davies 2011a,b; Young 2014).
A central topic in the understanding of paradigmatically
representational art forms, such as literature and film, is what
constitutes an acceptable interpretation of a work. One debate
concerns whether there is a single correct interpretation of any work
or multiple acceptable interpretations; another concerns the
constraints on acceptable interpretations, e.g., the extent to which
the artist’s intentions may or should be taken into account.
Though these questions seem equally applicable to musical works (S.
Davies 2002a; Dubiel 2011), most of the literature on understanding
music has focused on the nature of more basic musical understanding,
presumably because this seems more mysterious than the understanding
of language or pictures. (The latter are significant philosophical
topics in their own right, of course, and it is an interesting
question whether there should similarly be a general theory of music
as a medium, independent of questions of music’s artistic or
aesthetic use (Kania 2013a).)
An additional complication is that two arguably distinct activities go
by the name of “interpretation” in music: what might be
called performative and critical interpretation
(Levinson 1993). While a critical interpretation of a musical work
(often called an analysis) is roughly equivalent to an interpretation
of a novel, typically expressed linguistically, a performative
interpretation is a way of playing or singing the work, typically
expressed in a performance of it. It is not easy to clarify the
relationship between these two kinds of musical interpretation, but
see Levinson 1993, Maus 1999, Thom 2007, and Neufeld 2012. For the
remainder of this section, I focus on basic musical understanding.
Animals can hear music in a sense—your dog might be frightened
by the loud noise emitted by your stereo. But we do not hear music in
this way; we can listen to it with understanding. What
constitutes this experience of understanding music? To use an analogy,
while the mere sound of a piece of music might be represented
by a sonogram, our experience of it as music is better
represented by something like a marked-up score. We hear individual
notes that make up distinct melodies, harmonies, rhythms, sections,
and so on, and the interaction between these elements. Such musical
understanding comes in degrees along a number of dimensions. Your
understanding of a given piece or style may be deeper than mine, while
the reverse is true for another piece or style. I may hear more in a
particular piece than you do, but my understanding of it may be
inaccurate. My general musical understanding may be narrow, in the
sense that I only understand one kind of music, while you understand
many different kinds (Budd 1985b: 233–5; S. Davies 2011c:
88–95). Moreover, different pieces or kinds of pieces may call
on different abilities, since some music has no harmony to speak of,
some no melody, and so on. Many argue that, in addition to purely
musical features, understanding the emotions expressed in a piece is
essential to adequately understanding it (e.g., Ridley 1993; S. Davies
1994; Levinson 1990d: 30; Scruton 1997; Robinson 2005: 348–78).
(We have seen, in the previous section, the role this claim plays in
some explanations of why we seek out music that elicits negative
emotional responses.)
Though one must have recourse to technical terms, such as
“melody”, “dominant seventh”, “sonata
form”, and so on, in order to describe specific musical
experiences and the musical experience in general, it is widely agreed
that one need not possess these concepts explicitly, nor the
correlative vocabulary, in order to listen with understanding (Budd
1985b; 245–8; S. Davies 1994: 346–9; Levinson 1990d:
35–41; see DeBellis 1995 and Huovinen 2008 for dissenting
views). However, it is also widely acknowledged that such explicit
theoretical knowledge can aid deeper musical understanding and is
requisite for the description and understanding of one’s own
musical experience and that of others (Kivy 1990).
At the base of the musical experience seem to be (i) the experience of
tones, as opposed to mere pitched sounds, where a tone is
heard as being in “musical space”, that is, as bearing
relations to other tones such as being higher or lower, or of the same
kind (at the octave), and (ii) the experience of movement, as
when we hear a melody as wandering far afield and then coming to rest
where it began. Roger Scruton (1983; 1997: 1–96) argues that
these experiences are irreducibly metaphorical, since they involve the
application of spatial concepts to that which is not literally
spatial. (There is no identifiable individual that moves from place to
place in a melody (S. Davies 1994: 229–34).) Malcolm Budd
(1985b) argues that to appeal to metaphor in this context is
unilluminating since, first, it is unclear what it means for an
experience to be metaphorical and, second, a metaphor is only
given meaning through its interpretation, which Scruton not only fails
to give, but argues is unavailable. Budd suggests that the metaphor
is reducible, and thus eliminable, apparently in terms of
purely musical (i.e., non-spatial) concepts or vocabulary. Stephen
Davies (1994: 234–40) doubts that the spatial vocabulary can be
eliminated, but he is sympathetic to Budd’s rejection of the
centrality of metaphor. Instead, he argues that our use of spatial and
motion terms to describe music is a secondary, but literal, use of
those terms that is widely used to describe temporal processes, such
as the ups and downs of the stock market, the theoretical position one
occupies, one’s spirits plunging, and so on. The debate
continues in Budd 2003, Scruton 2004, and S. Davies 2011d.
Davies is surely right about the ubiquity of the application of the
language of space and motion to processes that lack individuals
located in space. The appeal to secondary literal meanings, however,
can seem as unsatisfying as the appeal to irreducible metaphor. We do
not hear music simply as a temporal process, it might be objected, but
as moving in the primary sense of the word, though
we know that it does not literally so move. Andrew Kania (2015)
develops a position out of this intuition by emphasizing
Scruton’s appeal to imagination while dropping the appeal to
metaphor, arguing that hearing the music as moving is a matter of
imagining that its constituent sounds move (see also de Clercq 2007
and Trivedi 2011: 116–18). Kania explicitly models his theory on
the popular Waltonian theory of fiction (Walton 1990). Whether this is
a benefit or a cost depends on how similar our basic experiences of
music and fictions are (and, of course, on the truth of Walton’s
theory of fiction).
Moving from basic musical understanding of short passages to that of
complex works of instrumental music, Jerrold Levinson makes a case
against what he sees as the paradigmatic conception of musical
understanding as a matter of the apprehension of form (1997). As a
replacement for this “architectonicism”, he promotes
“concatenationism”: the view that basic musical
understanding consists in following the musical and emotional
qualities of passages of music, and transitions between them, that are
short enough to be apprehended as a single experience
(“quasi-hearing”). He qualifies this basic idea
considerably, allowing for the experience of previous parts of the
piece, and anticipation of future parts, to modify one’s
experience of the music in the moment. He also allows that
architectonic awareness may play a role in enhancing one’s
moment-to-moment experience, and may even play an ineliminable part in
the understanding of some pieces. Nonetheless, Levinson maintains that
the part played by architectonic knowledge in basic musical
understanding is minimal, and that the cases where architectonic
knowledge is necessary are very much the exception.
Peter Kivy has taken up the gauntlet on behalf of the
architectonicists (2001; see also S. Davies 2011c: 95–9). While
Kivy acknowledges that the kinds of experiences Levinson champions are
necessary to basic musical understanding, he defends the idea that
grasping the large-scale form of most pieces of Western classical
music, at least, is necessary for an adequate understanding of them.
He does not deny that the experience of the form of a piece in
listening to it is more intellectual than quasi-hearing, but he
rejects Levinson’s argument that it is non-perceptual, and thus
marginal to an adequate experience of it as music. Rather, Kivy
argues, such experience is a matter of bringing one’s
perceptions under sophisticated concepts. (A tactic Kivy does not
consider is an attempt to hoist Levinson with his own contextualist
petard, arguing that even if architectonic listening is non-perceptual
it is a well-established mode of understanding pieces of music in the
Western classical music world, and thus that to argue music must be
understood primarily perceptually is to beg the question.)
Despite the heated debate that Levinson’s view has generated, it
is not clear that there is so much disagreement between the
architectonicist and the concatenationist. Both agree that the aspect
of musical understanding the other emphasizes is a non-negligible
component in the full understanding of a musical work. Levinson has
been explicit since the first publication of his view that he intends
it more as a polemic against and corrective to architectonicism,
rather than as a replacement for it (1997: ix–xi; 1999: 485;
2006a). Perhaps that purpose has now been fulfilled, but see Huovinen
2013 for a revival of the debate and an attempted synthesis.
(For more detailed introductions to these and other topics in musical
understanding, see S. Davies 2011c and Huovinen 2011.)
There are many disputes about the nature of aesthetic and artistic
value, including even whether these are synonymous terms or distinct
concepts. This is not the place to go into those disputes. (For an
excellent introduction, see Stecker 2003b.) With regard to the value
of art in general, there are two central points on which there is some
consensus. First, most philosophers take the value of artworks to be
intrinsic to them, in the sense that the value of a work is tied
essentially to the experience that the work affords. Thus, artworks
are not (properly) valued merely instrumentally, as means to some end,
but “for” or “in” themselves (Budd 1995:
1–16; S. Davies 1987: 198–200; Scruton 1997: 374–6;
Levinson 1992: 15–17). The question that naturally arises next
is what it is about the experience an artwork affords that makes it
valuable. That pleasure is a non-negligible part of the
answer to this question is the second point upon which there is some
consensus (S. Davies 1987: 198–205; Levinson 1992; Kivy 1997b:
212–17). However, concomitant with this consensus is an
acknowledgment that simple pleasure taken, say, in the sensuousness of
the musical sounds is too trivial to ground the great value we
attribute to music. In looking for other sources, the puzzle that
arises is that music is supposed to be an abstract art, par
excellence. If this means that music is divorced from everything
else that concerns us in the “real world” (that is,
extra-musical life), it is puzzling why we should find so valuable the
experiences musical works afford. Like the questions about musical
expressiveness and understanding considered above, this puzzle is most
evident with respect to “pure” instrumental music, though
solutions to it may be applicable to the purely musical aspects of
“impure” musical works such as songs.
There are a couple of dimensions to most solutions of the puzzle of
pure music’s value. One is the extent to which it is agreed that
music really is abstract. To the extent that one thinks that music is
not unrelated to the real world, one will be able to argue
that music’s value is at least no more puzzling than the value
of arts more obviously related to the real world, such as literature
and representational painting and sculpture. (See Ridley 2004 for an
extended critique of taking the concept of “pure” music as
central to musical aesthetics.) The other dimension to most solutions
of the puzzle of pure music’s value is the extent to which one
thinks the abstractness of music is the source of its value. Thus, two
theorists might agree on the extent to which music is related to the
real world (by being expressive, say), yet one locate its primary
value in that expressiveness while the other locates it in its
abstract, purely formal features.
Unsurprisingly, perhaps, those who take the experience of
music’s expressiveness to be a more intimately emotional one
(through being predicated on imaginative engagement with the music,
say), tend to emphasize that experience as more central to musical
understanding, and thus attribute a larger part of music’s value
to its expressiveness. Those, on the other hand, whose theory of the
experience of musical expressiveness is more distanced (a matter of
noticed resemblance, say), tend to place less weight on this element
in their theories of musical value. At one extreme of this spectrum is
the position that denies music to be expressive at all, and thus
cannot attribute music’s value to its expressiveness (most
notably Hanslick 1854; see also Zangwill 2004). Apart from this
extreme position, most theorists agree that music’s value is to
be located in different kinds of experience, including the experience
of formal and expressive features; their disagreements are mostly
about the relative weight of these different kinds of experiences in a
complete account of musical value.
As with the debate between architectonicists and concatenationists,
discussed above, the extent of the disagreement between various
parties to this dispute is not clear. Those defending the value of
music’s expressiveness tend to claim that its contribution to
overall musical value is significant, but many stop short even of
according it primary value, and do not argue against the value of
formal elements of musical works (Ridley 1995: 192–6; Levinson
1982, 1992: 20–2, 1996a: 124–5; Robinson 2005: 413; Young
2014: 150–4). They content themselves rather with pointing out
the ways in which expressiveness can be valuable. These include many
of the features discussed above with respect to our interest in
listening to music that arouses negative affective states in the
listener. To recap, our emotional responses to music’s
expressiveness can enable us to savor, understand, and even, to some
extent, experience emotions in a “safe” way. They can
provide us with a cathartic release, and enable us to participate in a
kind of communication with the composer or communion with other
members of our musical culture (Levinson 1982, 1996a; Higgins 1991,
2012; S. Davies 1994: 271). Emphasizing this last point, Roger Scruton
argues that music’s value is quasi-moral, in that the kinds of
music one responds to, or those valued in a particular culture,
reflect the state of that individual’s or culture’s
“soul” (1997: 380–91; see also S. Davies 1994:
275–6.) Stephen Davies (1987: 207–12) has argued that
there are beneficial consequences of an interest in music in
general, such as heightened emotional and aural sensitivity,
which are not properly valued as consequences of listening to
individual pieces, but which lead us to value musical culture as a
whole (just as we value kindness for its consequences in general,
while rejecting instrumental motivations for kind acts as
inappropriate).
On the other hand, those who defend the value of formal features tend
to argue that the value of those features is primary, and that the
value of music’s expressiveness is overrated. Peter Kivy, for
instance, argues that expressive properties serve merely 
to highlight musical structure, as color might be used by the painter
to emphasize contour or mass. Other expressive properties serve as
structural properties in their own right. (1990: 196) 
Alan Goldman (1992) argues against the idea that music is particularly
suited to the expression of emotion, claiming that representational
arts such as painting and literature are better at this. Moreover, he
disputes the grounds of the value of expressiveness given above. For
example, he denies that music can teach us much about the emotions,
and that we can savor our negative emotional responses to expressive
music. Similarly, after an extensive discussion of the nature of
musical expressiveness, Malcolm Budd argues that such expressiveness
cannot come close to explaining music’s value (1995:
155–7). He points to the facts that much valuable music is not
expressive and that the equal expressiveness of different pieces would
be outweighed in a comparative evaluation by the differences between
them in terms of formal value.
Both Budd and Goldman locate the value of pure music precisely in the
abstractness that to some seems the greatest obstacle to explaining
that value. Budd (1995: 164–71) points out that we have an
extensive interest in abstract forms outside the realm of music, such
as those of natural formations and in the decorative arts, and that
such forms are capable of possessing valued aesthetic properties, such
as beauty, elegance, and so on. Thus, it is no surprise that we value
highly the works of an art of abstract forms. Such artworks
can exhibit such forms at a level of complexity not found in nature or
the decorative arts and, further, can be about their abstract
patterns, as when the first movement of a piano sonata “says
something about” sonata form. Though these claims may be true,
and make the case of music less puzzling by showing it shares the
grounds of its value with other things, they also leave the primary
puzzle largely unsolved, namely, why it is that we find the experience
of abstract forms so valuable. (In Budd’s defense, this puzzle
is no longer one specific to the philosophy of music.)
Goldman (1992), by contrast, emphasizes the detachment from the world
of practical affairs implied by music’s abstractness. The
complexity of great musical works demands the active engagement of our
cognitive faculties, which we find rewarding, yet not in the pursuit
of some practical goal that could be frustrated. However, there are
some links between music and the “real world” in his
account of the value of the musical experience. For one, we value
pieces that lead to a satisfying resolution, particularly if they are
colored with negative affect, since this experience is rare in
everyday life. For another, we feel a particularly close communion
with the minds of the composer and other listeners, since we feel we
are going through an experience just like one they have also had.
Peter Kivy offers a similar, if less detailed, defense of this
“liberating” power of music (1997b: 179–217). One
problem for Kivy’s account is that he maintains both that our
experience of music has “complete freedom from connection with
our workaday world” (1997b: 209), and that the properties of the
music relevant to our experience include, “most importantly, its
expressive properties” (1997b: 205, original emphasis).
Without some account of how our interest in the expressive properties
of a piece does not lead us back to the workaday world (as Kivy
insists such properties do in representational arts, such as
literature and painting) it seems we should prefer a theory, such as
Budd’s or Goldman’s, that provides some account of the
real-world role our experience of these properties plays. These issues
are thrown into sharp relief in the debate over how instrumental
musical works could be “profound” (Kivy 1990:
202–18; 2003; S. Davies 2002b; Dodd 2014b).
The relationship between musical and ethical values (as opposed to
musical examples of more general ethical concerns, such as cultural
appropriation) is an area ripe for investigation. Extant work includes
Higgins 1991; Scruton 1997: 457–508; Gracyk 2007: 153–90;
Hagberg 2008; Kivy 2008; Maus 2011; and Levinson 2013b.
(For introductions to the evaluation of musical works and
performances, see S. Davies 1987, Levinson 1990e, and Gracyk
2011.)