Virtually all modern spacetime theories are now built in the same
way.  The theory posits a manifold of events and then assigns further
structures to those events to represent the content of spacetime. A
standard example is Einstein’s general theory of relativity. As a host
for the hole argument, we will pursue one of its best known
applications, the expanding universes of modern relativistic
cosmology.
 This one example illustrates the core content of the hole
argument. With only a little further effort, the argument can be made
more precise and general. This will be done concurrently in these
 notes,[1]
 intended for readers with some background in differential geometry and
general relativity.
 Here are the two, basic building blocks of modern, relativistic
cosmology: a manifold of events and the fields defined on it.
Manifold of Events. Consider our universe, which
relativistic cosmologies attempt to model. Its spacetime is the
entirety of all space through all time. The events of this spacetime
are generalizations of the dimensionless points of ordinary spatial
geometry.  A geometric point in ordinary spatial geometry is just a
particular spot in the space and has no extension.  Correspondingly,
an event in spacetime is a particular point in a cosmological space at
a particular moment of time.
So far, all we have defined is a set of events. To be a
four-dimensional manifold, the set of events must be a little bit more
organized. In a real spacetime, we have the idea that each event sits
in some local neighborhood of events; and this neighborhood sits
inside a larger neighborhood of events; and so on. That extra
organization comes from the requirement that we can smoothly label the
events with four numbers—or at least we can do this for any
sufficiently small chunk of the manifold. These labels form coordinate
systems. The fact that four numbers are just sufficient to label the
events makes the manifold four-dimensional. We can now pick out
neighborhoods of some event as the set of all points whose spacetime
coordinates differ from our starting event by at most one unit; or two
units; or three units; etc.. That gives us the nestling neighborhoods
of events.  Figure 1 illustrates how a set of events may be made into
a two dimensional manifold by assigning “x” and
“y” coordinates to the events.
 
 Figure 1. Forming a manifold of events
Metrical Structure and Matter Fields. In specifying
that events form a four dimensional manifold, there is still a lot we
have not said about the events. We have not specified which
events lie in the future and past of which other events, how much time
elapses between these events, which events are simultaneous with
others so that they can form three dimensional spaces, what spatial
distances separates these events and many more related
properties. 
 These additional properties are introduced by specifying the metric
field. To see how this field provides that information, imagine all
the curves connecting all pairs of events in spacetime. The
information about times elapsed and spatial distances is given by the
times elapsed and distances along all of these curves. See Figure
2:
 Figure 2. The function of the metric field.
 
 That information could be supplied by a huge catalog that specifies
the spatial or temporal distance between every pair of events along
every curve connecting them. Such a huge catalog would be massively
redundant, however. If we know the distance from A to
B and from B to C along some curve, then we
know the distance from A to C as well. The minimum
information we need is the temporal and spatial distance between each
event and all those (loosely speaking) infinitesimally close to it. That
information is what the metric field provides. It is a “field” since
that information belongs just to one event. We can then piece together
temporal and spatial distance along any curve just by summing all the
distances between successive infinitesimally close points along the
curve.
The matter of the universe is represented by matter fields. The
simplest form of matter—the big lumps that make 
galaxies—can be represented by worldlines that trace out the history of
each galaxy through time. In standard models, the galaxies recede from
one another and this is represented by a spreading apart of the
galactic worldlines as we proceed to later times. See Figure 3:
When Einstein first introduced his general theory of relativity in the
1910s, its novel feature was its general covariance. It was the first
spacetime theory in which one was free to use arbitrary spacetime
coordinate systems.  This feature is now shared by virtually all
modern formulations of spacetime theories, including modern versions
of special relativity and Newtonian spacetime theory.  In its original
form, general covariance was understood “passively”; that is, as a
freedom to describe structures in spacetime by means of arbitrarily
chosen coordinate systems. That freedom proves to be equivalent to
another freedom, known as “active” general covariance.  According to
active general covariance, we are licensed to spread geometrical
structures like metrical fields over the manifold in as many different
ways as there are coordinate transformations. (For a more extensive
account of the relationship between active and passive covariance, see
the Supplementary Document:
 Active and Passive Covariance.)[2]
 The exercising of this freedom is the essential manipulation of the  
hole argument. Figure 4 illustrates one way that we might spread the  
metrical structure and matter fields over the manifold of spacetime  
events:
 Figure 4. One way to spread metric and matter over the manifold.
Figure 5 illustrates a second way:
 Figure 5. Another way to spread metric and matter over the manifold.
 
 We shall call the transformation between the two spreadings a “hole
transformation.” The dotted region is The Hole. The first distribution
of metric and matter fields is transformed into the second in a way
that
 The two different spreadings share one vital characteristic upon
which the hole argument depends: the two spreadings agree completely
on all invariant properties. 
 These invariant properties are, loosely speaking, the ones that are
intrinsic to the geometry and dynamics, such as distance along spatial
curves and time along worldlines of galaxies, the rest mass of the
galaxy, the number of particles in it, as well as a host of other
properties, such as whether the spacetimes are metrically flat or
curved.
 The invariant properties are distinguished from non-invariant
properties. Best known of the non-invariant properties are those
dependent on a particular choice of coordinate system. For example,
just one event in a two-dimensional Euclidean space lies at the origin
of coordinate system, that is, at x=0, y=0. But
which event that is, changes when we change our coordinate system. So
“being at the origin” is not an invariant. The spatial distance
between two points, however, is that same no matter coordinate system
is used to describe the space. It is an invariant.
 While the fields are spread differently in the two cases, they agree
in all invariant properties; so, in invariant terms, they are the
same.  
 This last result actually explains the prevalence of general
covariance. The laws of a spacetime theory are typically stated as
relations between invariant properties. Therefore if they are
satisfied by one spacetime, they must also be satisfied by a transform
of that spacetime that shares all the original’s invariant geometric
properties.
 There is a special relationship between the invariants of a spacetime
theory and its observables, those quantities which are accessible to
observational verification: 
 For example, if one makes a journey from one galaxy to another, all
observables pertinent to the trip will be invariants. These include
the time elapsed along the journey, whether the spaceship is
accelerating or not at any time in its journey, the age of the galaxy
one leaves at the start of the trip and the age of the destination
galaxy at the end and all operations that may involve signaling with
particles or light pulses.
 Therefore, since the two spreadings or distributions of metric and
matter fields of a hole transformation agree on invariants, they also
agree on all observables. They are observationally
indistinguishable.
 Recall our original concern: we want to know whether we can conceive
of spacetime as a substance, that is, as something that exists
independently. To do this, we need to know what in the above
structures represents spacetime. One popular answer to that question
is that the manifold of events represents spacetime. We shall see
shortly that this popular form of the answer is the one that figures
in the hole argument. This choice is natural since modern spacetime
theories are built up by first positing a manifold of events and then
defining further structures on them. So the manifold plays the role of
a container just as we expect spacetime
 does.[4]
 One might wonder if this is the right choice, given that it excludes
the metric field, which contains important information on spatial
distances and times elapsed. Ought that not also to be considered a
part of the containing spacetime as opposed to what is contained
within spacetime?  
 General relativity makes it hard to view the metric field simply as
part of the containing spacetime. For, in addition to spatial and
temporal information, the metric field also represents the
gravitational field. Therefore it also carries energy and
momentum—the energy and momentum of the gravitational field
(although a notorious technical problem in general relativity
precludes identifying the energy and momentum density of the
gravitational field at any particular event in spacetime). This energy
and momentum is freely interchanged with other matter fields in
spacetimes. It is the source of the huge quantities of energy released
as radiation and heat in stellar collapse, for example. To carry
energy and momentum is a natural distinguishing characteristic of
matter contained within spacetime. So the metric field of general
relativity seems to defy easy characterization. We would like it to be
exclusively part of spacetime the container, or exclusively part of
matter the contained. Yet it seems to be part of both.
 The notion that the manifold represents an independently existing
thing is quite natural in the realist view of physical theories. In
that view one tries to construe physical theories literally. If
formulated as above, a spacetime is a manifold of events with certain
fields defined on the manifold. The literal reading is that this
manifold is an independently existing structure that bears
properties.
 So far we have characterized the substantivalist doctrine as the view
that spacetime has an existence independent of its contents. This
formulation conjures up powerful if vague intuitive pictures, but it
is not clear enough for interpretation in the context of physical
theories. If we represent spacetime by a manifold of events, how do we
characterize the independence of its existence? Is it the
counterfactual claim that were there no metric or matter fields, there
would still be a manifold of events? That counterfactual is
automatically denied by the standard formulation which posits that all
spacetimes have at least metrical structure. That seems too cheap a
refutation of manifold substantivalism. Surely, there must be an
improved formulation. Fortunately, we do not need to wrestle with
finding it. For present purposes we need only consider a consequence
of the substantivalist view and can set aside the task of giving a
precise formulation of the substantivalist view.
 In their celebrated debate over space and time, Leibniz taunted the
substantivalist Newton’s representative, Clarke, by asking how the
world would change if East and West were switched. For Leibniz there
would be no change since all spatial relations between bodies would be
preserved by such a switch. But the Newtonian substantivalist had to
concede that the bodies of the world were now located in different
spatial positions, so the two systems were physically distinct.
 Correspondingly, when we spread the metric and matter fields
differently over a manifold of events, we are now assigning metrical
and material properties in different ways to the events of the
manifold. For example, imagine that a galaxy passes through some event
E in the hole. After the hole transformation, this galaxy might not
pass through that event. For the manifold substantivalist, this must
be a matter of objective physical fact: either the galaxy passes
through E or not. The two distributions represent two physically
distinct possibilities.
 That is, manifold substantivalists must deny an equivalence inspired
by Leibniz’ taunt and is thus named after
 him:[5]
 The supplementary document
  illustrates the essential idea of Leibniz equivalence through an
analogy with different map projections of the Earth’s surface.
We can now assemble the pieces above to generate unhappy consequences
for the manifold substantivalist. Consider the two distributions of
metric and matter fields related by a hole transformation. Since the
manifold substantivalist denies Leibniz equivalence, the
substantivalist must hold that the two systems represent distinct
physical systems. But the properties that distinguish the two are very
elusive. They escape both (a) observational verification and (b) the
determining power of cosmological theory.
 
 (a) Observational verification.  We have already noticed
that the two distributions are observationally equivalent.  So the
substantivalist must insist that it makes a physical difference as to
whether the galaxy passes through event E or not. But no
observation can tell us if we are in a world in which the galaxy
passes through event E or misses event E, for
universes with either are observationally equivalent.
 It might be a little hard to see from Figure 6 that the two
distributions are observationally equivalent. In the first
distribution on the left, the middle galaxy moves in what looks like a
straight line and stays exactly at the spatial midpoint between the
galaxies on either side. In the second distribution on the right, all
that seems to be undone. The galaxy looks like it accelerates in
taking a swerve to the right, so that it moves closer to the galaxy on
its right.
 These differences that show up in the portrayal of Figure 6 are all
non-invariant differences. For the right hand distribution, the galaxy
does veer to the right in the figure, but at the same time, distances
between events get stretched as well, just as they get stretched in
the various map projections shown in the supplement,
 Visualizing Leibniz Equivalence Through Map Projections.
 So the galaxy always remains at the spatial midpoint of the galaxies
on either side; it just doesn’t look like it is at the spatial
midpoint from the way the figure is drawn.
 Similarly, an acceleration vector along the galaxy’s worldline
determines whether the galaxy is accelerating. That acceleration
vector is an invariant. So, if the galaxy in the left hand
distribution has a zero acceleration vector, then the corresponding
galaxy in the right hand distribution will also have a zero
acceleration vector. Remember, a hole transformation preserves
invariants. So if a galaxy is unaccelerated in the left hand
distribution, it is also unaccelerated in the right hand
distibution.
 (b) Determinism. The physical theory of relativistic
cosmology is unable to pick between the two cases. This is manifested
as an indeterminism of the theory. We can specify the distribution of
metric and matter fields throughout the manifold of events, excepting
within the region designated as The Hole. Then the theory is unable to
tell us how the fields will develop into The Hole. Both the original
and the transformed distribution are legitimate extensions of the
metric and matter fields outside The Hole into The Hole, since each
satisfies all the laws of the theory of relativistic cosmology. The
theory has no resources which allow us to insist that one only is
admissible.
It is important to see that the unhappy consequence does not consist
merely of a failure of determinism. We are all too familiar with such
failures and it is certainly not automatic grounds for dismissal of a
physical theory. The best known instance of a widely celebrated,
indeterministic theory is quantum theory, where, in the standard
interpretation, the measurement of a system can lead to an
indeterministic collapse onto one of many possible outcomes. Less well
known is that it is possible to devise indeterministic systems in
classical physics as well. Most examples involves oddities such as
bodies materializing at unbounded speed from spatial infinity, so
called “space invaders.” (Earman, 1986a, Ch. III; see also
 determinism: causal)
 Or they may arise through the interaction of infinitely many bodies
in a supertask
 (Supertasks.)
 More recently an extremely simple example has emerged in which a
single mass sits atop a dome and spontaneously sets itself into motion
after an arbitrary time delay and in an arbitrary direction (Norton,
2003, Section 3).
 The problem with the failure of determinism in the hole argument is
not the fact of failure but the way that it fails. If we deny manifold
substantivalism and accept Leibniz equivalence, then the indeterminism
induced by a hole transformation is eradicated. While there are
uncountably many mathematically distinct developments of the fields
into the hole, under Leibniz Equivalence, they are all physically the
same. That is, there is a unique development of the physical fields
into the hole after all. Thus the indeterminism is a direct product of
the substantivalist viewpoint. Similarly, if we accept Leibniz
equivalence, then we are no longer troubled that the two distributions
cannot be distinguished by any possible observation. They are merely
different mathematical descriptions of the same physical reality and
so should agree on all observables.
 We can load up any physical theory with superfluous, phantom
properties that cannot be fixed by observation. If their invisibility
to observation is not sufficient warning that these properties are
illegitimate, finding that they visit indeterminism onto a theory that
is otherwise deterministic in this set-up ought to be warning enough.
These properties are invisible to both observation and theory; they
should be discarded along with any doctrine that requires their
retention.
In sum the hole argument amounts to
 this:[6]
The hole argument was created by Albert Einstein late in 1913 as an
act of desperation when his quest for his general theory of relativity
had encountered what appeared to be insuperable obstacles. Over the
previous year, he had been determined to find a gravitation theory
that was generally covariant, that is, whose equations were unchanged
by arbitrary transformation of the spacetime coordinates. He had even
considered essentially the celebrated, generally covariant equations
he would settle upon in November 1915 and which now appear in all the
text books.
Unfortunately Einstein had been unable to see that these equations
were admissible. Newton’s theory of gravitation worked virtually
perfectly for weak gravitational fields. So it was essential that
Einstein’s theory revert to Newton’s in that case. But try as he
might, Einstein could not see that his equations and many variants of
them could properly mesh with Newton’s theory. In mid 1913 he
published a compromise: a sketch of a relativistic theory of
gravitation that was not generally covariant. (For further details of
these struggles, see Norton (1984).)
His failure to find an admissible generally covariant theory troubled
Einstein greatly. Later in 1913 he sought to transform his failure
into a victory of sorts: he thought he could show that no generally
covariant theory at all is admissible. Any such theory would violate
what he called the Law of Causality—we would now call it
determinism. He sought to demonstrate this remarkable claim with the
hole argument.
In its original incarnation, Einstein considered a spacetime filled
with matter excepting one region, the hole, which was matter free. (So
in this original form, the term “hole” makes more sense than in the
modern version.) He then asked if a full specification of both metric
and matter fields outside the hole would fix the metric field within.
Since he had tacitly eschewed Leibniz Equivalence, Einstein thought
that the resulting negative answer sufficient to damn all generally
covariant theories.
Einstein struggled on for two years with his misshapen theory of
limited covariance. Late in 1915, as evidence of his errors mounted
inexorably, Einstein was driven to near despair and ultimately
capitulation. He returned to the search for generally covariant
equations with a new urgency, fueled in part by the knowledge that
none other than David Hilbert had thrown himself into analysis of his
theory. Einstein’s quest came to a happy close in late November 1915
with the completion of his theory in generally covariant form.
For a long time it was thought that Hilbert had beaten Einstein by 5
days to the final theory. New evidence in the form of the proof pages
of Hilbert’s paper now suggests he may not have. More important, it
shows clearly that Hilbert, like Einstein, at least temporarily
believed that the hole argument precluded all generally covariant
theories and that the belief survived at least as far as the proof
pages of his paper. (See Corry, Renn and Stachel 1997.)
While Einstein had tacitly withdrawn his objections to generally
covariant theories, he had not made public where he thought the hole
argument failed. This he finally did when he published what John
Stachel calls the “point-coincidence argument.” This argument, well
known from Einstein’s (1916, p.117) review of his general theory of
relativity, amounts to a defense of Leibniz equivalence. He urges that
the physical content of a theory is exhausted by the catalog of the
spacetime coincidences it licenses. For example, in a theory that
treats particles only, the coincidences are the points of intersection
of the particle worldlines. These coincidences are preserved by
transformations of the fields. Therefore two systems of fields that
can be intertransformed have the same physical content; they represent
the same physical system.
Over the years, the hole argument was deemed to be a trivial error by
an otherwise insightful Einstein. It was John Stachel (1980) who
recognized its highly non-trivial character and brought this
realization to the modern community of historians and philosophers of
physics. (See also Stachel, 1986.) In Earman and Norton (1987), the
argument was recast as one that explicitly targets spacetime
substantivalism. For further historical discussion, see Howard and
Norton (1993), Janssen (1999), Klein (1995) and Norton
(1987). A thorough, synoptic treatment in four volumes is Renn (2007).
For an account of the appropriation and misappropriation of
Einstein’s point-coincidence argument by the logical empiricists, see
Giovanelli (2013).
There are at least as many responses to the hole argument as authors
who have written on it. One line of thought simply agrees that the
hole argument makes acceptance of Leibniz equivalence compelling. It
seeks to make more transparent what that acceptance involves by trying
to find a single mathematical structure that represents a physical
spacetime system rather than the equivalence class of
intertransformable structures licensed by Leibniz equivalence. One
such attempt involves the notion of a “Leibniz algebra.” (See Earman,
1989, Ch. 9, Sect. 9) It has become unclear that such attempts can
succeed.  Just as intertransformable fields represent the same
physical system, there are distinct but intertransformable Leibniz
algebras with the same physical import. If the formalisms of manifolds
and of Leibniz algebras are intertranslatable, one would expect the
hole argument to reappear in the latter formalism as well under this
translation. (See Rynasiewicz, 1992.)
Another approach seeks to explain Leibniz equivalence and
demonstrate the compatibility of general relativity with the hole
argument through the individuation of spacetime points by means of
“Dirac observables” and an associated gauge fixing
stipulation (Lusanna and Pauri, 2006).
Einstein’s original hole argument was formulated in the context of
general relativity. The hole argument as formulated in Earman and
Norton (1987) applies to all local spacetime theories and that
includes generally covariant formulations of virtually all known
spacetime theories. One view is that this goes too far, that general
relativity is distinct from many other spacetime theories in that its
spacetime geometry has become dynamical and it is only in such
theories that the hole argument should be mounted. (See Earman, 1989,
Ch.9, Section 5; Stachel, 1993; Iftime and Stachel, 2006.)
To critics, the hole argument presents a huge target. It consists of a
series of assumptions all of which are needed to make good on its
conclusion. The argument can be blocked by denying just one of its
presumptions. Different authors have sought to sustain denial of
virtually every one of them.
Perhaps the most promising of these attacks is one that requires the
least modification of the ideas used to mount the hole argument. It is
the proposal that spacetime is better represented not by the manifold
of events alone but by some richer structure, such as the manifold of
events in conjunction with metrical properties. (See, for example,
Hoefer, 1996.)  What motivates this escape is the idea that the
manifold of events lacks properties essential to spacetime. For
example, there is no notion of past and future, of time elapsed or of
spatial distance in the manifold of events. Thus one might be tempted
to identify spacetime with the manifold of events plus some further
structure that supplies these spatiotemporal notions. In relativistic
cosmologies, that further structure would be the metrical
structure. This escape from the hole argument sometimes succeeds and
sometimes fails. In certain important special cases, alternative
versions of the hole argument can be mounted against the
manifold-plus-further-structure substantivalists. (See Norton
1988.)
 A slight and very popular variant allows that each event of the
manifold represents a physical spacetime event, but which physical
event that might be depends on the spreading of metric and matter
fields on the manifold. Thus the indeterminism of the hole
transformation can be eradicated since the metric and matter
properties of an event can be carried with the transformation. (See,
for example, Brighouse, 1994.)
More generally, we may well wonder whether the problems faced by
spacetime substantivalism is an artifact of the particular formalism
described above. Bain (1998, 2003) has explored the effect of a transition
to other formalisms.
The simplest challenge notes that Leibniz equivalence is a standard
presumption in the modern mathematical physics literature and suggests
that even entertaining its denial (as manifold substantivalists must)
is some kind of mathematical blunder unworthy of serious attention.
While acceptance of Leibniz equivalence is widespread in the physics
literature, it is not a logical truth that can only be denied on pain
of contradiction. That it embodies non-trivial assumptions whose
import must be accepted with sober reflection is indicated by the
early acceptance of the hole argument by David Hilbert. (See
 Section 8.2
 above.) If denial of Leibniz equivalence is a blunder so egregious
that no competent mathematician would make it, then our standards for
competence have become unattainably high, for they must exclude David
Hilbert in 1915 at the height of his powers.
The question has been reopened recently by Weatherall (2018). He
argues that intertransformable mathematical structures are taken in
standard mathematical practice to be the same structure. Thus they
should represent the same physical system, precluding denial of
Leibniz equivalence. Roberts (2014, Other Internet Resources) has
responded that Nature, not mathematical practice, should decide
whether two mathematical structures represent the same physical
system. Curiel (2018) argues for a similar triviality conclusion as
Weatherall but on a different basis: there is no physical
correlate to the hole transformation in standard physical practice.
Belot (2018) argues against a single decision univocally in favor or
or contrary to Leibniz equivalence. While allowing that hole
transformations relate systems that are physically the same, he argues
that in some sectors of general relativity, some transformations that
preserve the metric may relate physically distinct systems.
Another challenge seeks principled reasons for denying general
covariance. One approach tries to establish that a spacetime can be
properly represented by at most one of two intertransformable systems
of fields on some manifold. So Maudlin (1990) urges that each
spacetime event carries its metrical properties essentially, that is,
it would not be that very event if (after redistribution of the
fields) we tried to assign different metrical properties to it. Teitel
(2019) has explored a refined version of this essentialist response
but concludes that it fails to improve on standard modal responses to
the hole argument. Butterfield (1989) portrays intertransformable
systems as different possible worlds and uses counterpart theory to
argue that at most one can represent an actual spacetime.
These responses are just a few of a large range of responses of
increasing ingenuity and technical depth. In the course of the
scrutiny of the argument, virtually all its aspects have been weighed
and tested. Is the indeterminism of the hole argument merely an
artifact of an ill-chosen definition of determinism? Is the problem
merely a trivial variant of the philosophical puzzle of inscrutability
of reference? Or are there deep matters of physics at issue? The
debate continues over these and further issues. To enter it, the
reader is directed to the bibliography below.
 The hole argument has had a broader significance in the philosophy of
science in three ways, pertaining to realism about theoretical
entities, to theories of quantum gravity and to the way we should
approach gauge freedoms in physical theories.
 The hole argument has presented a new sort of obstacle to the rise of
scientific realism. According to that view, one should read the
assertions of our mature theories literally. So, if general relativity
describes a manifold of events and a metrical structure, then that is
literally what is there in the view of the strict scientific
realist. To think otherwise, it is asserted, would be to leave the
success of these theories an unexplained miracle. If spacetime does
not really have the geometrical structure attributed to it by general
relativity, then how can we explain the theory’s success?
 Appealing as this view is, the hole argument shows that some limits
must be placed on our literal reading of a successful theory. Or at
least that persistence in such literal readings comes with a high
price. The hole argument shows us that we might want to admit that
there is something a little less really there than the literal reading
says, lest we be forced to posit physically real properties that
transcend both observation and the determining power of our
theory.
 One of the most tenacious problems in modern theoretical physics is
the quantization of gravity. While Einstein’s 1915 general theory of
relativity produced a revolutionary new way of thinking of gravitation
in terms of the curvature of spacetime, it is generally agreed now
that it cannot be the final account of gravity. The reason is that it
is still a classical theory. It does not treat matter in accord with
the quantum theory.
 The problem of bringing quantum theory and general relativity
together in a single theory remains unsolved. (See Quantum Gravity.) 
There are many
contenders, notably string theory and loop quantum gravity. One of the
issues that has been raised is that the hole argument has shown us
that no successful theory of quantum gravity can be set against an
independent, container spacetime. John Stachel was an early proponent
of this outcome of the hole argument. See Stachel 2005 (Other Internet
Resources). This issue has often been raised by loop quantum gravity
theorists specifically as a criticsm of string theoretic approaches,
for string theoretic approaches have such a background spacetime. See
Gaul and Rovelli (1999) (Other Internet Resources) and Smolin (2005)
(Other Internet Resources).
In a related development, Gryb and Thébault (2016) have argued that
the problem of the hole argument and the “problem of time”
of quantum gravity are essentially the same, given suitable
assumptions. For more, see
Problem of Time in the article on quantum gravity.
 The hole argument has played a role in the growing recognition in
philosophy of physics of the importance of gauge transformations. The
analysis of the hole argument provides philosophers of physics a
convenient template when they are trying to decide if something is a
gauge freedom or not.
 To see how this works, let us first review what a gauge freedom is. A
gauge freedom arises whenever we have mathematically distinct
structures in a physical theory that represent the same physical
situation. The simplest and best known example occurs in Newtonian
gravitation theory. If we have a large mass M like the sun,
it exerts an attractive force F on a unit test mass at
distance r from the sun of magnitude
 where G is the universal constant of gravitation. This force
is an observable in the sense that a unit test mass at r will
be accelerated towards the central mass by this force with
acceleration F.
 These same facts about gravity can be expressed in terms of a
potential field U. The large mass M generates a
potential field U at a point r distant from the mass
according to
 The potential field U becomes more negative as r
gets smaller. For r= 6, 4, 3, …, U =
−2, −3, −4, … where we pick the numerically
easy case of GM=12. Since masses move to regions of lower
potential, they fall into this negative potential well.
 A simple rule lets us determine the force pulling a unit mass into
the potential well. That force is just the negative gradient of the
potential field, where (loosely speaking) the gradient is the
difference between potentials at the point in question and an
infinitesimally neighboring point. 
 The important point in all this is that the potential field
U = −GM/r is only one of very many
potential fields compatible with the inverse square law for forces
F = GM/r2. Since the forces
F are recovered from the potential field U by
comparing the values of U at neighboring points in space, we
can add a constant amount—K say—to U
everywhere and still get the same forces. When we compare the
potential field U at neighboring points, the Ks at
each point cancel out. 
 What will become very important below is that this constant
K must be the same everywhere in space only at one instant of
time. Its value can change from moment to moment. So at time
t=0, we may have K=0; or at t=1 we may have
K=27; and so on. To indicate that K may vary with
time t but not spatial position, it is written here as
 K(t).[7]
 If we use the freedom to add the constant K(t) to
U to transform to the new potential field U′,
we arrive at the simplest example of a gauge transformation
  Both fields, U and U′ give the same
observable forces. In so far as determining the gravitational forces
on bodies is concerned, we can use either U or
U′. The choice doesn’t matter. That is taken to signify
that the two potential fields U and U′
represent the same reality. The transformation between them is a gauge
freedom.
 
 This is the simplest and best known example of a gauge freedom in
physics. If we accept Leibniz equivalence, the hole transformation
that relates the two metric fields of the hole argument is another
example of a gauge transformation. Gauge transformations have long
been of importance in particle physics, where they have provided a
powerful means of constructing theories of interaction fields.
 Intertransformable mathematical structures often arise in physical
theories. The philosophical problem is to know when two
intertransformable structures do in fact represent the same physical
situation, so that the transformation is a gauge transformation. 
 Sometimes it is thought that the mere fact that two mathematical
structures are intertransformable is all that is needed for the
transformation to be a gauge transformation and for the differences
between the two structures to correspond to nothing physical. Since
the transformation is invertible, the essential fact is that any
property of the first structure will have a correlated property in the
second; and any property of the second will have a correlated property
in the first. That means that the two structures are, informally
speaking, perfect mathematical images of each other and each could
stand in for the other in any formal application.
 The notion that this transformation must be a gauge transformation
fails, however. That the two structures are perfect mathematical
mirror images of each other is not sufficient to ensure that they must
represent the same physical structures. They certainly may
represent the same physical structures, but they also may
not. To see this, consider a mathematical, three dimensional
Euclidean space used to represent a three dimensional physical space
with Euclidean properties. The mathematical space hosts many flat, two
dimensional surfaces, each of which can be transformed perfectly into
any other. But to say that these transformations are merely gauge
transformations is to collapse the three dimensions of the physical
space into two dimensions. Each two dimensional surface in the
physical space is a perfect copy of every other one; they are not all
the same surface. The transformations between them cannot be gauge
transformations.  
 One of the major outcomes of the discussions of the hole argument was
this:
 Unfortunately that complicates matters. A nice mathematical condition
for when something is a gauge freedom would have been a
straightforward solution to the problem. The sorts of physical
considerations that speak for or against a gauge freedom are more
elusive and less decisive. The template of the hole argument provides
two indicators that some candidate transformation is a gauge
transformation:
A transformation may be a gauge transformation and correspond to no
real change in the physical reality represented if
 The argument that justifies this criterion is the same as was used in
the hole argument; it is just slightly generalized. The presumption is
that it is possible to keep adding further mathematical embellishments
to the mathematics of a physical theory until we are assuredly adding
structures with no physical counterparts. The warning that we have
reached this point of physical superfluity is that we can make changes
to these mathematical structures that make no difference to what we
observe and also outstrip the determining power of the laws of the
theory. When those structures become invisible both to our powers of
observation and to the theory’s laws, we are being warned that we have
gone too far.
 These ideas can be carried further. Earman (2003) has generalized
this approach and suggests that the constrained Hamiltonian formalism
gives principled reason for deciding whether a transformation is a
gauge transformation. (For an entry into philosophical problems
associated with gauge transformations, see the entry on 
 symmetry and symmetry breaking,
especially Section 2.5; and Brading and Castellani (2003).)
 A hole argument type failure of determinism can often be achieved in
field theories, depending, of course, on the specific properties of
the field theory. Here’s an example of one within Newtonian
gravitation theory.
 Let us consider the field surrounding a central mass for which
GM=12. We shall use the transformation
  to create a hole type argument that indicates this transformation is
merely a gauge transformation.
 We start with the field U. It has values
U(6)=−2, U(4)=−3, U(3)=−4
U(2)=−6. If we assume that the mass M is at
rest in space, then the potential field U will be constant
through time. This field is illustrated in Figure 7 below.  It shows
the space around the central mass at different times t=0,
t=1 and t=2. The circles represent points in space
with the same value of U. For example, all those points at
radius r=6 have U=−2. The constancy of the
field in time is represented by the vertical lines that connect points
with the same value of U across time. For example, point at
r=6 at each time instant have the same potential
U=−2.
 Let us select the following K(t). It is 0 for all
time t except in 0 < t < 2. In that time
interval, K(t) grows to a maximum value of
K(t)=2 at t=1. Computing the field
U′ = U+K(t) for
t=1, where K=2, we find values for U′
as follows: U(6)=0, U(4)=−1,
U(3)=−2 U(2)=−4.  Figure 8
illustrates this new field. The result of the transformation has been
to shift regions of a particular value of U′
inwards. For example, at t=0 and t=2,
U′=−2 at radial distance r=6. However at
t=1, U′ has a different value at r=6;
the points with U′=−2 have been shifted inward to
radial distance r=3. As before, the vertical lines connect
points with the same potential U′. They bend inward to
reflect the shift in U′ in the time 0 < t
< 2.
 What are we to make of these differences between the two fields
U and U′? Do they betoken any physical
difference in gravitational realities? The template of the hole
argument suggests that they do not. For the differences in U and U’
are not expressed in any differences in the observationally verifiable
motions of bodies falling in the vicinity of the mass M; the forces in
both fields are the same. Moreover the laws of Newtonian gravitation
theory do not seem to be able to discern which of the two fields ought
to be realized in space. We can fix the field at
U=U′ for all space and all times t
< 0.5 and t > 1.5. Nonetheless, Newtonian gravitation
theory is unable to say which of U and U′ is
the appropriate extension of the potential field into the times 0.5
< t < 1.5. Whatever dfferences there are between
U and U′ in this region outstrip Newtonian
gravitation theory.
 In this example, the region in which determinism fails fills all
space over some short period of time. What was distinctive and
disturbing about the indeterminism of the original hole argument was
that the indeterminism was localized to a region of arbitrarily small
extent in both space and time. Such failures of determinism can arise
in other field theories. After the gauge freedom of Newtonian
gravitation theory, the next best known gauge freedom is in classical
electrodynamics. In that theory, it is possible to set up a hole
argument in which the indeterminism manifests in a region of
arbitrarily small extent in both space and
 time.[8]
Rynasiewicz (2012) has related this gauge freedom to the freedom
asserted by the thesis of the
 conventionality of simultaneity
 in special relativity. He argues that the relation
of distant simultaneity among events is conventional to the same
extent as the intertransformable models of the hole argument are
physically equivalent.
For more applications of hole type arguments see Iftime (2006)
(Other Internet Resources), Healey (1999), Lyre (1999) (Other Internet
Resources) and Rickles (2004) (Other Internet Resources), and Rickles
(2005). 