In the fourth century, Vasubandhu undertook a comprehensive survey of
the Sarvāstivāda School's thought, and wrote a compendium,
Treasury of Knowledge,
(Abhidharmakośakārikā [AK]; Mngon pa
ku 1b–25a) with his own Commentary on the Treasury of
Knowledge (Abhidharmakośabhāṣya [AKB],
Mngon pa ku 26b–258a). This commentary not only offers
an excellent account of the Sarvāstivādin views, including
the theory of the two truths, but also offers a sharp critique of many
views held by the Sarvāstivādins. Vasubandhu based his
commentary on the Mahāvibhāṣā (The
Great Commentary), as the Sarvāstivādins held their
philosophical positions according to the teachings of the
Mahāvibhāṣā. Consequently,
Sarvāstivādins are often known as
Vaibhāṣikas.
The Sarvāstivādin's
 ontology[2]
 or the theory of the two truths makes two fundamental claims.
To put the matter straightforwardly, for the Sarvāstivādins,
wholes and continua are only conventionally real, whereas the atoms
and point-instant consciousness are only ultimately real.
To see how the Sarvāstivādins defend these two claims, we
shall have a close look at their definitions of the two truths. We
will examine conventional truth first. This will provide the argument
in support of the second claim. In the Abhidharmakośa
Vasubandu defines conventional truth/reality as follows: “An
entity, the cognition of which does not arise when it is destroyed
and, mentally divided, is conventionally existent like a pot and
water. Ultimate existence is otherwise.” ([AK] 6.4, Mngon
pa khu 7ab) Whatever is, on this definition, designated as
“conventionally existent” is taken to be
“conventionally real” or conventional truth when the idea
or concept of which ceases to arise when it is physically destroyed,
by means of a hammer for instance. Or its properties such as shape are
stripped away from it by means of subjecting it under analysis,
thereby conceptually excluding them. A pot and water are designated as
conventionally existent therefore conventionally real for the concept
“pot” ceases to exist when it is destroyed physically, and
the concept “water” no longer arises when we conceptually
exclude from it its shape, colour etc.
On the Sarvāstivādin definition, for an entity to be real,
it does not need to be ultimately real, exclusively. For a thing to be
ultimately real is for that thing to be “foundationally
existent” (dravya-sat / rdzas
 yod)[3]
 in contrast with being “compositely existent”
(avayavidravya / rdzas grub). By “foundationally existent”
the Sarvāstivādin refer to the entity which is fundamentally
real, the concept or the cognition of which is not dependent on
conceptual construction, hence not conceptually existent
(prajñaptisat) nor a composition of the aggregative phenomena.
In the case of foundational existent there always remains something
irreducible to which the concept of the thing applies, hence it is
ultimately real. A simple entity is not reducible to conceptual forms,
or conventional designations, nor is it compositely existent entity.
We will have lot more to say on this point shortly.
Pot and water are not the foundational entities. They are rather
composite entities (avayavi-dravya / rdzas grub). By composite entity,
we mean an entity or existent which is not fundamental, primary or
simple, but is rather a conceptually constructed
(prajñaptisat), composition of various properties, and is thus
reducible both physically and logically.
Hence for the Sarvāstivādin, conventional reality
(samvṛtisatya), composite-existence (avayavi-dravya / rdzas
grub), and the lack of intrinsic reality (niḥsvabhāva) are
all equivalents. A conventional reality is therefore characterised as
a reducible conventional entity on three grounds: (i) conventional
reality is both physically and logically reducible, as it
disintegrates when it is subjected to physical destruction and
disappears from our minds when its parts are separated from it by
logical analysis; (ii) conventional reality borrows its identity from
other things including its parts, concepts etc., it does not exist
independently in virtue of its intrinsic reality
(niḥsvabhāva), the exclusion of its parts and concepts thus
affects and reduces its inherent nature; and (iii) conventional
reality is a product of mental constructions, like that of
conventionally real wholes, causation, continuum etc, and it does not
exists intrinsically.
The definition of the ultimate reality, as we shall see, offers the
Sarvāstivādin response to the claim that ultimate reality
consists of irreducible atoms and point-instant moments. In glossing
the [AK] 6.4 verse his commentary explains that ultimate reality is
regarded as ultimately existent, one that is both physically and
logically irreducible. Vasubandhu supplies three arguments to support
this: (i) ultimate reality is both physically and logically
irreducible, as it does not disintegrate when it is subjected to
physical destruction and that its identity does not disappear when its
parts are separated from it under logical analysis; and (ii) ultimate
reality does not borrow its nature from other things including its
parts. Rather it exists independently in virtue of its intrinsic
reality (svabhāva), the exclusion of its parts thus does
not affect its inherent nature; and (iii) it is not a product of
mental constructions, like that of conventionally real wholes,
causation, continuum etc. It exists intrinsically ([AKB] 6.4,
Mngon pa khu 214a).
Ultimate reality is of two types: the compounded
(saṁskṛta) ultimate, and the uncompounded
(asaṁskṛta) ultimate. The uncompounded ultimate consists
of (a) space (akāśa), and (b)
nirvāṇa—analytical cessation
(pratisaṁkyā-nirodha) and non-analytical cessation
(apratisaṁkhyā-nirodha). These three ultimates are
uncompounded as each is seen as being causally unconditioned. They are
nonspatial concepts. These concepts do not have any physical referent
whatsoever. Space is a mere absence of entity. Analytical and
nonanalytical cessations are the two forms of nirvāṇa,
which is simply freedom from afflictive suffering, or the elimination
of afflictive suffering. These concepts are not associated in positing
any thing that can be described as remotely physical. They are thus
the concepts that are irreducible physically and logically.
The compounded ultimate consists of the five aggregates—material
aggregate (rūpa), feeling aggregate (vedanā),
perception-aggregate (saṁjñā), dispositional
aggregate (saṁskāra), and consciousness-aggregate
(vijñāna)—since they are causally produced, and the
ideas of each aggregate are conceived individually rather than
collectively. If the aggregates, the ideas of which are conceived
collectively as a whole(s) or a continuum/continua, they could not be
ultimately real. The collective concepts of the aggregate as a
“whole” or as a “continuum” subject to
cessation as they cease to appear to the mind, get excluded from the
conceptual framework of the reality of the five aggregates when they
are logically analysed.
The
 philosophers[4]
 who championed this view are some of the best-known Indian logicians
and epistemologists. Other great names who propogated the tradition
include Devendrabuddhi (?), Śākhyabuddhi (?), Vinitadeva
(630–700), Dharmottara (750–810), Mokṣakaragupt (ca.
1100–1200). Dignāga (480–540) and Dharmakīrti
(600–660) are credited to have founded this school. For the
theory of the two truths in the Sautrāntika we will need to rely
on the following texts:
Broadly, all objects of knowledge are classified into two realities
based on the ways in which right-cognition (pramāṇa)
engages with its object. They are either directly accessible
(pratyakṣa), which constitutes objects that are obvious
to cognition, or they are directly inaccessible
(parokṣa), which constitutes objects that are occulted,
or obscured from cognition. A directly accessible object is
principally known by a direct perceptual right-cognition
(pratyaṣa-pramāṇa), whereas a directly inaccessible
object is principally known by an inferential right-cognition
(anumāna-pramāṇa).
Of the two types of objects, some are ultimately real while others are
only conventionally real, and some are not even conventionally real,
they are just unreal, or fictions. In defining ultimate truth in the
Sautrāntika tradition, we read in Dharmakīrti's [PVK]:
“That which is ultimately causally efficient is here an
ultimately existent (paramārthasat). Conventionally existent
(saṁvṛtisat) is otherwise. They are declared as the
definitions of the unique particular (svalakṣaṇa) and the
universal (sāmāṅyalakṣaṇa)”
(Dharmakīrti [PVK] Tshad ma ce 118b).
Ultimate truth is, on this definition, a phenomenon (dharma) that is
ultimately existent, and ultimately existent are ultimately causally
efficient. Phenomenon that is ultimately causally efficient is
intrinsically or objectively real, existing in and of itself as a
“unique particular”
 (svalakṣaṇa).[5]
 By “unique particular” Dharmakīrti means ultimately
real phenomenon—dharma that is self-defined, uniquely
individual, objectively real, existing independent of any conceptual
fabrication, ultimately causally efficient (artha), a dharma which
serves as an objects of direct perception, dharma that presents itself
to the cognitions as distinctive/unique individuals.
In the [PVT] Dharmakīrti characterises (Tshad ma ce
274b–279b) all ultimately real unique particulars exist as
distinct individuals with their own intrinsic natures. And they
satisfy three criteria:
So “determinate intrinsic natures of the unique
particulars,” Dharmakīrti argues in [PVT] “are not
accidental or fortuitous since what is not determinate cannot be
spatially, temporally and ontologically determinate” (Tshad
ma ce 179a).
The unique particulars are, Sautrāntika claims, ultimately real,
and they supply us four arguments to support the claim:
(1) Unique particulars are causally efficient phenomena
(arthakriyāsamartha) ([PVT] Tshad ma ce 179a) because:
(a) they have ability to serve pragmatic purpose of life—fulfil
the objectives in our life, and (b) ability to produce a variety of
cognitive images due to their remoteness or proximity. (Dharmottara's
Nyābinduṭīkā Tshad ma we 36b–92a)
Both of these abilities must be associated exclusively with objects of
direct perception (Tshad ma we 45a).
(2) Unique particulars present themselves only to a direct perceptual
cognition as distinct and uniquely defined individuals because unique
particulars are, as Dharmakīrti's Nyāyabindu points
out “the objects whose nearness or remoteness presents the
difference of cognitive image” (Tshad ma ce 231a) and
that object alone which produces the impression of vividness according
to its remoteness or proximity, exists ultimately
(DharmottaraTshad ma we 44b–45a).
(3) Unique particulars are not denotable by language since they are
beyond the full grasp of any conceptual mind
(śabdasyāviśaya). Although unique particulars are
objective references of language and thought, and we may have firm
beliefs about them, conceptual mind does not fully grasp their real
nature. They are ultimately real, directly cognisable by means of
certain perception without reliance on other factors (nimitta) such as
language and thought. Therefore they must exist. They are the sorts of
phenomenon whose cognition would not occur if they are not objectively
real.
In the Sautrāntika ontology ultimately real/existent (synonymous)
unique particulars are classified into three kinds:
The Sautrāntika's theory of ultimate truth mirrors its ontology
of flux in which unique particulars are viewed as spatially
infinitesimal atoms constituting temporally momentary events
(kṣaṇika) or as successive flashes of consciousnesses,
cognitive events, all devoid of any real continuity as substratum.
Unique particulars are ultimately real, although they are not enduring
substances (dravyas) inhering in it's qualities (guṇas) and
actions (karmas) as the Naiyāyika-Vaiśeṣika claims.
They are rather bundles of events arising and disappearing instantly.
Even continuity of things and motion are only successive events
closely resembling each other. On this theory ultimate realities are
momentary point instants, and Vasubandhu and Dharmakīrti both
argue that no conditioned phenomenon, therefore, no ultimately real
unique particulars, endure more than a single moment—hence they
are momentary instants (kṣaṇika).
Four closely interrelated arguments provide the defence of the
Sautrāntika's claim that ultimately real unique particulars are
momentary instants. Vasubandhu and Dharmakīrti both employ the
first two arguments. The third argument is one Dharmakīrti
specialises in his works.
(1) Ultimately real unique particulars are momentary instants because
their perishing or destruction is spontaneous to their becoming. This
follows because (i) unique particulars are inherently self-destructive
(Vasubandhu [AKB], Mngon pa khu 166b–167a), and (ii)
their perishing or cessation is intrinsic and does not depend
on any other extrinsic causal factors (Dharmakīrti,
[PVK] Tshad ma ce 102a; [PVT], Tshad ma ce
178ab).
(2) The ultimately real unique particulars are momentary instants
because they are motionless, and do not move from one temporal or
spatial location to another. They perish just where they were born
since nothing exists later than its acquisition of existence
(Vasubandhu [AKB] Mngon pa khu 166b).
(3) The third argument proves momentary instants of unique particulars
from the inference of existence (sattvānumāna). This is a
case of the argument from identity of existence and production
(svabhāvahetu). All unique particulars which are ultimately
existent, are necessarily produced, since only those that are
ultimately existent, insofar as Dharmakīriti is concerned, are
able to a perform causal function—i.e., to produce effects. And
causally efficient unique particulars imply constant change for the
renewal and the perishing of their antecedent identities, therefore,
they are momentary.
Finally (4), unique particulars are ultimately real not only on the
ground that they constitute the final ontological status, but also
because it forms the basis of the Sautrāntika soteriology. The
attainment of nirvāṇa — the ultimate freedom from the
afflictions of life—for the Sautrāntika, according to
Dharmakīrti's Vādanyāya, has an immediate
perception of the unique particulars as its necessary condition
(Tshad ma che 108b–109a).
Dharmakīrti defines conventional truth, in his [PVK], as dharma
which is “conventionally existent” and he identifies
conventional truth with the “universal”
 (sāmānya-lakṣaṇa)[7]
 just as he identifies ultimate truth with unique particular
(Tshad ma ce 118b). When a Sautrāntika philosopher
describes a certain entity as a universal, he means a conceptual
entity not apprehended by virtue of its own being. He means a general
property that is conceptually constructed, appearing to be something
common amongst all items in a certain class of objects. Unlike
Nyāya-Vaiśeṣika view where universals are regarded as
objectively real and eternal entities inhering in substances,
qualities and particulars, universals, for the Sautrāntika are
pure conceptual constructs. Sautrāntika holds the view known as
nominalism or conceptualism—the view that denies universals any
independent extramental objective reality existing on their own apart
from being mentally constructed.
While unique particulars exist independently of linguistic convention,
universals have no reality in isolation from linguistic and conceptual
conventions. Thus, universals and ultimate reality are mutually
exclusive. Universals are therefore only conventionally real, lacking
any intrinsic nature, whereas unique particulars are ultimately real,
and exist intrinsically.
The Sautrāntika defends the claim that universals
(sāmānya-lakṣaṇa) are only conventional reality
for the following reasons (tshad ma ce 118b):
According to the Sautrāntika philosophy, language does not
describe reality or unique particulars positively through real
universals as suggested by the Naiyāyikas. The Sautrāntika
developed an alternative nominalist theory of universal called the
apoha-theory in which language is seen to engage with reality
negatively by means of elimination or exclusion of the other
(anyāpoha / gzhan sel). On this theory, the function of language,
specifically naming, is to eliminate object from the class of
those objects to which language does not apply.
In brief the Sautrāntika's theory of the two truths rests on
dichotomising objects between unique particulars, which are understood
as ultimately reals, dynamic, momentary, causally effective, the
objective domain of the direct perception; and universals, which are
understood as only conventionally reals, conceptually constructed,
static, causally ineffective and the objective domain of the
inferential cognition.
The Vaibhāṣika's realistic theory of the two truths and the
Sautrāntika's representationalist theory of the two truths both
affirm the ultimate reality of physical objects constituted by atoms.
The Yogācāra rejects physical realism of both the
Vaibhāṣika and the Sautrāntika, although it agrees
with the Sautrāntika's representationalist theory as far as they
both affirm representation as the intentional objects in perception
and deny in perception a direct access to any external object. Where
they part their company is in their response to the questions: what
causes representations? Is the contact of senses with physical objects
necessary to give rise to representations in perception? The
Sautrāntika's reply is that external objects cause
representations, given that these representations are intentional
objects there is indeed a contact between senses and external objects.
This affirmative response allows the Sautrāntika to affirm
reality of external objects. The Yogācārin however replies
that “subliminal impressions” (vāsanās) from
foundational consciousness (ālayavijñāna) are the
causes of the mental representations, and given that these impressions
are only internal phenomena acting as intentional objects, the contact
between senses and external objects is therefore rejected even
conventionally. This allows the Yogācārin to deny even
conventional reality of all physical objects, and argue that all
conventional realities are our mental representations, mental
creations, cognitions etc.
The central thesis in the Yogācāra philosophy, the theory of
the two truths echoes is the assertion that all that is conventionally
real is only ideas, representations, images, creations of the mind,
and that there is no conventionally real object that exists outside
the mind to which it corresponds. These ideas are only objects of any
cognition. The whole universe is a mental universe. All physical
objects are only fiction, they are unreal even by the conventional
standard, similar to a dream, a mirage, a magical illusion, where what
we perceive are only products of our mind, without a real external
existence.
Inspired by the idealistic tendencies of various sūtras
consisting of important elements of the idealistic doctrines, in the
third and the fourth centuries many Indian philosophers developed and
systematised a coherent Idealist School. In the beginning of the
Viṃśatikā Vasubandhu treats citta,
manas, vijñāna, vijñāpti as
synonymous and uses these terms as the names of the idealistic school.
The chief founders were Maitreyanāth (ca. 300) and
Asaṅga (315–390), propagated by Vasubandhu
(320–380), Dignāga (480–540) Sthiramati (ca.
500), Dharmapāla (530–561), Hiuan-tsang (602–664),
Dharmakīrti (600–660), Śāntarakṣita
(ca.725–788) and Kamalaśīla (ca.740–795). The
last two are Yogācāra-Mādhyamikas in contrast with the
earlier figures who are identified as Yogācārins.
Like other Buddhist schools, the theory of the two truths captures the
central Yogācāra doctrines. Maitreyanāth asserts in his
Verses on the Distinction Between Phenomena and Reality
(Dharmadharmatāvibhaṅga-kārikā,
DDVK; Sems tsam phi 50b–53b)—“All this is
understood to be condensed in two categories: phenomena (dharma) and
reality (dharmatā) because they encompass all.”
(DDVK 2, Sems tsam phi) By “All”
Yogācārin means every possible object of knowledge, and they
are said to be contained in the two truths since objects are either
conventional truth or ultimate truth. Things are either objects of
conventional knowledge or objects of ultimate knowledge, and a third
category is not admitted.
Etymologically the term conventional truth covers the sense of what we
ordinarily take as commonsensical truths. However, in contrast with
naïve realism associated with common sense notions of truths, for
the Yogācāra the term “conventional truth” has
somewhat a negative connotation. It exclusively refers to objects of
knowledge like forms, sound etc., the mode of existence or mode of
being which radically contradicts with the mode of its appearance, and
thus they are false, unreal, and deceptive. Forms, sounds, etc., are
defined as conventional entities in that they are realities from the
perspective of, or by the force of, three forms of convention:
A conventional truth is therefore a truth by virtue of being
fabricated by the conceptual mind; or it is truth erroneously
apprehended by means of the dualistic consciousness; or it is true
concept, meaning, signified and designated by a convenient
designator/signifier.
Because the Yogācārins admit three conventions, it also
admits three categories of conventional truths:
The first and the last are categories of imaginary phenomena
(parikalpita) and the second is dependent phenomena (paratantra).
The Yogācāra's claim that external objects are not even
conventionally real, what is conventionally real are only our
impressions, and mental representations is one Vasubandhu closely
defends by means of the Yogācāra's theory of the three
natures (trisvabhāva). In his Discernment of the
Three Natures (Trisvabhāvakārikā, or
Trisvabhāvanirdeśa [TSN]; Sems tsam shi
10a–11b), Vasubandhu explains that the Yogācāra
ontology and phenomenology as consisting of the unity of three natures
(svabhāva):
The first two account for conventional truth and the latter ultimate
truth. We shall consider the import of the three in turn. 
First, Vasubandhu defines the dependent nature as: (a) one that exists
due to being causally conditioned
(pratyayādhīnavṛttitvāt), and (b) it is the basis
of “what appears” (yat khyāti) mistakenly in our
cognition as conventionally real, it is the basis for the
“unreal conceptual fabrication” (asatkalpa) which is the
phenomenological basis of the appearance of reified subjects and
objects ([TSN] 2 Sems tsam shi 10a). The implications of the
Yogācārin expression “what appears” to describe
the dependent nature are therefore twofold: (a) that the things that
appear in our cognitions are exclusively the representations, which
are the manifest forms of the subliminal impressions, and (b) that the
entire web of conventional reality, which presents itself to our
cognitions phenomenologically in various ways, is exclusively the
appearance of those representations. Apart from those representations,
consciousnesses, which appear to be external objects, there is no
conventionally real external content which corresponds to what
appears. 
Second, in contrast with the dependent nature which is the basis of
“what appears” (yat khyāti), the imaginary nature
(parikalpita), as Vasubandu defines it, is the mode of
appearance “as it appears” (sau yathā khyāti) on
the ground that its existence is only an “unreal conceptual
fabrication” (asatakalpo) ([TSN] 2, Sems tsam chi 10a).
The imaginary nature is only an “unreal conceptual
construction” because of two reasons: (i) it is the dependent
nature—representations—merely dually reified by the mind
as an ultimately real subject, or self, or eg, and (ii) the imaginary
nature is dualistic reification of beings and objects as existing
really and externally, there is no such reality. 
Third, given the fact that the dependent nature is devoid, or free
from this duality, the imaginary nature is a mere superimposition on
it. Hence nonduality, the perfect nature (pariniṣpanna) is
ultimate reality of the dependent nature. 
In the Commentary on the Sūtra of Intent
(Ārya-saṃdhinirmocana-sūtra, Mdo sde
ca 1b–55b) it is stated that “Reality as it is, which is
the intentional object of a pure consciousness, is the definition of
the perfect nature. This must be so because it is with respect to this
that the Victorious Buddha attributed all phenomena as natureless,
ultimately.” (Mdo sde ca 35b) Vasubandhu's [TSN]
defines “the perfect nature (pariniṣpanna) as the
eternal nonexistence of ‘as it appears’ of ‘what
appears’ because it is unalterable.” ([TSN] 3, Sems
tsam chi 10a) “What appears” is the dependent
nature—a series of cognitive events, the representations.
“As it appears” is the imaginary nature—the unreal
conceptual fabrication of the subject-object duality. The
representations, (i.e., the dependent nature) appear in the cognition
as if they have in them the subject-object duality, even though the
dependent nature is wholly devoid of such subject-object duality. The
perfect nature is therefore this eternal nonexistence of the imaginary
nature—the duality—in the dependent nature. 
Vasubandhu defines the perfect nature as the ultimate truth and
identifies it with mere-consciousness. “This is the ultimate
(paramārtha) of the dharmas, and so it is the reality
(tathatā) too. Because its reality is like this all the time, it
is mere consciousness.” (Triṃ 25, Sems
tsam shi 3b) Accordingly Sthiramati's Commentary on the
Thirty Verses (Triṃśikābhāṣya
[TriṃB], Sems tsam shi 146b–171b), explains
“ultimate” (paramārtha) here as refering to
“’ world-transcending knowledge’
(lokottara-nirvikalpa-jñāna) in that there is
nothing that surpasses it. Since it is the object of [the transcendent
knowledge], it is the ultimate. It is even like the space in having
the same taste everywhere. It is the perfect nature, which is
stainless and unchangable. Therefore, it is known as the
‘ultimate.’” ([TriṃB], Sems tsam shi
169ab) 
So, as we can see the dependent and the imaginary natures together
explain the Yogācāra's conventional reality and the perfect
nature explains its conception of the ultimate reality. The first two
natures provide an argument for the Yogācāra's empirical and
practical standpoints (vyavahāra), conventional truth and the
third nature an argument for its ultimate truth. Even then the
dependent nature alone is conventionally real and the perfect nature
alone is ultimately real. By contrast, the imaginary nature is unreal
and false even by the empirical and practical standards. This is true
in spite of the fact the imaginary nature is constitutive of the
conventional truth. 
So, the perfect nature—nondual mind, i.e., emptiness
(śūnyatā) of the subject-object duality—is the
ultimate reality of the Yogācāra conception. Ultimate truth
takes various forms as it is understood within the Yogācārin
tradition. As Maitreyanātha states, ultimate truth takes three
primary forms—as emptiness it is the ultimate object, as
nirvāṇa it is the ultimate attainment, and as nonconceptual
knowledge it is the ultimate realization ([MVK], Sems tsam
phi 42B). 
Yogācāra Arguments
The core argument in support of the only mind thesis is the
impossibility of the existence of external objects. Vasubandhu
develops this argument in his Viṃ 1–27 as does
Dignāga in his Examination of the Intentional Object
(Ālambanaparīkṣāvṛtti,
ĀPV 1–8, Tshad ma ce 86a–87b)
against the atomists (Naiyāyikas-Vaiśeṣika and
 Ābhidharmikas[8]).
 Against the Yogācāra idealist thesis the realist opponents,
as Vasubandhu observes, raise three objections:—“If
consciousness (does) not (arise) out from an object (i) neither the
determination or certainty (niyama) in regard to place (deśa) and
time (kāla), (ii) nor the indetermination or unexclusiveness
(aniyama) in regard to the series of (consciousness) (iii) nor the
performance of the (specific) function (kṛtyakriya) are
logically possible (yuktā)” (Viṁ 2, Sems
tsam shi 3a).
Vasubandhu offers his Yogācāra reply in the
Viṃ to these realist objections and insists that the
idealist position does not face these three problems. The first
problem is not an issue for the Yogācāra since dreams
(svapna) account for the spatio-temporal determination. In dreams, in
the absence of an external object, one still has the cognition of a
woman, or a man in only determinate / specific time and place, and not
arbitrarily and not everywhere and not in any moment. Neither is the
second problem of the lack of an intersubjective agreement an issue
for the Yogācāra. The case of the pretas (hungry-ghosts)
account for intersubjective agreement as they look at water they
alone, not other beings, see rivers of pus, urine, excrement, and
collectively hallucinates demons as the hell guardians. Although pus,
urine, excrement and hell guardians are nonexistent externally, due to
the maturation of their collective karma, pretas exclusively
experience the series of cognitions (vijñapti), other beings do
not encounter such experience (Viṃ 3, Sems
tsam shi). Nor is the lack of causal efficacy of the impressions
or representations in the consciousness a problem for the
Yogācāra. As in the case of wet dreams, even without a union
of the couple, the emission of semen can occur, and so the
representations in the consciousness are causally efficient even
without the externally real object.
Yogācāra's defensive arguments against the realist
challenges are quite strong. However unless Yogācāra is able
to undermine the core realist thesis—i.e., reality of the
external objects—and its key supporting argument—the
existence of atoms—then the debate could go either way.
Therefore Yogācāra shows the nonexistence, or unreality of
the atoms as the basis of the external object to reject the realist
position.
Yogācāra's impressions-only theory and the
Sautrāntika's representationalist theory both explain our sensory
experience (the spatio-temporal determinacy, intersubjective
agreement, and causal efficacy). They agree on what the observables
are: mental entities, including mental images but also emotions such
as desires. They also agree that karma plays vital role in explaining
our experience. The realist theory, though, according to
Dignāga's Investigation About the Support of the
Cognition (Ālambanaparīkṣāvṛ
tti [ĀlamPV]) has to posit the reality of additional
physical objects, things that are in principle unobservable, given
that all we experience in the cognition are our impressions
([ĀlamPV], Tshad ma ce 86a).
If the realist thesis were correct, then there would be three
alternatives for the atoms to act as the intentional objects of
cognition.
Of the three alternatives: (1) points to the unity of a thing
conceived as a whole; and (2) and (3) point to the
multiplicity looking at the things as loose atoms, i.e.,
composite atoms. Not one of the three possibilities is, on
Yogācāra's account, admissible as the object of cognition
however. The first is inadmissible because nowhere an external object
is grasped as a unity, whole, one apart
from its parts ([ĀlamPV] Tshad ma ce 86b). The second is
inadmissible because when we see things we find that the atoms are not
perceived individually as one by one ([Viṃ] 13, Sems
tsam shi 3b). The third alternative is also rejected because the
atoms in this case cannot be proved to exist as an indivisible
([Viṃ] 14, Sems tsam shi 3b).
Further, if there were a simultaneous conjunction of an atom with
other six atoms coming from the six directions, the atom would have
six parts because that which is the locus of one atom cannot be the
locus of another atom. If the locus of one atom were the locus of the
six atoms, which were in conjunction with it, then since all the seven
atoms would have the same common locus, the whole mass constituted by
the seven atoms would be of the size of a single atom, because of the
mutual exclusion of the occupants of a locus. Consequently, there
would be no visible mass (Viṃ12, Sems tsam shi
3b).
Since unity is an essential characteristic of being the whole, or
composite whereas indivisibility an essential characteristic of being
an atom when both the unity and individuality of the atoms are
rejected, then the whole and indivisible atoms are no longer
admissible. Therefore, Vasubandhu sums up the Yogācāra
objections against the reality of the external sense-objects
(āyatanas) as: “An external sense-object is unreal because
it cannot be the intentional object of cognition either as (1) a
single thing or (2) as a multiple in [isolated] atoms; or (3) as a
aggregate because the atom is not proven to exist”
(Viṃ11, Sems tsam shi 3b).
The realist insists that the external sense objects are real and that
their reality is ascertained by the various means of knowledge
(pramāṇas) of which perception (pratyakṣa) is the
most important. If the external sense objects are nonexistents, there
can be no intentional objects, then cognition would not arise. Since
cognitions do arise, there must be external objects as their
intentional objects.
To this objection, Yogācāra employs two arguments to refute
the realist claim and to establish the mechanism of cognition, which
takes place without the atoms of an external object. The first
argument shows that atoms do not satisfy the criterian of being the
intentional object, therefore they do not cause the perception.
“Perceptual cognition [takes place] just like in dreams and the
like [even without an external object]; moreover, when that
[cognition] occurs, the external object is not seen; how can it be
thought that this is a case of perception?”
(Viṃ16, Sems tsam shi 3b).
The second is the time-lag argument, according to which, there is a
time-gap between the perceptual judgement we make and the actual
perceptual process. When we make a perceptual judgement, at that time
we do not perceive the external object as it is in our mental
consciousness (manovijñāna) that carries out the judgement
and since the visual consciousness that perceives the object has
already ceased. Hence at the time when the mental consciousness
delivers it judgment, the perceptual cognition no longer exists since
all things are momentary. Therefore the atoms of an external object is
not the intentional object of perceptual cognition, since it has
already ceased and does not now exist therefore it is not responsible
for the cognition's having the content it has, like the unseen events
occurring on the other side of the wall (Vasubandhu's
Viṃśatikā-kārikāvṛtti
[ViṃKV] 16–17).
Yogācāra therefore concludes that we cannot postulate the
reality of an external object through direct perception. However since
in perceptual cognition we are directly aware of something, there must
be an intentional object of the perceptual cognition. That intentional
object of perceptual cognition is, according to the
Yogācāra, none other than the subliminal impressions
(vāsanās) passing from their latent state contained in the
storehouse consciousness (ālayavijñāna) to their
conscious level. Therefore the impressions are the only things that
are conventionally real.
Vasubandhu's [TSN] 35–36 inspired by the Buddhist traditional
religious beliefs also offers others arguments to defend the idealism
of Yogācāra:
All these arguments based on the facts of experience show that objects
do not exist really outside the mind, that they are products of mental
creation and that their appearance is entirely mind dependent.
Therefore the Yogācāra's theory of the two truths concludes
that the whole world is a product of mind—it is the collective
mental actions (karma) of all beings. All living beings see the same
world because of the identical maturation of their karmic
consequences. Since the karmic histories of beings are same, there is
homogeneity in the way in which the world is experienced and
perceived. This is the reason there is an orderly world instead of
chaotic and arbitrariness. This is also the reason behind the
impressions of the objectivity of the world.
After the Buddha the philosopher who broke new ground on the theory of
the two truths in the Madhyamaka system is a South Indian monk,
Nāgārjuna (ca. 100 BCE–100 CE). Amongst his seminal
philosophical works delineating the theory are
Nāgārjuna's
Āryadeva's work
Catuḥśatakaṣāstrakārikā
(Four Hundred Verses) is also considered as one of the
foundational texts delineating Madhyamaka's theory of the two
truths.
Nāgārjuna saw himself as propagating the dharma taught by
the Buddha, which he says is precisely based on the theory of the two
truths: a truth of mundane conventions and a truth of the ultimate.
([MMK] 24.8, Dbu ma tsa 14b–15a) He saw the theory of
the two truths as constituting the Buddha's core teaching and his
philosophy. Nāgārjuna maitains therefore that those who do
not understand the distinction between these two truths would fail to
understand the Buddha's teaching ([MMK] 24.9, Dbu ma tsa
15a). This is so, for Nāgārjuna, because (1) without relying
on the conventional truth, the meaning of the ultimate cannot be
explained, and (2) without understanding the meaning of the ultimate,
nirvāṇa is not achieved ([MMK] 24.10, Dbu ma tsa
15a).
Nāgārjuna's theory of the two truths is fundamentally
different from all theories of truth in other Indian philosophies.
Hindu philosophers of the Nyāya-Vaiśeṣika,
Sāṃkya-Yoga, and
Mīmāṁsā-Vedānta—all advocate a
foundationalism of some kind according to which ultimate reality is
taken to be “substantive reality” (drayva) or foundation
upon which stands the entire edifice of the conventional ontological
structures where the ultimate reality is posited as immutable, fixed,
irreducible and independent of any interpretative conventions. That is
so, even though the conventional structure that stands upon it
constantly changes and transforms.
As we saw the Buddhist realism of the Vaibhāṣika and the
representationalism of the Sautrāntika both advocate ultimate
truth as ultimately real, logically irreducible. The idealism of
Yogācāra holds nondual mind as the only ultimate reality and
the external world as merely conventional truths. On
Nāgārjuna's Madhyamaka all things including ultimate truth
are ultimately unreal, empty (śūnya) of any intrinsic nature
(svabhāva) including the emptiness (śūnyatā)
itself, therefore all are groundless. In this sense a Mādhyamika
(a proponent of the Madhyamaka thought) is a an advocate of the
emptiness (śūnyavādin), advocate of the intrinsic
unreality (niḥsvabhāvavādin), groundlessness,
essencelessness, or carelessness. Nevertheless to assert that all
things are empty of any intrinsic reality, for Nāgārjuna, is
not to undermine the existential status of things as simply
nothing. On the contrary, Nāgārjuna argues, to
assert that the things are empty of any intrinsic reality is to
explain the way things really are as causally conditioned phenomena
(pratītyasamputpaṅhā).
Nāgārjuna's central argument to support his radical
non-foundationalist theory of the two truths draws upon an
understanding of conventional truth as tied to dependently arisen
phenomena, and ultimate truth as tied to emptiness of the intrinsic
nature. Since the former and the latter are coconstitutive of each
other, in that each entials the other, ultimate reality is tied to
being that which is conventionally real. Nāgārjuna advances
important arguments justifying the correlation between conventional
truth vis-à-vis dependent arising, and emptiness
vis-à-vis ultimate truth. These arguments bring home their
epistemological and ontological correlations ([MMK] 24.14; Dbu
ma tsa 15a). He argues that wherever applies emptiness as the
ultimate reality, there applies the causal efficacy of conventional
reality and wherever emptiness does not apply as the ultimate reality,
there does not apply the causal efficacy of conventional reality
(Vig.71) (Dbu ma tsa 29a). According to
Nāgārjuna, ultimate reality's being empty of any intrinsic
reality affords conventional reality its causal efficacy since being
ultimately empty is identical to being causally produced,
conventionally. This must be so since, for Nāgārjuna,
“there is no thing that is not dependently arisen; therefore,
there is no such thing that is not empty” ([MMK] 24.19, Dbu
ma tsa 15a).
Svātantrika / Prāsaṅgika and the two
truths
The theory of the two truths in the Madhyamaka in India took a great
resurgence from the fifth century onwards soon after Buddhapālita
(ca. 470–540) wrote A Commentary on [Nāgārjuna's]
Fundamental Verses of the Middle Way

(Buddhapālitamūlamadhyamakavṛtti,[10]Dbu
 ma tsa 158b–281a). Set forth in this text is a
thoroughgoing non-foundationalist philosophic reasoning and
method—prāsaṅga arguments or reductio ad
absurdum style without relying upon the svatantra,
formal probative argument—to elucidate the Madhyamaka
metaphysics and epistemology ingrained in theory of the two truths.
For this reason, Buddhapālita is often identified later as the
founder of the Prāsaṅgika Madhyamaka, although elucidation
of the theory itself is set out in the works of Candrakīrti.
Three decades later
 Bhāvaviveka[11]
 (ca. 500–570) challenged Buddhapālita's interpretation of
the two truths, and developed a Madhyamaka account of the two truths
that reflects a significant ontological and epistemological shift from
Buddhapalitā's position, which was later defended in the works of
Candrakīrti to whom we shall return shortly.
Many later commentators ignore the philosophical contents of the
debate between the Prāsaṅgika and the Svātantrika and
claim that their controversy is confined only to pedagogical or
methodological issues. There is another view according to which the
contents of the debate between the Prāsaṅgika and the
Svātantrika—Buddhapālita versus Bhāvavevika
followed by Bhāvavevika versus Candrakīrti—is
essentially philosophic in nature. Underpinning the dialectical or
methodological controversy between the two Madhyamaka camps lies a
deeper ontological and epistemological divide implied within their
theories of the two truths, and this in turn is reflected in the
different methodological considerations they each deploy. So on this
second view, the variation in the methods used by the two schools of
the Madhyamaka are not simple differences in their rhetorical devices
or pedagogical tools, they are underlain by more serious philosophical
disagreements between the two.
According to this view the philosophical differentiations between the
Svātantrika and the Prāsaṅgika is best contained
within the discourse of the two truths. Prāsaṅgika's theory
of the two truths we leave aside for the time being. First we shall
take up the Svātantrika's account.
Bhāvaviveka wrote some of the major Madhyamaka treatises
including
In these texts Bhāvavevika rejects the Brahmanical systems of
Nyāya-Vaiśeṣika, Sāṃkhya-Yoga,
Mīmāṃsā-Vedānta on both metaphysical and
epistemological grounds. All the theories of truth and knowledge
advanced in these systems from his Madhyamaka point of view are too
rigid to be of any significant use. Bhāvavevika's critiques of
Ābhidharmikas—Vaibhāṣika and
Sautrāntika—and Yogācāra predominantly target the
ontological foundationalism which underpins their theories of the
ultimate truth. He rejects them on the ground that from an analytic
cognitive perspective, which scrutinises the nature of reality,
nothing—subject and object—is found to be ultimately real
since all things are rationally reduced to spatial parts or temporal
moments. Thus he proposes the view that both the subject and the
object are conventionally intrinsically real as both are
conventional truths, where as both are ultimately
intrinsically unreal as both are empty of ultimate reality, hence
emptiness alone is the ultimate reality.
Although Bhāvavevika is said to have founded the Svātantrika
Madhyamaka, it is important to note that there exists two different
subschools of the Svātantrika tradition:
The two schools of the Svātantrika Madhyamaka take
Bhāvavevika's intepretation of the two truths, on the whole, to
be more cogent than the Prāsaṅgika's. Particularly both
schools reject ultimate intrinsic reality while positing
conventional intrinsic reality. As far as the presentation of
ultimate truth is concerned both schools are in
agreement—nonself or emptiness alone is the ultimate reality,
and the rest—the entire range of dharmas—are ultimately
empty of any intrinsic reality. Nevertheless, the two schools differ
slightly on the matter related to the theory of conventional truth,
specifically concerning reality or unreality of the external or
physical objects on the conventional level. The Sautrāntika
Svātantrika Madhyamaka view held by Bhāvavevika himself, and
his student Jñānagarbha, affirms intrinsic reality of the
conventional truths of both the outer domains and the inner domains
and mental faculty along with their six respective
consciousnesses.
The arguments that affirm the conventional reality of the external
objects are the same arguments that Bhāvavevika employed to
criticise the Yogācāra arguments rejecting the reality of
external objects. Bhāvavevika's [MadhHK] 5.15 points out
Yogācāra's arguments are contradicted by perception
(pratyakṣa), tradition (āgama) and commonse sense
(lokaprasiddha), since they all prove the correctness of the cogniton
of material form ([MadhHK] 5.15 Dbu ma dza 20b and
Tarkajvālā 5.15 Dbu ma dza 204ab).
Yogācāra's dream argument is also rejected because,
according to Bhāvavevika, dream-consciousness and so forth have
dharmas as their objects (ālambana / dmigs pa) ([MadhHK]
5.19 Dbu ma dza 20b). And dharmas are based on intrinsically real
conventional objects, because they are the repeated impression of the
objects that have been experienced previously, like memory
(Tarkajvālā 5.19 Dbu ma dza 205a).
The Yogācāra Svātantrika Madhyamaka view held by
Śāntarakṣita and his student Kamalaśīla
affirms conventionally intrinsic reality of the inner domains and
rejects the intrinsic reality of the outer domains and it claims the
external objects are mere conceptual fictions.
Of the two schools of Svātantraka we shall first take up the
theory of the two truths presented in the Sautrāntika
Svātantrika Madhyamaka. Bhāvavevika's position represents
the theory of the two truths held by this school which was later
promoted by his disciple Jñānagarbha. The cornerstones of
the Sautrāntika Svātantrika Madhyamaka theory of the two
truths are the following theses:
We shall consider Sautrāntika Svātantrika Madhyamaka's
defence of the two claims in turn. We will begin first with
Bhāvavevika's definition of the conventional truth. In the
Tarkajvālā, he defines conventional truths as an
“incontrovertible (phyin ci ma log pa) linguistic
convention.” (Dbu ma dza 56a) Such conventional truth
on Bhāvavevika's Svātantrika takes two forms—unique
particulars (svalakṣaṇa / rang mtshan) and universals
(sāmānyalakṣaṇa / spyi mtshan) as the
Tarkajvālā III.8, explains:
Phenomena have dual characteristics (lakṣana / mtshan nyid),
differentiated as being universal or unique. Unique particular
(svalakṣaṇa / rang mtshan) is a thing's intrinsic reality
(svabhāvatā / rang gi ngo bo), the domain of engagement
which is definitively ascertained by a non-conceptual cognition
(nirvikalpena jñānena / rnam par rtog pa med pa'i shes
pa). Universal (sāmāṅyalakṣaṇa) is a
cognitive domain to be apprehended by an inferential cognition
(anumanavijñānena / rjes su dpog pa'i shes pa) which is
conceptual (Dbu ma dza 55b).
In this passage Bhāvavevika essentially summarises some of the
key features of conventional truths which are also critical to
understanding the differences between the Svātantrika and
Prāsaṅgika.
Bhāvavevika's defence of the thesis that conventionally things
are intrinsically real can be summed up in two arguments. First, as
far as things are conventional realities they are also intrinsic or
inherent realities, for being intrinsically real is the reason why
things are designated as “conventional reality,” since
from a conventional standpoint—i.e., non-analytical cognitive
engagements of the ordinary beings—things do appear to be
inherently real. This means that being “intrinsic” is, for
Bhāvavevika, what makes conventional reality a
reality.
Bhāvavevika's second argument states that as long as a
Mādhyamika accepts conventional reality it must also accept
things as intrinsic in order to avoid the nihilism charge, for
conventional reality is defined in terms of its being intrinsically
and uniquely real (svalakṣaṇa). Denying intrinsic reality
of things at the conventional level, would therefore entail the denial
of their conventional existence, since it would entail the denial of
the defining characteristics of the conventional reality. This follows
says Bhāvavevika because “The Lord (bhāgvan / bcom
ldan ldas) has taught the two truths. Based on this [explanatory
schema] conventionally things are posited in terms of their intrinsic
natures and [unique] particulars ([sva]lakṣaṇa / mtshan
nyid). It is only ultimately that [things are] posited as having no
intrinsic reality” ((Dbu ma dza 60a).
Bhāvavevika's second thesis is that at the level of ultimate
truth, all phenomena are intrinsically unreal
(niḥsvabhāvataḥ), therefore Madhyamaka rejects
intrinsic reality ultimately. Bhāvavevika's
Tarkajvālā 3.26 offers three ways to interpret the
compound paramārtha “ultimate domain” or
“ultimate object” literally. In the first, both the terms
“ultimate” (param) and “domain” (artha) stands
for the object—emptiness (śūnyatā)—because
it is both the “ultimate” or “final” as well
as an “object to be known,” “analysed”
(parīkṣaṇīya / brtag par bya ba) and
“understood” (pratipādya / go bar bya ba). In the
second compound, paramārtha stands for “object of the
ultimate” (paramasya artha / dam pa'i don) where
“object” refers to emptiness and “ultimate”
refers to a non-conceptual exalted cognition
(nirvikalpajñāna / rnam par mi rtog pa'i ye shes) of the
meditative equipoise (samāhita / mnyam bzhag). In the third
compound paramārth stands for a concordant ultimate (rjes su
mthun pa'i shes rab), a cognition that accords with the knowledge of
the ultimate since it has the ultimate as its domain.
The first two etymological senses of the term paramārthas have in
them the sense of emptiness as an objective domain since it is both
the final ontic status of things and it is the ultimate object of a
non-conceptual exalted cognition. Bhāvavevika's third
etymological sense of the term paramārtha has it identified with
cognition that accords with the knowledge of the ultimate truth on the
ground that such cognition has emptiness as its object and such
knowledge is a means through which one develops a non-conceptual
knowledge of ultimate reality. This third sense of paramārtha
allows Bhāvavevika to argue that a cognition of the subsequent
attainment (pṛṣṭhalabdhajñāna / rjes
thob ye shes) which directly follows from the non-conceptual
meditative equipoise, while it is conceptual in character, is
nevertheless a concordant ultimate ([PPMV] Dbu ma tsa
228a).
So for Bhāvavevika then, “the ultimate is of two kinds: one
is transcendent (lokuttara / ‘jig rten las ‘das pa),
undefiled (zag pa med pa), free from elaboration (aprapañca /
spros med) which needs to be engaged without a deliberative effort.
The second one” as he explains in Tarkajvālā
3.26 “is elaborative (prāpañca / spros pa), hence it
can be engaged with a deliberative effort by means of a correct
mundane cognitive process (dag pa'i ‘jig rten pa'i ye shes) that
is sustained by the collective force of virtues (bsod nams) and
insights (ye shes)” (Dbu ma dza 60b).
Bhāvavevika advances several arguments to defend the thesis that
ultimately all are intrinsically unreal. The first is the
conditionality argument pertaining to the four elements, according to
which, all the four elements are ultimately empty of any intrinsic
reality, for they all are conditioned by the causal factors
appropriated for their becoming and their existence.
The second is Bhāvavevika's non-foundationalist ontological
argument which demonstrates all phenomena, including the atoms, are
ultimately non-foundational, for ultimately there is nothing that can
be taken as the foundational entity (dravya) or intrinsically real
since the ultimate analysis reveals that all phenomena are composed of
the atomic particles that are themselves composites.
Bhāvavevika's third non-foundationalist epistemological argument
shows that ultimately the objects are not the domain of cognitions.
The argument says that “A visible form is not ultimately
apprehended by the visual faculty because it is a composite (bsags)
like a sound and because it is a product of the elements like the
sound.” ([MadhHK] 3.33 Dbu ma dza 5a) The reasons
provided to justify the thesis are twofold: (i) being composite and
(ii) being a product of the elements. Given that being
composites and products equally apply to visible
form and sound, these two reasons cannot warrant the validity of the
argument justifying the thesis that a visible form is ultimately
apprehended by the visual faculty. If they did, they would equally
warrant the validity of the argument justifying the thesis that a
sound is ultimately apprehended by the visual faculty (Dbu ma
dza 65ab).
In conclusion: mirroring these two critically important philosophical
positions Bhāvavevika introduces a type of method or pedagogical
device that is unique to the Svātantrika contra to his
Prāsaṅgika counterpart.
In the early eighth century Bhāvavevika and
Jñānagarbha's theory of the two truths was adopted and
elucidated in the works of the latter's
 student[12]
 Śāntarakṣita (705–762) and his student
Kamalaśīla (ca. 725–788). Śāntarakṣita
wrote:
In these works he argues for the synthesis of Madhyamaka and
Yogācāra's theories of the two truths which resulted in the
formation of the Yogacārā-Svātantrika
Madhyamaka—a subschool within the Svātantrika Madhyamaka.
Kamalaśīla, who is a student of
Śāntarakṣita, held the same conception of the two
truths in his works:
Unlike Jñānagarbha and Bhāvavevika's realistic
Sautrāntika Svātantrika Madhyamaka which presents
conventional truth in agreement with the epistemological realism of
the Sautrāntika and ultimate truth in agreement with
non-foundationalist ontology of the Madhyamaka,
Śāntarakṣita and Kamalaśīla advocate the
Yogācāra Svātantrika Madhyamaka. They each maintain a
basic presentation of conventional truth in agreement with the
epistemological idealism of Yogācāra and the presentation of
ultimate truth in agreement with the ontological non-foundationalism
of the Madhyamaka. Therefore Śāntarakṣita concludes:
“By relying on the Mind Only (cittamatra / sems tsam) one
understands that external phenomena do not exist. And by relying on
this [i.e., Madhyamaka] one understands that even [the mind] is
thoroughly nonself.” ([MAK] 23 Dbu ma sa 56a) “Therefore,
one attains a Mahāyāna [path] when one is able to ride the
chariots of the two systems by holding to the reigns of logic.”
([MAK] 24 Dbu ma sa 56a) By “the two systems”
Śāntarakṣita meant, Yogācāra's account of
the conventional truth with Madhyamaka's account of the ultimate
 truth.[13]
Underlying this syncretistic view of the two truths lay two
fundamental theses that Yogācāra Svātantrika Madhyamaka
are committed—namely:
And it is precisely the synthesis of these two theses that defines the
characteristic of the theory of the two truths in the
Yogācāra Svātantrika Madhyamaka.
Śāntaraṣita and Kamalaśīla attempt to
achieve this distinctive syncretistic characteristic in their works to
which we turn our discussion.
We will follow Śāntarakṣita and Kamalaśīla
and first take up the second major thesis—ultimately everything,
including the mind, is unreal and empty. Therefore, ultimate truth is
the emptiness of any intrinsic reality. According to
Kamalaśīla ultimate truth has three senses: ([MA], Dbu
ma sa 233b)
Both Śāntarakṣita and Kamalaśīla maintains
that the emptiness of intrinsic reality is the ultimate truth, and in
order to demonstrate that this is so, Kamalaśīla deploys
five forms of arguments—namely: 
The most well-known of Śāntarakśita's arguments is the
neither-one-nor many
 argument,[14]
 which seeks to examine the final (or ultimate) identity (ngo bo
la dpyod pa) of all phenomena. In his [MAK] and [MAV]
Śāntarakṣita develops this argument in a great detail.
The essential feature of the argument is as follows: “The
entities that are proclaimed by our own [Buddhist] schools and the
other [non-Buddhist] schools, lack intrinsic identity because in
reality their identity is neither a (1) singular nor a (2)
plural—like a reflection.” ([MAK] 1, Dbu ma sa
53a) In this argument:
According to Śāntarakṣita the validity of the
neither-one-nor many argument depends on whether or not it satisfies
the triple criteria (trirūpaliṅga / tshul gsum) of
formal probative reasoning. The first criterion
(pakṣadharmatā / phyogs chos) shows that the
reason qualifies the subject (phyogs / pakṣa or chos can /
dharmin), i.e., that the subject must be proven to have the
property of the reason. That is, all entities must be shown, in
reality, as neither singular nor plural. And therefore this argument
consists of two premises:
In [MAK] and [MAV] Śāntarakṣita develops the argument
showing the lack of singularity in two parts: (i) the argument that
shows the lack of the non-pervasive singularity in (a)
permanent phenomena, and (b) in impermanent entities; and (ii) the
argument that shows the lack of pervasive singularity by (a)
refuting the indivisible atomic particles which are said to have
composed the objects, and (b) by refuting the unified consciousness
posited by Yogācāra. 
The premise that shows the lack of plurality is based upon the
conclusion of the argument that shows the lack of singularity. This is
so, argues Śāntarakṣita, because “When we
analyse any entity, none is [found] to be a singular. For that for
which nothing is singular, there must also be nothing which is
plural” ([MAK] 61, Dbu ma sa 55a). This argument of
Śāntarakṣita proceeds from understanding that being
singular and being plural (manifold) are essentially
interdependent—if there are no singular entity, one must accept
that there are no plural entity either since the latter is the former
assembled.
According to Śāntarakṣita the argument from
neither-one-nor many satisfies the triple criteria of valid reasoning.
It satisfies the first criterion because all instances of the subject,
namely the intrinsic identities of those entities asserted by the
Buddhist and non-Buddhist opponents, are instances of entities which
are neither singular nor plural. The second criterion of a valid
reason—the proof of the forward entailment
(anvayavyāpti / rjes khyab), i.e., the proof that the
reason occurs in only “similar instances”
(sapakṣa / mthun phyogs) where all instances of the
reason are the instances of the predicates—is also satisfied
because the reason—all phenomena are neither singular nor
plural—is an instance of the predicate—phenomena which
lack identity. The third criterion of a valid reason—the proof
of the counter entailment (vyatirekavyāpti / ldog khyab /
ldog khyab), or the proof that the reason is completely absent
from the dissimilar instances of the predicate (vipakṣa / mi
mthun phyogs)—hold because there are no instances of the
predicate which are not instances of the reason.
There are no instances of phenomena, which lacked intrinsic identity,
which are not also instances of phenomena, that are neither singular
nor plural. Therefore “the counter entailment holds since there
are no entities that could be posited as existing in other possible
alternatives” ([MAV] 62 Dbu ma sa 69b).
Thus the second and the third criteria which are mutually entailling
prove the entailment of the neither one-nor many argument. Once the
 entailment[15]
 of the argument is accomplished, in Śāntarakṣita's
view, all potential loopholes in this argument are addressed. And
therefore the argument successfully proves that all phenomena are
empty of any intrinsic reality, since they all lack any singular or
plural identity.
It is clear, then, that the arguments of Śāntarakṣita
and Kamalaśīla have the final thrust of demonstrating the
reasons why all phenomena ultimately lack any intrinsic
reality, and are therefore geared towards proving the emptiness of
intrinsic reality as the ultimate truth, in each argument a specific
domain of analysis is used to prove the final ontological
position.
Let us now turn to the first thesis and look at the
Yogācāra-Svātantratika Madhyamaka defence of the theory
of conventional truth. As we have seen from the arguments such as
neither-one-nor many, Śāntarakṣita and
Kamalaśīla draw the conclusion that entities are ultimately
empty of reality, for ultimately they do not exist either as a
singular or as a plural. They then move on to explain the way things
do exist, and Śāntarakṣita does this with an explicit
admission that things do exist conventionally—“Therefore
these entities are only conventionally defined. If [someone] accepts
them as ultimate, what can I do for that?” ([MAK] 63 Dbu
ma sa 55a). Why is it that all entities are defined as only
conventionally real? To understand the answer to this question, we
need to look at Śāntarakṣita's definition of
conventional reality, which consists of three criteria:
Elsewhere in [MAV] Śāntarakṣita also provides a
broader definition of conventionality (saṁvṛti / kun
rdzob), and argues that conventionality is not simply a linguistic
convention (śabda-vyvahāra / sgra'i tha snyad), it also
includes what is conventionally real, those that are seen and accepted
by the Mādhaymikas as dependently coarisen
(pratītyasamutpanna / rten cing ‘brel ‘byung), and
those which cannot be rationally analysed ([MAV] 65, Dbu ma
sa 70a).
Kamalaśīla's definition of conventional truth stresses
epistemic error (brānta jñāna / rnam shes khrul ba)
in as much as he does stress on non-erroneous epistemic perspective
(abrānta jñāna / rnam shes ma khrul ba) in his
definition of the ultimate truth. So on his definition, the nature of
all entities, illusory persons and the like, is classified into two
truths by virtue of erroneous (brānta / khrula ba) and
non-erroneous cognition through which they are each represented.
Kamalaśīla's definition of conventional truth makes
explicity clear the synthesis between Madhayamaka and
Yogācāra. The Yogācāra Svātantrika Madhyamaka
claims that the Yogācāra is right about the presentation of
the conventional truth as mere mental impressions, and that this can
be seen from the way in which Śāntaraṣita and
Kamalaśīla defend this synthesis textually and rationally
through relying heavily on the
sūtras—Saṃdhinirmocannasūtra,
Laṅkāvatārasūtra,
Saddharmapuṇḍarīkasūtra and so
forth—traditionally supporting Yogācāra idealism. The
claim is made here, and Śāntarakṣita does this
explicity, that the Madhyamaka and the idealistic doctrines taught in
these scriptures are all “consistent.” ([MAV] 91 Dbu
ma sa 79a) The works of these two philosophers produce abundant
citations from these sūtra literatures stressing the
significance of the passages like this from the
Laṅkāvatārasūtra: “Material forms
do not exist, one's mind appears to be external.”
In terms of the argument, Śāntarakṣita argues
“that which is cause and effect is mere consciousness only. And
whatever is causally established abides in consciousness.”
([MAK] 91, Dbu ma sa 56a) Therefore phenomena that appear to
be real external objects like a blue-patch are not something that is
distinct from the nature of the phenomenological experience of
blue-patch, even so, as the material form experienced in dreams is not
distinct from the dreaming experience ([MAV] 91 Dbu ma sa
79a).
Briefly, then, it is clear the two Svātantriak
schools—Sautrāntika-Svātantrika-Madhyamak and the
Yogācāra-Svātantrika Madhyamaka—both uphold the
standard Madhyamaka position in terms of treating emptiness as the
ultimate truth, although, they vary somewhat in their presentation of
conventional truth since the former is realistic and the latter
idealistic about the nature of the conventional truth.
Bhāvaviveka's Svātantrika Madhyamaka theory of the two
truths soon came under attack from Candrakīrti (ca.
600–650) who, among other works, wrote the following:
In these philosophical works, Candrakīrti rejects the theories of
the two truths in both Brahmanical and the Buddhist schools of
Vaibhāṣika, Sautrāntika, Yogācāra and
Svātantrika Madhyamaka. His chief reason for doing this is his
deep mistrust of the varying degrees of metaphysical and
epistemological foundationalism that these theories are committed to.
For example Candrakīrti rejects Bhāvavevika's reading of
Nāgārjuna's theory of the two truths and explicitly
vindicates Buddhapālita's Prāsaṅgika approach to
understanding Nāgārjuna's Madhyamaka. He does this by
demonstrating the groundlessness of the fallacies Bhāvavevika
attributed to Buddhapālita, and thereby rejecting
Bhāvavevika's admission and imposition upon Nāgārjuna's
non-foundationalist ontology of a kind of independent formal
svātantra argument, which Candrakīrti saw as one encumbered
by foundationalist metaphysics, and is incompatible with
Nāgārjuna's ontology. Instead of relying on the two truths
theories of other schools, Candrakīrti proposes a distinctive
non-foundationalist theory of the two truths in the Madhyamaka, and he
defends it against his foundationalist opponents. This school later
came to be known as the Prāsaṅgika Madhyamaka.
At the core of the Prāsaṅgika's theory of the two truths
are these two fundamental theses:
Although these two theses are advanced separately, they are mutually
coextensive. There is a compatible relationship between conventional
truth and ultimate truth, hence between dependent arising
(pratītyasamutpāda / rten ‘brel) and emptiness
(śūnyatā / stong pa nyid), and there is no tension
between the two. We shall examine the Prāsaṅgika arguments
in defence of these theses.
Let us turn to the first thesis. Earlier we saw that both the
Vaibhāṣika and Sautrāntika argue that only
ultimately intrinsic reality (svabhāva) enables things
to perform a causal function (arthakriya). The Svātantrika
Madhyamaka rejects this, and it instead argues that things are
causally efficient because of their conventionally intrinsic
reality (svabhāva) or unique particularity
(svalakṣaṇa). The Prāsaṅgika Madhyamaka,
however, rejects both these positions, and argues only what is
conventionally non-intrinsic reality (niḥsvabhāva)
is causally effective, for only those phenomena, the conventional
nature of which is non-intrinsic, are subject to conditioned or
dependent arising. Conventional reality (here treated as dependently
arisen phenomenon), given it is causally effective, is therefore
always intrinsically unreal, and hence lacks any intrinsic
reality even conventionally. Hence that which is conventionally (or
dependently) coarisen is always conventionally (or dependently) arisen
and strictly does not arise ultimately.
In his etymological analysis of the term “convention”
(saṃvṛti / kun rdzob) in [PP] Candrakīrti attributes
three senses to the term convention:
Candrakīrti's claims that in the case of mundane cognitive
processes of the ordinary beings, the first sense of convention
eclipses the force of the second and the third senses. As a result,
far from understanding things as dependently arisen (the second sense)
and dependently designated (the third sense), ordinary beings reify
them to be non-dependently arisen, and non-designated. Due to the
force of this cognitive confusion, from the perspective of mundane
cognitive processes of the ordinary beings, things appear real, and
each phenomenon appears intrinsically real in spite of their
non-intrinsic nature. Consequently this confusion, according to
Candrakīrti, defines epistemic practices of the ordinary beings.
For this reason, the epistemic norms or the standard set by
mundane convention of the ordinary beings, is poles apart
from the epistemic norms set by mundane convention of the noble beings
(āryas / ‘phags pa) whose mundane cognitive processes are
not under the sway of afflictive confusion.
In order to illustrate this distinction, in his commentary [MBh] 6.28
Candrakīrti introduces the concept: mere convention (kun
rdzob tsam) of the noble beings to contrast with conventionally
real or conventional true (kun rdzob bden pa) of the
ordinary beings. Ordinary beings erroneously grasp all conditioned
phenomena as intrinsically real, therefore things are
conventionally real and thus are categories of conventional
truth. For noble beings, however, because they no longer reify them as
real, things are perceived as having the nature of being
created (bcos ma) and unreal (bden pa ma yin pa)
like the reflected image ([MBh] 6.28 Dbu ma ‘a
255a).
According to Candrakırti's definition of the two truths, all
things embody dual nature, for each is constituted by its conventional
nature and its ultimate nature. Consequently, all entities, according
to this definition, satisfy the criterion of the two truths, for the
definition of the two truths is one based on the two natures. The two
truths are, therefore, not merely one specific nature
mirrored in two different perspectives ([MBh] 6.23 Dbu ma
‘a 253a). Conventional nature entails conventional truth and
ultimate nature entails ultimate truth, and given each entity is
constituted by the two natures, the two truths define what each entity
is in its ontological and epistemological terms.
Conventional nature is defined as conventional truth because it is the
domain of mundane cognitive process, and is readily accessible for
ordinary beings, including mundane cognitive process of noble beings.
It is a sort of truth, while unreal and illusory in
reality, it is yet erroneously and non-analytically taken for granted
by mundane cognitive processes of the ordinary beings. Ultimate
nature, on the other hand, is defined as ultimate truth because it is
domain of the exalted cognitive process which engages with its object
analytically, one that is directly accessible for noble beings
(āryas) and only inferentially accessible for ordinary beings. It
is this sort of truth, both real and non-illusory, that is
correctly and directly found out by exalted cognitive processes of
noble beings, and by analytic cognitive processes of ordinary
beings.
Mundane cognitive process that is associated with the definition of
conventional truth and therefore allied to the perception of
unreal entities is of two kinds ([M] 6.24 Dbu ma
‘a 205a):
Correct cognitive process is associated with an acute sense faculty,
which is not impaired by any occasional extraneous causes of
misperception (see below). Fallacious cognitive process is associated
with a defective sense faculty impaired by occasional extraneous
causes of misperception. In [PP] Candrakīrti introduces us to a
similar epistemic distinction:
Candrakīrti's key argument behind to support the distinction
between two mundane epistemic practices—one mundane
convention and the other non-mundane convention—is that
the former is, for mundane standard, epistemically reliable whereas
the latter is epistemically unreliable. Consequently correct cognitive
processes of both ordinary and awakened beings satisfy the epistemic
standard of mundane convention, being non-deceptive by
mundane standard, thus they set the standard of mundane convention;
whereas fallacious cognitive processes of defective sense faculties,
of both ordinary and awakened beings, do not satisfy the epistemic
standard of mundane convention, and therefore, they are
deceptive even by mundane standard. They are thus
“non-mundane convention” as Candrakīrti characterises
them in [PP] 24.8 (Dbu ma ‘a 163ab).
Just as they are two kinds of sensory faculty—nonerroneous and
erroneous—their objects are, according to Candrakīrti, of
two corresponding kinds:
First, cognitive processes associated with sense faculties that are
unimpaired by extraneous causes of misperception grasp the former
objects, and because this kind of object fulfils realistic mundane
ontological standard, it is thus real for ordinary beings,
(not so for the noble beings the issue to which we turn later). Hence
it is only conventionally real.
Second, cognitive processes associated with sense faculties that are
impaired by extraneous causes of misperception grasp conventionally
unreal objects, and because this kind of object does not meet
realistic mundane ontological standard, they are thus
conventionally unreal.
Although Candrakīrti recognises that conventional reality
satisfies the ontological standard of ordinary beings, he,
importantly, argues that it does not satisfy the ontological criterion
of the Madhyamaka (here synonymous for noble beings). Just as illusion
is partly real although partly unreal, all objects
that are considered commonsensically as conventionally real, are
unreal. The major difference between the two is that a
knowledge of illusion being unreal is available to mundane cognitive
processes of ordinary beings where as a knowledge of unreality of
conventionally real entities is not available to mundane cognitive
processes of ordinary beings.
However, for Candrakīrti illusory objects are
conventionally real and causally efficient, and that the
conventionally real entities themselves are illusion-like.
Candrakīrti develops this argument using the two tier theory of
illusion.
Candrakīrti support his argument from the theory of illusion by
means of applying four categories of the conventional entities:
Candrakīrti accepts conventional reality of both
entities—partly unreal (i) and partly real (ii)—on the
ground that they both appear in mundane cognitive processes who are
confused about their ultimate ontological status. Candrakīrti
rejects conventional reality status of those entities that are
supposedly intrinsically real (iii) and conventionally unreal (iv),
although for different reasons. Conventional reality of intrinsically
real entity is rejected in [MBh] 6.28 on the ground that its existence
does not, forever, appear to a mundane cognitive processes.
Candrakīrti argues that there is a critical epistemic
differentiation to be made between the two
entities—conventionally real and conventionally illusory.
Deceptive, unreal, and dependently arisen nature of conventionally
real entities is beyond the grasp of mundane cognitive processes. By
contrast, deceptive, unreal and dependently arisen nature of
conventionally illusory, partly unreal, entities is grasped by mundane
cognitive processes. Therefore illusory objects are regarded as
deceptive, and unreal by the standard of mundane knowledge, whereas,
conventionally real things are regarded as nondeceptive and real by
the standard of mundane knowledge.
So the argument from the first tier of the illusory theory shows that
mundane cognitive processes of ordinary beings fail to know
illusory and unreal nature of conventionally real entities, they
instead grasp them to be intrinsically real. The argument from the
second tier of the illusory theory offers Candrakīrti's reason
why this is so. Here, he argues, the presence of the underlying
confusion operating beneath mundane cognitive processes of the
ordinary beings is the force by which ordinary beings intuitively and
erroneously reify the nature of conventional entites. Hence they grasp
conventional entities as intrinsically real, although they are in
actual fact on a closer analysis, only non-intrinsic, unreal or
illusory.
Therefore intrinsic reality is not a conventional reality and grasping
things to be intrinsically real is only a confused belief, not a
knowledge. Hence Candrakīrti clearly excludes it from the
ontological categories of conventional reality, for the reason that
intrinsic reality is a conceptual fiction fabricated by confused minds
of the ordinary beings and that it is a conceptual construct thrust
upon non-intrinsic entities ([MBh] 6.28 Dbu ma ‘a
255a). In addition Candrakīrti argues that if things were
intrinsically real, even conventionally, as the Svātantrikas take
them to be, in Candrakīrti's view, things would exist by virtue
of their intrinsic reality, at least conventionally. If this
were the case then intrinsic reality would become the ultimate nature
of things. That would be absurd.
For Mādhyamikas, things cannot have more than one final mode of
existence—if they exist, they must exist qua only
conventionally. Consequently, given the mutually exclusive relation of
intrinsic reality and emptiness, if intrinsic reality is granted even
a conventional reality status, Candrakīrti contends, one has to
reject emptiness as the ultimate reality ([M] 6.34, DBu ma
‘a 205b). But since the Mādhyamika asserts emptiness to be
the ultimate reality, and given that emptiness and intrinsic reality
are mutually exclusive, Mādhyamika must reject intrinsic reality
in all its forms—conventionally as well as ultimately ([MBh]
6.36, 1994: 118).
We now turn to Candrakīrti's second thesis—namely, only
what is ultimately non-intrinsic is causally effective, for
only those phenomena, an ultimate nature of which is non-intrinsic,
are subject to conditioned arising. Ultimate reality (or emptiness),
given it is causally effective, is therefore intrinsically unreal.
Therefore ultimate reality is ultimately unreal (or put it
differently, emptiness is ultimately empty).
Candrakīrti defines ultimate reality as the nature of things
found by the perception of reality ([M] 6.23 Dbu ma ‘a
205a). In the commentary Candrakīrti expands this definition.
“Ultimate is the object, the nature of which is found by
particular exalted cognitive processes (yishes) of those who
perceive reality. But it does not exist by virtue of its intrinsic
objective reality (svarūpatā / bdag gi ngo bo
nyid).” ([MBh] 6.23 Dbu ma ‘a 253a) Of the two
natures, the object of the perception of reality is the way things
really are, and this is, Candrakīrti explains, what it means to
be ultimate reality ([MBh] 6.23 Dbu ma ‘a 253ab). 
Candrakīrti's definition raises a couple of important points
here. First, by defining ultimate reality as “the nature of
things found by particular exalted cognitive processes (yeshes) of
those who perceive reality,” he means ultimate reality is not
found by any exalted cognitive processes, it must be found by
a particular exalted cognitive processes—analytic—that
knows things just as they are. Second, by stating that “it does
not exist by virtue of its intrinsic objective reality”
(svarūpatā / bdag gi ngo bo nyid), he means ultimate reality
is not intrinsically real just as much as conventional reality is not
intrinsically real. Third, he says that ultimate reality is the first
nature of the two natures of things found by perception of reality.
This means ultimate reality is ultimate nature of all conventionally
real things. For they all have an ultimate nature representing
ultimate status, just as they have conventional nature representing
conventional status.
Ultimate truth, according to Candrakīrti, for the purpose of
liberating all sentient beings ([M] 6.179 Dbu ma ‘a
213a). ‘a 213a) is differentiated by the Buddha into two
aspects:
As we shall see Candrakīrti's arguments come from two domains of
analysis which he employs to account for his theory of ultimate truth:
analysis of personal self (pudgala-ātmya / gang zag gi bdag) and
analysis of phenomenal self (dharma-ātmya / chos kyi bdag). The
analysis will demonstrate whether or not conventionally real phenomena
and persons are more than what they are conventionally. So we shall
consider Candrakīrti's arguments under this rubrics:
Let us begin with the first. The not-self argumnent demonstrates, as
we shall see, unreality of conventionally real person. We shall
develop this argument of Candrakīrti progressively in three
steps:
In order to appreciate Candrakīrti's not-self argument, or the
argument that shows unreality of conventionally real person, we need
to understand Candrakīrti's purpose of refuting personal self.
According to Candrakīrti it is important that we look into the
question: from where does the assumption of self arise before we go
any further. He argues, like all the Buddhist philosophers do, the
notion of self or the assumption of self arises in relation to
personhood. After all it is a personal identity issue. To analyse the
self therefore requires us to look closely among the parts that
constitute a person, and given that the conception of self is embedded
in personhood which is constituted by the five aggregates, we need to
examine its relation to our conception of self.
Suffice it here to highlight the important relation that exists
between the aggregates and the notion of self. According to
Candrakīrti, the five aggregates are primary categories upon
which we will draw to examine the phenomenal structure of sentient
beings, because of the following reasons: because (1) it serves as a
phenomenological scheme for examining the nature of human experience,
(2) the way in which human beings construct conceptions of the self is
based upon different existential experiences within the framework of
the five aggregates, (3) they are the basis upon which we develop the
sense of self through the view that objectifies the five aggregates
which are transient and composites
(satkāyaḍṛṣṭi / ‘jig tshogs la lta
ba), either through an appropriation or falsely identifying the
aggregates to be self ([MBh] 6.120, Dbu ma ‘a 292ab),
(4) they are the objective domain of the arising of defilements that
cause us suffering since the false view objectifying the aggregates
(satkāyaḍṛṣṭi / ‘jig tshogs la lta
ba) to be real self lead to the arising of all “afflictive
defilements”, and finally (5) the five aggregates are the
objective domain of the knowledge of unreality of personal self. For
the simple reason that confusion and misconceptions of self arise in
relation to the aggregates, thus it is within the same framework that
the realisation of nonself must emerge.
Therefore, for Candrakīrti, it is clear that within the range of
the five aggregates exhaust “all” or
“everything” that could be considered as the basis for
developing the misconception of a reified self and also the
basis for correct knowledge of non-self—i.e., reality of person
or self.
Candrakīrti develops his arguments against personal self in a
great detail in [M]/[Mbh] chapter six. Suffice it here to consider one
such argument called “the argument from the sevenfold analysis
of a chariot” (shing rta rnams bdun gyi rigs pa). This argument
however is more or less a way of putting all his arguments together.
In it, Candrakīrti concludes: “the basis of the conception
of self, when analysed, is not plausible to be an entity. It is not
plausible to be different from the aggregates, nor identity of the
aggregates, nor dependent (skandhadhāra) on the aggregates. The
‘basis’ (skandhadhāra) at issue is a compound that
exposes the implausibility of self as both the container
(ādhāra / rten) and the contained (adheya / brten pa). The
self does not own the aggregates. This is established in codependence
on the aggregates” ([M] 6.150, Dbu ma ‘a 221b).
Putting this argument anologically, Candrakīrti asserts that the
self is, in terms of not being intrinsically real, analogous to a
chariot. “We do not accept a chariot to be different from its
own parts, nor to be identical [to its parts], nor to be in possession
of them, nor is it in the parts, nor are the parts in it, nor
is it the mere composite [of its parts], nor is it the shape [or size
of the those parts]” ([M] 6.151 Dbu ma ‘a
221b).
So the structure of the nonself “chariot” argument that
demonstrates unreality of a conventionally real person can be briefly
stated as follows:
There is no ultimately real self that can be logically proven to
exist. If it did exist it has to be found when it is subjected to
these sevenfold analyses. But the self is not found either to be
different from the aggregates, nor identical to the aggregates, nor to
be in possession of them, nor is the self in the aggregates,
nor are the aggregates in the self, nor is the self the mere
composite of the aggregates; nor is the self the shape or sizes of the
aggregates. Since there is no more to a person any more than
dependently designated self upon basis of the five aggregates, they
exhaust all that there is in a person, Candrakīrti therefore
concludes that there is no real self anywhere whatsoever to be found
in the five aggregates.
From this argument, Candrakīrti concludes that both ultimately
and conventionally, any intrinsic reality of a personal self must
remain unproven. Therefore according to any of the sevenfold analysis
a personal self is unreal, and empty of any intrinsic reality. What
Candrakīrti does not conclude from this argument, though, is the
implausibility of a conventionally real self for everyday purpose. As
matter of fact, Candrakīrti argues, the argument from the
sevenfold analysis reinforces the idea that only conventionally real
self makes sense. For such a self constitutes being dependently
designated on the aggregates in as much as a chariot is dependently
designated on its parts (M / MBh 6.158). Just as the chariot
is conveniently designated in dependence on its parts, and it is
referred to in the world as “agent,” even so, a
conventionally self which is established through dependent designation
serves as a conventionally real moral agent. Therefore, although the
argument from the sevenfold analyses denies the existence of
intrinsically real self or ultimately real self, the argument does not
entail a denial of conventionally real self. (M / MBh
6.159).
It turns out therefore that a self is merely a convenient designation,
or a meaningful label given to the five aggregates, and taken for
granted in the everyday purpose as a agent. And it is this nominal
self that serves the purpose of moral agent. This nominal or
conventional self is comparable to anything that exists
conventionally. Candrakīrti compares it to a chariot.
Second, Candrakīrti's argument from emptiness demonstrates the
unreality of the conventionally real phenomena by means of appealing
to causal processes at work in producing these entities. The
understanding here is that the way in which things arise and come into
existence definitively informs us about how things actually are. This
argument is an extension of Nāgārjuna's famous tetralemma
argument which states: “neither from itself nor from another nor
from both, nor without cause does anything anywhere, ever
arise.” ([MMK] 1.1) Candrakīrti develops this argument in
great detail in chaper 6 of [M]/[MBh], we shall only have a quick look
at its overall strategy without delving into its details.
If entities are intrinsically real there are only two alternative ways
for them to arise: either they arise (a) causally or (b) causelessly.
If one holds that intrinsically real things arise causally, then there
are only three possible ways for them to arise: either they should
arise from (1) themselves, or from (2) another or from (3) both.
P1 If intrinsic entity arise from itself it would absurdly follow that
cause and effect would be identical and they would exist
simultaneously. In which case, the production of an effect would be
pointless for it would be already in existence. It is thus
unreasonable to assume that something already arisen might arise all
over again. ([M] 6.8) If an entity in existence still requires arising
then an infinite regress would follow ([M] 6. 9–13).
P2 If an intrinsically real entity arises from another, anything could
arise from anything (like a fire from pitch-darkness), given that
cause and effect would be distinct, all causes would be equally
‘another’ ([M] 6. 14–21).
P3 If an intrinsic entity arises from both itself and another then
both reductio ad absurdums in P1 and P2 would apply ([M] 6.
98).
P4 If an intrinsic entity arises causelessly, then anything could
arise from everything ([M] 6. 99–103).
Thus it is not possible for any intrinsic entity to exist because no
such entity could be causally produce either from itself or from
another or both or causelessly. It follows therefore that any entity
that arises causally is not intrinsically real, hence it is
dependently originated entity ([M] 6. 104). 
Candrakīrti therefore insists that entities that are
intrinsically unreal are not nonexistent unlike intrinsically real
entities which are nonexistent analogous to the rabbit's horn. Even
though they are not intrinsically real, hence remain unproduced
according to the four analyses, unlike the rabbit's horn,
intrinsically unreal entities are objects of mundane cognitive
processes, and they arise codependently ([M] 110–114). Hence, in
summarising the argument, Candrakīrti states: “Entities do
not arise causelessly, and they do not arise through causes like God,
for example. Nor do they arise out of themselves, nor from another,
nor from both. They arise codependently.” ([M] 6.114, Dbu ma
‘a 209b) So because entities arise codependently, according to
Candrakīrti, reified concepts such as intrinsic entities cannot
stand up under logical analysis. The argument from dependent arising
therefore eliminates the web of erroneous views presupposing intrinsic
reality. If entities are intrinsically real, then their arising could
be through themselves, from another or from both, causelessly. However
upon critical analysis the entity as such proves to be nonexistent
([M]/[MBh] 6. 115–116).
Third, Candrakīrti's argument from the emptiness of emptiness
demonstrates the unreality of ultimate reality. The
“emptiness-argument” and the
“nonself-argument” show that all conventionally real
phenomena and persons are empty of intrinsic reality. As we have seen
from a critical rational point of view, it is demonstrated that there
is no ultimately real or ultimately existent entities or real self of
person to be found. The two arguments do not however show that
emptiness per se is empty, nor do they show that the
selflessness is itself selfless. This raises an important question:
does this mean that emptiness is the intrinsic reality of
conventionally real entities and selflessness is the intrinsic reality
of conventionally real persons? Putting the question differently:
could a Mādhyamika claim that emptiness and selflessness are
ultimately real or are intrinsically real? This question is
reasonable. We tend to posit ultimate reality to be something that is
timeless, independent, transcendent, nondual etc. So if emptiness is
the ultimate reality of all phenomena and if selflessness is the
ultimate reality of all persons,could we say that emptiness and
selflessness are nonempty, ultimately real or
intrinsically real?
In order to answer this question Candrakīrti maintains that the
Buddha reclassifies emptiness and nonself under various
aspects—“He elaborated sixteen emptinesses and
subsequently he condensed these into four explanations which are
adopted by the Mahāyāna.” ([M] 6.180 Dbu ma
‘a 213a) We shall consider one example here: Candrakīrti
argues “The eye is empty of eye[ness] because that is its
reality. The ear, nose, tongue, body and mind are also to be explained
in this way.” ([M] 6.181 Dbu ma ‘a 213ab)
“Because each of them are non-eternal (ther zugs tu
gnas pa ma yin) not subject to disintegration
(‘jig pa ma yin pa) and their reality is
non-intrinsic [the emptiness of] the eye and the other six
faculties is accepted as ‘internal emptiness’
(adhyātmaśūnyatā)”([M] 6.181
Dbu ma ‘a 2213b).
On Candrakīrit's view just as the chariot, self and other
conventionally real phenomena are intrinsically unreal, so too is the
emptiness and the nonself. Emptiness is also empty of intrinsic
reality. Candrakīrti explains the emptiness of emptiness as:
Also consider Candrakīrti's argument against positing emptiness
as ultimately real that he develops in his commentary on [MMK] 13.7.
If emptiness is ultimately real, emptiness would not be empty of the
intrinsic reality—the essence of conventionally real objects. In
that case we will have to grant emptiness as existing independently of
conventionally real entities, as their underlying substratum. If this
is granted the emptiness of a chariot and the empty entity, the
chariot itself, would be quite distinct and unrelated. Moreover if the
emptiness of the chariot is nonempty, i.e., if it is ultimately real,
whereas the chariot itself is empty i.e., ultimately unreal, then, one
has to posit two distinct and contradictory verifiable realities even
for one conventionally real chariot. But since there is not even the
slightest nonempty phenomenon verified in the chariot—not even
the slightest bit of entity withstanding critical
analysis—emptiness of the chariot, like the chariot itself, is
implausible to be ultimately real. Like the chariot itself, the
emptiness of the chariot is also ultimately empty. 
Therefore, while emptiness is the ultimate truth of the conventionally
real entities, it is not plausible to posit emptiness to be ultimately
real. Similarly, while nonself is the ultimate truth of the personal
self, nonself is implausible to be ultimately real. Therefore nonself
is not considered as the essence of persons or self. 
So, to wind up the discussion on the Prāsaṅgika's theory of
the two truths, just as conventional truth is empty of intrinsic
reality, hence ultimately unreal, even so, is ultimate truth empty of
intrinsic reality, hence ultimately unreal. It is, therefore,
demonstrated that nothing is ultimately real for Candrakīrti,
hence everything is empty of intrinsic reality. The heart of
Candrakīrti's two truths theory is the argument that only because
they are empty of intrinsic reality can conventionally real entities
be causally efficient. Only in the context of a categorical rejection
of any foundationalism of intrinsic reality—both conventionally
and ultimate, Candrakīrti insists, can there be mundane practices
rooted in the mutually interdependent character of cognitive
processes and objects cognised. For this reason
Candrakīrti concludes that whomsoever emptiness makes sense,
everything makes sense. For whomsoever emptiness makes no sense,
dependent arising would not make sense. Hence nothing would make sense
([PP] 24.14, Dbu ma ‘a 166b).
To sum up, though this entry provides just an overview of the theory
of the two truths in Indian Buddhism discussed overview, it
nevertheless offers us enough reasons to believe that there is no
single theory of the two truths in Indian Buddhism. As we
have seen there are many such competing theories, some of which are
highly complex and sophisticated. The essay clearly shows, however,
that except for the Prāsaṅgika's theory of the two truths,
which unconditionally rejects all forms of foundationalism
both conventionally and ultimately, all other theories of the two
truths, while rejecting some forms of foundationalism, embrace another
form of foundationalism. The Sārvastivādin (or
Vaibhāṣika) theory rejects the substance-metaphysics of the
Brahmanical schools, yet it claims the irreducible spatial units
(e.g., atoms of the material category) and irreducible temporal units
(e.g., point-instant consciousnesses) of the five basic categories as
ultimate truths, which ground conventional truth, which is comprised
of only reducible spatial wholes or temporal continua. Based on the
same metaphysical assumption and although with modified definitions,
the Sautrāntika argues that the unique particulars
(svalakṣaṇa) which, they say, are ultimately causally
efficient, are ultimately real; whereas the universals
(sāmāṅyalakṣaṇa) which are only
conceptually constructed, are only conventionally real. Rejecting the
Ābhidharmika realism, the Yogācāra proposes a form of
idealism in which which it is argued that only mental impressions are
conventionally real and nondual perfect nature is the ultimately real.
The Svātantrika Madhyamaka, however, rejects both the
Ābhidharmika realism and the Yogācāra idealism as
philosophically incoherent. It argues that things are only
intrinsically real, conventionally, for this ensures their
causal efficiency, things do not need to be ultimately intrinsically
real. Therefore it proposes the theory which states that
conventionally all phenomena are intrinsically real
(svabhāvataḥ) whereas ultimately all phenomena are
intrinsically unreal (niḥsvabhāvataḥ). Finally, the
Prāsaṅgika Madhyamaka rejects all the theories of the two
truths including the one advanced by its Madhyamaka counterpart,
namely, Svātantrika, on the ground that all the theories are
metaphysically too stringent, and they do not provide the ontological
malleability necessary for the ontological identity of conventional
truth (dependent arising) and ultimate truth (emptiness). It therefore
proposes the theory of the two truths in which the notion of intrinsic
reality is categorically denied. It argues that only when conventional
truth and ultimate truth are both conventionally and
ultimately non-intrinsic, can they be causally effective.