Anthony Trollope’s novel, The Way We Live Now, is a
biting critique of the corruption of late Victorian morals. One of its
central characters, the shallow Lady Carbury, at one point voices her
conviction that the praiseworthy deeds of the powerful escape the
normal categories of morality. Commenting on the character of the
novel’s dominant figure, the grand swindler Melmotte, she says to
her journalist friend Mr. Booker:
“If a thing can be made great and beneficent, a boon to
humanity, simply by creating a belief in it, does not a man become a
benefactor to his race by creating that belief?”
“At the expense of veracity?” suggested Mr. Booker.
“At the expense of anything?” rejoined Lady Carbury with
energy. “One cannot measure such men by the ordinary
rule.”
“You would do evil to produce good?” asked Mr.
Booker.
“I do not call it doing evil….You tell me this man may
perhaps ruin hundreds, but then again he may create a new world in
which millions will be rich and happy.”
“You are an excellent casuist, Lady Carbury.”
“I am an enthusiastic lover of beneficent audacity,”
said Lady Carbury…
Contemporary moral and political philosophy suffers from no lack of
enthusiastic admirers of “beneficent audacity”. At one end
of a spectrum are those consequentialists who are so captivated by the
prospect of the new world of “happy millions” that they
think it obscurantist to object to any evil means needed to achieve
it—indeed, they agree with Lady Carbury in not calling such
means evil. At the other end of that spectrum, stand the rather more
reluctant advocates of “dirty hands” who think that some
very good ends, such as the aversion of catastrophe, require the doing
of evil, but unlike Lady Carbury, they insist on calling it evil,
though necessary evil. And like Lady Carbury, they rather think that
the agents who so dirty their hands cannot be measured “by the
ordinary rule.” Even so, like W.H. Auden in his poem
“Spain”, they think such agents doing what current
circumstances make “necessary” should accept the guilt
that their immoral actions earn. As Auden puts it:
“To-day the deliberate increase in the chances of death,
The conscious acceptance of guilt in the necessary murder.”
The dirty hands tradition dates back to Machiavelli, though its
present currency is largely owed to the American political theorist
Michael Walzer who gave it the title of dirty hands in an influential
article “Political Action: the Problem of Dirty Hands”, in
which he coined the term “dirty hands” adapting it from
Jean Paul Sartre’s play of the same name (Walzer 1973).  Later, Walzer
used the idea, though not the term, in his book Just and Unjust
Wars (1977) in which he argued that an appeal to “supreme
emergency” could not only explain but justify the Allied terror
bombing of German cities in the early stages of World War II (Walzer
1977a, 267–68). For these early stages, roughly (it seems, for Walzer
gives no date) up to the end of 1941, the deliberate massacre of
thousands of German non-combatants was required by supreme emergency,
even though it was gravely immoral. The prospect and likelihood of a
Nazi victory were so dire for the lives and communal values of those
facing defeat that the price of severe immorality was worth paying. In
the subsequent conduct of the war, Walzer argued, the city bombings
were simply immoral (as were the city bombings of Japan, including the
atomic attacks on Hiroshima and Nagasaki) and could not be justified
by supreme
 emergency.[1]
When Walzer later revisited the
topic of supreme emergency, he made it clear that it was a case of
dirty hands, indeed he seems to have come to the view that
only something like the circumstances of supreme emergency
could provide a dirty hands justification. So he says, in the later
discussion of supreme emergency, that the doctrine of dirty hands is
that “according to which political and military leaders may
sometimes find themselves in situations where they cannot avoid acting
immorally, even when that means deliberately killing the
innocent.” And again: “…dirty hands aren’t
permissible (or necessary) when anything less than the ongoingness of
the community is at stake, or when the danger that we face is anything
less than communal death” (Walzer 2004a, 46).
The first thing to notice about this is that the identification of
supreme emergency and dirty hands represents a dramatic shift from
Walzer’s view in his original article, and this shift reflects a
significant ambiguity in the dirty hands tradition. Walzer’s
accounts of supreme emergency vary somewhat in the treatments in
Just and Unjust Wars and in the later article,
“Emergency Ethics” (and we shall attend to this later) but
in both accounts the necessity to override deep moral constraints only
arises in conditions approaching catastrophe. In the original 1973
paper, however, the trigger for dirty hands is nowhere near as
extreme. One example there, with intriguing contemporary
relevance, concerned a political leader’s need to torture a
suspected terrorist in the hope of preventing the likely killing of
hundreds of innocent people. This falls well short of the criterion of
supreme emergency in Walzer’s later writings where the trigger is
the devastation of whole peoples and/or their ways of life. Moreover,
Walzer’s other example in the original paper was of a good
democratic politician bribing a corrupt ward boss to deliver him votes
with the promise of improperly delivered school construction contracts.
Here not only is the moral violation much less profound than in the
former case, but the emergency could hardly be considered
“supreme” in any sense even if we allow that the votes are
needed to win an important election and that the politician is
genuinely motivated to do good when elected. In Walzer’s initial
treatment, there is also some ambiguity in the use of the term
“dirty hands” since he sometimes uses it for any
conspicuous immorality as well as the more interesting and technical
sense we are concerned with. So he says “It is easy to get
one’s hands dirty in politics and it is often right to do
so” (Walzer 1973, 174). The first clause seems to point to the
widespread temptation to resort to immorality where the second
indicates that it isn’t always right to do so, hence demarcating
a positive normative sense of “dirty” from a merely
descriptive sense. The use of “often” shows the more
concessive attitude to the scope of dirty hands in contrast to
Walzer’s later view.
Earlier writers concerned with the need for politicians to dirty their
hands with immoral behaviour show some of this vacillation, sometimes
stressing the extreme stakes that are involved, but more often
appearing to view the political process generally as above morality,
or at least operating with a different morality. (“One cannot
measure such men by the ordinary rule”). John M. Parrish in an
interesting and far-ranging book (Parrish, 2007) shows that there are
elements of the concern about the generally challenging nature of
politics for morality as early as
Plato’s Republic. Parrish’s understanding,
however, of what constitutes dirty hands is often so broad as to
obscure some of the distinctions, ambiguities and problems arising
from current philosophical discussions. to be fair, he is interested
in charting a sort of pre-history to the contemporary debate, and
admits that “the problem may have changed over time” so
that there is “a succession of dirty hands problems”
(Parrish, p. 18). Even so, some of the apparently morally troubling
examples he discusses from ancient intellectual sources have none of
the marks of the contemporary problem. Augustine’s insistence,
for example, that even a justly waged war is morally regrettable is
accompanied by the untroubled argument that the warrior whose cause
and intention is just does not sin at all (i.e., violate any moral
obligation) in killing his enemy. Parrish’ emphasis on the idea
that political life is pervasively morally problematic, however, does
find echoes in early modern treatments that foreshadow the
contemporary dirty hands discussion. One such influential treatment is
that of Machiavelli. So Machiavelli thinks that the ordinary processes
of politics require that the Prince “must learn how not to be
good”, though he should maintain the appearance of virtue and
indeed behave virtuously when the cost is low (Machiavelli 1513,
52). Max Weber stresses the way that regard for consequences must
dominate the thinking of the politician as contrasted with ordinary or
religiously inspired ethics. This contrast lies behind the opposition
Weber discerns in “Politics as Vocation” between “an
ethic of responsibility” and “an ethic of ultimate
ends”. Although the terms in which Weber frames the contrast
tend to confuse rather than clarify the issues, it is probable that
one thing he has in mind for the “ultimate ends” side of
the conflict is an ethic involving absolute prohibitions; he sees
these as being in tension with an outlook geared to counting
consequences. As Weber puts it: “there is an abysmal contrast
between conduct that follows the maxim of an ethic of ultimate
ends-that is, in religious terms, ‘the Christian does rightly
and leaves the results with the Lord’-and conduct that follows
the maxim of an ethic of responsibility, in which case one has to give
an account of the foreseeable results of one’s action”
(Weber 1919, 120). The starkness of this contrast is one source of
confusion since, as we shall see later, absolutists are not totally
indifferent to consequences — not all their ethic consists of
absolute prohibitions-and non-absolutists need not be obsessed only
with consequences. But Weber is adamant that it is impossible in
politics to adhere generally to any absolutist ethic of ultimate ends,
largely because of what he sees as the central role of violence in
politics. In spite of Walzer citing him approvingly (up to a point) in
his original article, Weber does not seem to hold anything like
Walzer’s mature view. He does not think that an ethic of
ultimate ends suffices most of the time, but gives way in conditions
of supreme emergency; rather his view appears to be that the ultimate
ends ethic is quite generally inadequate to politics. In fact,
Weber’s belief that violence is central to the operation of
politics is exaggerated, though understandable in the circumstances in
which he wrote, but if it were true it might give his position more
affinity with Walzer’s idea of supreme emergency. The difference
would remain that, although violence may well be a factor in
establishing supreme emergency, Walzer’s mature understanding of
supreme emergency requires more than simply incursions of
violence.
This ambiguity about the extent of the need for dirty hands is
reflected in much of the literature on the topic. Numerous writers
have followed early Walzer (and some elements in both Machiavelli’s
and Weber’s treatment of political morality) in regarding politics as
a zone in which, to quote Neil Levy, “dirty actions are part and
parcel of ordinary political life”. Levy adds:
“Politicians must make deals, compromise with interests they
abhor, distribute favours and neglect relationships” (Levy 2007,
52–3, endnote 26). A number of these things are no doubt regrettable
or distasteful in varying degrees, but whether they are immoral
depends on what the deals are, what the favours involve, how deep the
compromise runs, and how damaging the neglect is (and to what sort of
relationship). Much of what various writers regard as the need for
dirty hands in politics is dubiously an issue of immorality at all. In
order to maintain power and get important work done, a politician may
have to appoint a member of a party in coalition with his own to an
important Ministry ahead of a trusted colleague in his own party who
has better credentials for the job. This is disappointing and painful
to him and his colleague and clearly less than ideal (even though the
appointee is, we may suppose, competent enough) but I do not think the
act can be seen as immoral. To call it morally disagreeable is to
signal the fact that certain valuable relations and ends are put under
strain by it, but it is clearly not is the same league as torture,
murder, or gross deceit.
  

Bernard Williams does indeed distinguish levels of gravity in the
sinning required of politicians in his exploration of the scope of
dirty hands, but he also suggests that the politician’s necessary
immoralities are very common and distinctive. He distinguishes between
the morally “disagreeable or distasteful” and the morally
criminal, the latter being subsumed under a broad category of what he
calls “violence” (Williams 1978, 71). Although Williams
allows that some political actions that are popularly believed to be
morally dubious, may well be morally acceptable when circumstances are
properly understood, he casts a pretty wide net for the morally
disagreeable. It involves such things as “lying, or at least
concealment and the making of misleading statements; breaking
promises; special pleading; temporary coalition with the distasteful;
sacrifice of the interests of worthy persons to those of unworthy
persons; and (at least if in a sufficiently important position)
coercion up to blackmail” (Williams 1978, 59). Yet it is
unlikely that all of these, as so generally described, are morally
wrong in all circumstances. True, some philosophers have held as much
for some of these—Augustine, Aquinas and Kant for lying, and
Kant for promising—but surely lying is acceptable in extreme
circumstances such as the need to protect an innocent person from a
murderer, and even coercion (depending on the definition) isn’t always
morally wrong, witness the coercive detention of people reasonably
suspected of contagious disease that they are unaware of. It seems
that most, if not all the things Williams mentions are in the category
“normally morally wrong but morally permissible in certain
circumstances”. Even blackmail might be in this category since
blackmailing a vicious criminal in order to secure the freedom of his
victim might (perhaps depending on the kind of blackmail) be morally
permissible. Notions like regret or remorse are sometimes invoked to
show that what had to be done was nonetheless immoral, but apart from
the fact that an act such as the blackmail of a vicious criminal need
not even be regrettable, there are many things one can rightly regret
having to do that are not immoral, for example, punishing a child by
withdrawing privileges. Remorse strikes a stronger, more moralised
note, but for that very reason one should be careful not to confuse it
with various feelings of discomfort, regret or sorrow for having to do
certain things. Further investigation of the nature and appropriate
conditions for remorse is interesting and difficult, but beyond the
scope of this discussion, and its role as a criterion of dirty hands
seems at best inconclusive.
The idea that dirty hands (in contrast to sheer bad behaviour and
corrupt activity) are commonplace in politics is highly dubious, but
just how extensive the reach of this phenomenon is in politics is
difficult to determine, and would be best considered on a case by
case, or perhaps category by category, fashion. Clearly, the most
obvious, and I think the most interesting category is that described
by Williams with the term “violence” (though that has the
contentious, and I think unfortunate implication that all violence is
immoral). This covers the acts that Walzer’s later argument seeks to
capture with his term “supreme emergency”. His terminology
and his later practice make the scope of dirty hands pretty
restricted, perhaps more so than Williams intended, but I will follow
his example and focus on really grave injustices like murder, torture,
rape or slavery that are said to be warranted in conditions of extreme
emergency. 
First, however, it is worth noting that enthusiasm to detect the sway
of dirty hands can lead to misdescription of some complex, disturbing
moral situations. An interesting example of this has been explored by
Jennifer Rubenstein in connection with problems facing International
NGOs providing aid in emergency situations such as the refugee camps
in the Congo. INGO agents have found that their provision of food and
medicine is often exploited by warring factions within refugee camps
and elsewhere (see also some of Fiona Terry’s discussion and examples
in Terry 2002). This confronts them with often agonising decisions
about whether to cease aid and leave the areas of distress because of
the harm this exploitation generates, including continuation of
violent conflict. If they leave they abandon suffering people, but if
they stay, then they contribute unintentionally to great harms that
others inflict on innocent people. Such problems are often described
with the vocabulary of “dirty hands”, but, as Rubenstein
argues, this description is misplaced since, for one thing, the aid
agencies do not themselves intentionally do harm to avoid some great
evil or achieve some great good. Rubenstein proposes a category of
“spattered hands” to describe these situations in order to
emphasise that the soiling is contributed by the actions of others
(Rubenstein 2014, Chapter 4). We cannot examine the adequacy of her
new category here, but she seems right that the examples are
misdescribed as dirty hands. 
It will be apparent from all this that the dirty hands problem needs
initially some conceptual clarification; this should proceed with a
view to five issues. First, there is the question whether the dirty
hands scenario makes any sense at all; perhaps it is just a muddle.
Second, there is the related question whether the overriding that dirty
hands involve (or purport to involve) takes place within morality or
somehow beyond it. Third, there is the question whether dirty hands are
necessitated only or primarily by politics. Fourth, how are the
circumstances that call for dirty hands best described? Fifth, there is
the issue of the relation of the dirty hands problem to that of moral
dilemmas and the requirements of some form of moral absolutism.
Let us examine these in turn. The structure of dirty hands is such that
it seems to involve a contradiction or paradox. The advocate of dirty
hands says in effect that it is sometimes right to do what is wrong,
and this seems tantamount to saying that some act is both wrong and not
wrong. But the dirty hands theorist is not saying that it is wrong in
some respects and right in others, nor that what would normally be
wrong is here right. Rather, it is the whole act in context that is
both categorically wrong and not wrong. In the dirty hands scenario we
are asked to believe that doing X is morally wrong and yet it
is palpably right to do it. As Walzer has more recently written of his
own position, it is both “provocative and paradoxical”
(Walzer 2004a, 33). Kai Nielson has urged the point even more
strongly, but something of the sort has puzzled many who contemplate
the problem. The category of dirty hands, as described by Walzer and
some others is, according to Nielson “a conceptual confusion with
unfortunate moral residues” (Nielson 2000, 140). Clearly
such a dismissal would come naturally to a utilitarian or most
consequentialists who would simply declare the dirty hands decision to
be one in which a right act (that producing the best consequences in
terms of preference satisfactions, overall increase in happiness or
whatever) has been done though it may have been distressing to do it.
Nielson disavows utilitarianism and calls himself a “weak
consequentialist” but the upshot is much the same. He thinks that
dirty hands situations confront an agent with a choice of two evils and
the agent should always choose the lesser evil. No doubt, in acting
against what in other circumstances is a deep moral constraint, the
agent will experience distress; she will “feel guilty” but
feeling guilty is not to be confused with being guilty (Nielson 2000,
140).
From the opposite direction the problem can also be resolved by the
denial that the hands should become dirty. An insistence on the
inviolability of some moral prescriptions makes the paradox disappear
as neatly as the Nielson manoeuvre. If we hold to the prohibition on
intentionally killing the innocent, for example, in the face of crises
like that supposed by Walzer to necessitate the bombing of German
cities in the early phase of World War II, then there are no dirty
hands to have. Such a position is often called absolutist. Absolutist
positions have been explicitly held by many philosophers, notably
Augustine, Aquinas, and Kant, and implicitly perhaps by many more. The
position involves complexities that we will examine later.
Both these responses agree in holding that moral reasons rightly
dominate all others. Another way of defusing the strong appearance of
contradiction is to hold that morality is not the only legitimate
determinant of right action and that some other determinant may
occasionally properly trump it. This provides one answer to the second
point of clarification mentioned earlier. Dirty hands problems do not
arise within morality but rather when morality clashes with
some other rational necessity of a profound kind that correctly
overrules
 it.[2]
The overruling must inspire regret,
possibly remorse, but it is nonetheless clear that the overruling is in
order, indeed required. Here, it is important to acknowledge that the
overruling in question is not merely a description of what often
happens. It is common knowledge that the demands of morality are often
enough overridden by other persuasive demands, such as imperatives of
self-interest, careerism, political advantage and friendship. It may
even be that politics is an arena in which such overpowering happens
more commonly than elsewhere, so that participation in it is fraught
with moral hazard that requires an exceptional moral character to
overcome. Nonetheless, the importance and challenge of the dirty hands
scenario is not that hands get dirty from time to time, but that it is
right that they do so.
If we allow that non-moral “oughts” can sometimes trump
moral ones then the dirty hands position may be restated as holding
that, in circumstances of extremity, reasons of “necessity”
(or whatever) defeat important moral reasons. This seems to be one
plausible construal of Machiavelli when he talks of the necessity that
rulers must learn how not to be good. Of course, he has the model of
Christian morality in mind when he calls for its overriding and so may
be understood as opposing one form of morality to another, but a good
deal of his discussion can be treated as elevating “reasons of
state” above morality. This is a rejection of the idea that moral
reasons dominate all other reasons.
It may be useful here to distinguish between dominance and
comprehensiveness. Most moral theorists hold that morality is both
comprehensive and dominant, that is, it relevant to all decisions and
where relevant it defeats all other reasons. One could however hold
that morality is comprehensive but not dominant, or dominant but not
comprehensive, or indeed neither dominant nor comprehensive. Our
present inquiry is concerned with the first two options. The ideas of
dominance and comprehensiveness express somewhat different pictures of
the status of morality, though an exalted understanding of morality
often draws on both. Morality’s dominance would consist in its
trumping all other considerations whenever it is relevant to them,
whereas morality’s comprehensiveness consists in its being
universally relevant whether it trumps other considerations or not. On
the present interpretation, dirty hands theorists accept
morality’s comprehensiveness (at least with respect to the
domains they are concerned with) but reluctantly reject its dominance
for one class of decisions.
We might usefully contrast this with the position of the school of
thinkers called “political realists” whose outlook has some
affinity with the dirty hands theorists to the point that the two are
sometimes confused. Realists are often viewed (and often present
themselves) as rejecting the comprehensive relevance of morality by
reference to something special about politics or international
relations. So we find E.H. Carr stating as “the realist
view” that “no ethical standards are applicable to
relations between states…” (Carr 1962, 153). Other realists
come close to this, though their views are clouded by uncertainties
about morality’s provenance (as indeed are Carr’s). Arthur
Schlesinger Jr., for instance, claims: “The raw material of
foreign affairs is, most of the time, morally neutral or ambiguous. In
consequence, for the great majority of foreign-policy transactions,
moral principles cannot be decisive” (Schlesinger 1971,
73).The influential American realist, Hans Morgenthau, is anxious
to separate politics from morality by maintaining “the autonomy
of the political sphere.” He recognises the autonomy of other
spheres such as economics, law and morality, but insists that the
political realist must “subordinate these other standards to
those of politics” (Morgenthau 2006, 13). Here, he echoes
the position of the German conservative thinker Carl Schmitt by whom he
was clearly influenced. Schmitt became embroiled with the Nazi Party in
the 1930s and enjoyed (if that is the word) some fame for a time as a
theoretician for the Nazi cause. These quotations all suggest the idea
that politics, or some significant area of it, such as international
relations, falls quite outside the provenance of morality, thus denying
morality comprehensiveness, though the reference to morality’s
failure to be “decisive” hints at a denial of
dominance. There are many obscurities in the stance of political
realism, and this is not the place to unravel them, but in spite of the
ambiguities in pronouncements of the leading theorists in the school,
and in spite of some continuity between their outlook on politics and
that of the dirty hands theorists, it is clear that the realist’s
attitude to morality usually has quite a different flavour to that of
the dirty hands
 theorists.[3]
Part of this is captured by the
difference between the denials of comprehensiveness and dominance, and
this connects with the fact that when realists reject moral
considerations they do so with no deep sense of regret or remorse for
having done what is morally wrong.
The denial of dominance preserves a certain coherence for morality
since it is not, as it were, at odds with itself; it is at times and in
context at odds with something else which, following both Machiavelli
and Walzer, might be called “necessity”. But what is this
necessity? Clearly, it is not meant to be some form of deterministic
necessity, since it would have been possible for the British leadership
in World War II to have rejected the policy of city bombing outright,
as their declared policy prior to the war had indicated they would do,
a policy that their initial bombing practices indeed
 respected.[4]
Yet
there is a trace of this deterministic thought in the idea of supreme
emergency with its implication of something that overwhelms the normal
power of morality. We might recall in this connection Thomas
Hobbes’s argument that moral dictates cannot apply when they
would lead to self-destruction. Hobbes’s idea is that the
rationality of self-preservation, which itself gives rise to morality,
makes acting on morality null and void when acting on it would defy
self-preservation. As Hobbes puts it: “The laws of nature oblige
in foro interno; that is to say, they bind to a desire that
they should take place: but in foro externo: this is to the
putting of them in act, not always. For he that should be modest, and
tractable, and perform all he promises, in such time, and place, where
no man else should do so, should but make himself a prey to others, and
procure his own certain ruin, contrary to the ground of all laws of
nature, which tend to nature’s preservation” (Leviathan,
Ch. XV, p. 99).
Hobbes certainly does paint a totally isolated scenario for the person
who would obey the moral law—“where no man else should do
so”—and one might wonder whether the institution of
promising could even exist in so bleakly uncooperative “time and
place” as he supposes. But presumably a sufficient number of
non-cooperators would serve to make one “a prey to others”
and procure “certain ruin”, and it is the necessity of
avoiding some such ruin that motivates the supreme emergency story,
even though it is collective rather than individual ruin that lies at
its heart. Hobbes’s exemption from the need to practice morality
(rather than desire its operation) makes most sense on a contractarian
view of morality or in connection with those moral obligations that are
dependent upon agreement (even if other obligations are not). In a
world in which hardly anyone kept their promises or adhered to their
contracts, the sense of such commitments would dissipate and entering
into what shell remained of them might be folly indeed, and very likely
futile as well. But many other areas of morality are not like this, and
so even where adherence to moral imperatives may be perilous in the
extreme, it may not be the folly that Hobbes’s comments make it
seem. One woman who survived Belsen, Hanna Levy-Haas, records in her
diary a philosophical debate she had in the camp with a fellow Marxist,
Professor K who argued the somewhat Hobbesian case (embellished with
Marxist terminology) that morality did not apply in the camps because
it was superseded by the survival imperative. She rejected his argument
because it required her “simply to compromise with the enemy, to
betray one’s principles, to deny spiritual values in the
interests of saving one’s skin” (Levy-Haas 1982, 65).
These comments indicate at the very least that the idea of “total
ruin” is open to interpretations that see the abandonment or
degrading of moral integrity as itself a primary ingredient in such
ruin.
This excursion into the world of the Leviathan nonetheless helps give
some sense to the idea that the practice of morality might be suspended
for a time and hence morality itself moved aside by an external
necessity. It thus helps show a way that the dirty hands story might be
redeemed from incoherence, even if the idea that morality should
sometimes be dominated by an external necessity proves unacceptable.
The dirty hands position might then be coherent but false. So Hanna
Levy-Haas could understand the Professor’s argument, but found
reason to reject it.
Another route out of paradox would be to hold that the clash
depicted by dirty hands theorists occurs within morality. Here, the
idea might be that morality itself is not entirely coherent or
self-consistent. In certain extreme circumstances, one powerful strand
in morality comes into conflict with another. Even more clearly,
Weber’s distinction between the ethics of ultimate ends and that
of responsibility points in this direction. His idea is expressed
somewhat opaquely, but he seems to be claiming that there are two
strands in morality, or two types of morality, such that one may be
applicable to ordinary life, but must yield to the other in matters
political, especially those that involve difficult choices in a context
of violence. Several passages in Walzer’s discussion tend in this
direction. He holds that a morality of rights and a morality of
consequences or utility co-exist in our moral outlook in such a way
that although rights trump utility in normal circumstances, a
“utilitarianism of extremity” rightly overrides the
morality of rights in some rare circumstances. As he puts it: in a
situation of supreme emergency, “a certain kind of utilitarianism
reimposes itself”, this being “the utilitarianism of
extremity” set against “a rights normality” (Walzer
2004a, 40).
This contrast between a rights ethic (or other deontological ethic) and
utilitarianism is one way of locating the clash within morality itself.
Another way is by having recourse to role morality: within morality
itself there are general moral principles, rules etc. and then special
moral requirements dictated by significant social roles. These can come
into conflict, as when the lawyer’s obligation to provide her
client with the best defence and to preserve confidentiality can
conflict with the demands of impartial justice. So it might be argued
that the political role has obligations and rights special to it that
override more general moral obligations and rights. When it comes to
the immensely important role of political leadership, we “cannot
measure such men by the ordinary rule” as Lady Carbury puts it.
This manoeuvre has the advantage of capturing something important in
the dirty hands literature (and it is also present in the realist
literature), namely, the emphasis on the special moral significance of
the role of political leadership. Walzer, for instance, places great
weight upon “what political leaders are for.” Talking
of political and military leaders, he says, “The effect of the
supreme emergency arguments should be to reinforce professional
ethics, and to provide an account of when it is permissible (and
necessary) to get our hands dirty” (Walzer 2004a, 42). An
initial problem with this sort of move is that the special duties and
rights of social roles are underpinned by general moral considerations
since it is only those roles that can be morally supported by quite
general moral considerations that will have a role morality. We may
describe the code of the Mafia thug as the morality of his role, but
usually it is mores rather morality being described. Even if it is a
requirement of his role that a Mafia hit-man must murder anyone who
snitches to the police, this is hardly a moral imperative of any sort.
And where there are genuine moral duties to a role, and they are
endorsed by broader moral considerations, we do not believe that this
endorsement cannot itself be overruled by other general moral
obligations. The requirements of professional confidentiality, for
instance, can be so overridden, as when medical confidentiality
regarding a doctor-patient communication stands in the way of saving a
life. The famous Tarasof case is instructive in this respect. It
concerned a counsellor at the University of California at Berkeley who
learned from his client that he planned to kill his ex-girl friend. The
counsellor was sufficiently worried that he broke confidentiality to
tell the police who investigated but took no further action. The girl
friend (Tarasof) was duly murdered by the client, and a court later
held that the counsellor should have gone further and notified Tarasof
or her family of the
 danger.[5]
Other courts have been less
demanding, but there is a general recognition that the professional
duty of client confidentiality can be overridden by more pressing moral
demands.
Indeed, the structure of the role morality defence of the dirty hands
story provides a curious inversion of the role morality logic since
that logic requires that emergency situations allow or even demand the
overturning of the role duties by the more general demands of a deeper
morality. By contrast, the dirty hands scenario requires the role
morality to triumph over the deeper moral outlook that gives sense to
the morality of role itself. Here we find yet another paradox
generated by the dirty hands category. It could only be resolved by
the insistence that the political role is unique among roles since in
its case its moral power somehow transcends the general morality. (Or,
if the dirty hands scenario applies beyond the political, it will be
one of a small set of roles that is unique.) In fact, there is a
strong strand of this political exceptionism inherent in the dirty
hands story. Yet how could the political role have such a status? We
might expect such an exaltation of the role from one such as Schmitt,
but in fact Walzer himself is drawn to it. Walzer’s position has been
cited as treating the dirty hands conflict as involving a clash
between a rights ethic and a utilitarianism of extremity, but the
following quote puts his position much more in the role morality
arena. He says in his later treatment: “No government can put
the life of the community and all its members at risk, so long as
there are actions available to it, even immoral actions, that would
avoid or reduce the risk….That is what political leaders are
for; that is their first task” (Walzer 2004a, 42). Furthermore,
the significance of this task is cashed out in terms of the supreme
value of the specific “moral community” to which the
political leader belongs. The leader’s obligations will involve
calculations of utility, but, in extremis, his or her ultimate
responsibility to that community trumps universalist utilitarian
calculations as well as specific deontological constraints. When the
“ongoingness” of a community’s way of life is threatened
then the prospect is that of “a loss greater than any that can
be imagined, except for the destruction of humanity itself”
(Walzer 2004a, 43). These claims, if true, would certainly establish a
pre-eminent, if not unique, significance for the political role, so
they need close examination.
Walzer’s two quotes stress significantly different values that
he has a tendency to conflate. The first is that of life itself for all
members of the community, the second that of the continuity of a
“way of life”. Survival is at issue in both cases but the
significance and weight that each survival should have is surely very
different. The prospect of universal massacre understandably puts
stress upon anything constraining the scope of actions to prevent it,
but the prospect of forced alterations, set-backs or radical changes to
a way of life must be less threatening. Even a relatively benign
foreign occupation may involve extensive and very regrettable changes
to the way of life of the occupied community perhaps in the form of
restrictions on traditional freedoms, such as those of political speech
or religious expression, and a degraded position of citizenship
vis-a-vis the occupiers. Yet throughout history modified life styles
have evolved for such communities that make for the possibility of at
least coping and even some flourishing. It is not at all obvious that
slaughtering innocent people is justified in order to avoid such an
outcome, or even outcomes notably worse on the same scale.
Even if dirty hands were permitted only to political communities facing
extreme situations, it is not at all clear that the exemption should
only be available to political communities that have states. Walzer
does not exactly say this, but his pro-state bias is evident in his
discussion of supreme emergency in Just and Unjust Wars. Early
in that discussion, he says, for instance, “Can soldiers and
statesmen override the rights of innocent people for the sake of their
own political community? I am inclined to answer this question
affirmatively, though not without hesitation and worry” (Walzer
1977, 254). Further, in a different essay on terrorism, Walzer
rejects arguments on behalf of terrorism by non-state agents that are
very similar to those that he accepts as legitimating the bombing of
German cities. For example, he claims that the familiar terrorist
excuse that they had no alternative in the face of oppression is only
“a pretence.” As he puts it: “‘Last
resort’ has only a notional finality; the resort to terror is
ideologically last, not last in an actual series of actions, just last
for the sake of the excuse” (Walzer 2004b, 54). Yet no such
scepticism is expressed about the no alternative and last resort
justifications offered by governments who use terrorism in supreme
emergency.
But political communities other than states may surely face supreme
emergencies, even allowing for the difficulties in interpreting the
concept, so the way is open in principle for sub-state terrorism to be
justified. This is a position that Walzer somewhat reluctantly seems
now (in a parenthesis to a later reprinting of the terrorism article)
to concede, though it goes somewhat against the grain of the article
itself. The parenthetical comments, published in 2004, are:
“Would terrorism be justified in a ‘supreme
emergency’ as that condition is described [by Walzer in the
earlier chapter called ‘Emergency Ethics’]. It might be,
but only if the oppression to which the terrorists claimed to be
responding was genocidal in character” (Walzer 2004b, 54). There
are difficulties in matching the complex meanings of
“genocide” to Walzer’s communitarian account of
supreme emergency. For one thing, a Nazi victory would probably not
have meant genocide for the British community yet, according to Walzer,
they were facing supreme emergency. So, the sources of his differential
treatment of state and sub-state terrorism remain a puzzle.
He goes on to deny that any actual recent terrorism has
been “a means for avoiding disaster” rather than merely a
“reaching for political success” (Walzer 2004b, 54).  So
the supreme emergency/dirty hands exemption seems available, given
significant qualifications concerning probability of success, for
terrorists aiming to save a communal way of life. In a later paper
again, Walzer allows for exceptional cases in which sub-state
terrorism might be excusable though not justifiable; he imagines as
excusable “a terrorist campaign by Jewish militants against
German civilians in the 1940s—if attacks on civilians had been
likely (in fact they would have been highly unlikely) to stop the mass
murder of the Jews” (Walzer 2006, 7). The shift from justifiable
in the earlier quotation to excusable in the later clearly needs more
explanation; Walzer seems hesitant, if not confused in his resort to
these categories. Nonetheless, on Walzer’s own grounds, there would
seem to be a case, given some likelihood of success, for the
employment of terrorism by Palestinian groups seeking to salvage what
remains of their community’s way of life from the ravages of Israeli
occupation, settlement and military attack. It is perhaps pertinent to
this prospect that the Palestinians refer to their dispossession and
ongoing sufferings at the hands of Israel as “al-Nakba”:
the catastrophe. No doubt, their achieving that prospect would involve
some sort of “reaching for political success” but this
hardly counts against its status as a response to supreme emergency.
The point here is not to make any particular claims about the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict, but rather to stress the idea, noted
earlier, that Walzer’s move to a criterion of genocide is puzzling as
the sole interpretation of what a threat to the continuity of a
communal way of life could mean.
Walzer’s tendency to run together the categories of excuse and
justification needs some comment because it is symptomatic of the
tensions inherent in the dirty hands scenario. He realises in the 1973
article that it is important to distinguish them. Citing J.L. Austin,
Walzer remarks that “the two can seem to come very close
together…but they are conceptually distinct…an excuse is
typically an admission of fault; a justification is typically a denial
of fault and an assertion of innocence” (Walzer 1973, 170;
Walzer 1974, 72). Yet dirty hands acts involve both an admission of
fault and a justification. This tends to collapse the distinction
since what is justified needs no excuse and the unjustifiable is
sometimes excusable. Walzer’s discussion for the most part clearly
treats the dirty hands decisions as justified in some sense, whatever
is said about its role as excuse. It is notable that at least one
commentator, Tamar Meisels, explicitly rejects the account in terms of
justification in her discussion of terrorism and torture but she
accepts dirty hands as providing grounds for excuse (Meisels 2008a,
213–221). Yet not only is this an unlikely interpretation of the
tradition, but it renders the category of dirty hands far less
interesting philosophically and ethically.
The discussion of the importance and extent of political community
leads naturally to the question whether the need for dirty hands can be
restricted to the political sphere. If hands must be dirtied to avoid
widespread massacre, on the one hand, or damage to the
moral-cum-political continuity of a community’s way of life, then
why not to avoid the unjustified killing of individuals or small groups
or the drastic disruption of individual or small group’s way of
living. Why should the political community and the political role take
such dramatic precedence over such significant groups as families and
their associated roles? For that matter, why should it take precedence
over the individual’s need for survival regardless of role? The
answer to this is not entirely clear. In Walzer’s discussion of
supreme emergency and the World War II city bombings, he confronts this
question but his discussion is marked by what he himself calls
“hesitation and worry”. It is also marked by appeals
to what people are “likely to feel”, “what is not
usually said” and similar phrases. He says: “…it is
not usually said of individuals in domestic society that they
necessarily will or that they morally can strike out at innocent
people, even in the supreme emergency of self-defense. They can only
attack their attackers. But communities, in emergencies, seem to have
different and larger prerogatives. I am not sure that I can account for
the difference, without ascribing to communal life a kind of
transcendence that I don’t believe it to have” (Walzer
1977, 254). Nor, he thinks, can it simply be a matter of the numbers.
Yet he persists with the superiority of the political community:
“We might better say that it is possible to live in a world where
individuals are sometimes murdered, but a world where entire peoples
are enslaved or massacred is literally unbearable. For the survival and
freedom of political communities—whose members share a way of
life, developed by their ancestors, to be passed on to their
children—are the highest values of international society”
(Walzer 1977, 254). Leaving aside the quibble that an individual facing
murder won’t find it possible to live on if she is actually
murdered when perhaps she refuses to kill the innocent in order to
survive, we might question the sensitivity of ignoring the way any
murder victim’s close relatives find her death unbearable and the
prospect of living on an agonising one. We might also wonder why
“we” don’t find it unbearable to slaughter hundreds
of thousands of innocent people to preserve the survival and freedom of
our political communities. Nor is the reference to “the highest
values of international society” particularly compelling. Where
“international society” refers to the society of states, as
Walzer seems often to mean, then it is not surprising that such states
hold their survival as a pre-eminent value, but non-state agents may
understandably have different priorities. A mother scrounging for the
survival of her children in the desperate conditions of a third-world
slum or primitive refugee camp may just as plausibly see herself coming
under what Walzer calls, in connection with political communities,
“the rule of necessity (and necessity knows no rules)”
(Walzer 1977, 254).
In his original article on dirty hands, Walzer allows in passing
that the phenomenon he is exploring might have a place beyond politics.
So, he says: “I don’t want to argue that it is only a
political dilemma. No doubt we can get our hands dirty in private life
also, and sometimes, no doubt, we should. But the issue is posed most
dramatically in politics…” (Walzer 1974, 76). This
concession has, however, little influence on his developed position
which is focused wholly on extreme emergency in political contexts.
(The original article is, after all, called, “Political Action:
the Problem of Dirty Hands”.) Other writers have been puzzled by
the heavy concentration on politics. Michael Stocker, for one, rejects
this restriction (Stocker 2000, 32–3).
Stocker also argues that the dirty hands phenomena, though distinctive
in various ways, exhibit quite common features of moral conflicts more
generally, and partly for this reason he thinks there is no logical
incoherence in the dirty hands story. Stocker argues that what he calls
double-counting, i.e., giving moral weight to impossible oughts, and
allowing for non-action-guiding act evaluations, is a central feature
of dirty hands, but is not restricted to them since they occur
“across the board” of moral thinking and deciding.
However it should be located, the phenomenon of dirty hands can be
easily assimilated to that of moral dilemma, but this is an
assimilation that should be resisted. Someone confronted with a
supreme emergency is indeed in what is often colloquially called
“a moral dilemma” in the sense that she faces a disturbing
and difficult choice situation, but that does not make it a moral
dilemma in a philosophically interesting sense. In common parlance all
sorts of situations that cause initial uncertainty and require hard
moral thinking to sort out are called moral dilemmas, as philosophers
who teach or consult on business ethics are fully aware. This usage is
harmless enough, but the philosophical usage of the term points to a
more disturbing situation and one that needs to be distinguished from
dirty hands. Both the categories of dirty hands and moral dilemma
involve agonising choice in which there will be grave moral loss
either way. The most salient difference between the categories is that
a moral dilemma arises only when the choice is such that neither horn
is decisively supported by morality, indeed morality speaks equally
against both. (There is a parallel dilemma for non-moral normative
contexts, if there be any, where normative reasons speak equally
against doing p or doing not-p.) Whichever way the
agent chooses, her action is unjustified and there is no question of
one course being more necessary or demanded than the other. By
contrast, the dirty hands choice is always dictated as the
“necessary” course: in the context of political
emergencies, the community defence always wins the day even over
innocent lives. This is the special feature that marks off dirty hands
from moral dilemmas.
A relatively unexplored question concerns whether anything more
informative than a reference to “emergency”, supreme or
otherwise, can be provided to illuminate the typical circumstances in
which it is claimed that hands must be dirtied. One line of
clarification that might be attempted would be to scrutinise more
carefully various broad situations in which moral action might be
especially under strain in political contexts. A first suggestion might
be that politics is essentially a zone of compromise, and it is the
pressure of compromise that creates the need for dirty hands. It is
certainly true that compromise is a pervasive feature of political
life, but compromise is hardly unique to politics, nor is it
necessarily a pressure for immoral conduct. Indeed, it is arguable that
the capacity to compromise is an essential moral ingredient in all
successful cooperative endeavours, since, apart from its instrumental
value, it shows respect for other reasonable participants in public
action. Nonetheless, compromise clearly has its morally dangerous side
as indicated by our use of “compromised” to characterise
someone whose principles have been sullied to an extent that makes them
untrustworthy. Since a compromise is a sort of bargain where parties
sacrifice some good objectives in order to gain others, it raises a
question about how far such deals can go, and this brings us into dirty
hands territory. Another situation, related to our earlier discussion
of Hobbes, is that of moral isolation. As noted there, the fact that
general adherence to morality has to a considerable degree broken down,
might not give as great a dispensation from moral constraints as Hobbes
supposes, but at least it poses starkly the rationale for compliance. A
third situation that seems relevant here and needs further exploration
is that of extrication. Politicians, and others, often find themselves
in situations where they have inherited, or are otherwise constrained
by, the decisions and policies of others (or even their previous
selves) that they now judge unwise or even gravely immoral. So, for
example, they may seek to end an unjust war to which their predecessors
have committed the nation, but immediate cessation and withdrawal may
not be desirable from several perspectives, including a moral point of
view. They may very well think that the best extrication strategy
requires a temporary continuation of the war, unjust as it is, with a
view to a withdrawal that better secures the rights of innocent people
and makes the withdrawal politically possible. Obviously, what such
situations might allow in terms of continued immorality needs to be
spelled out in more detail than space allows here, but equally, it
seems clear that there is a potential for dirty hands discussion that
moves fruitfully beyond the often-vague generalities of
“emergency” or “extremity”.
The discussion of extrication raises another point about dirty hands
that is seldom addressed. Dirty Hands scenarios are often constructed
very specifically as giving the agent narrow choices restricted by
external circumstances over which she has no present control. The
specific scenario is often then generalised as though those external
circumstances, or ones very like them, are immutable for an agent with
that sort of background (e.g., a politician). This is, however,, too
static and inflexible a view of moral contexts, roles and agent
capacities. In the extrication story above, the politician’s
“necessary immorality” is forced upon her by the circumstances she has
created or inherited, but the point of invoking extrication morality
within the dirty hands problematic is to insist on possibilities of
temporary involvement in evil and the need to change the circumstances
that require such involvement. The ruler bent on extrication must
persist in waging an unjust war only because at that time there is no
other way that she can end the war by changing the context. But this
restriction should be seen here and in other dirty hands situations as
creating a moral imperative for the agent or others to change the
background against which the moral crisis has arisen so that similar
situations are unlikely to recur. In the unjust war example, the
politician might use eventual success in ending the war to change
colonial or neo-colonial policies that fed the resort to war, to
remove over-belligerent personnel from the defence establishment,
rethink alliances that played a part in promoting the unjust war, and
so on. Courage, imagination and luck may be needed to realise the
relevant possibilities, but without making efforts at relevant
changes, the agent’s appeal to necessity when invoking the dirty
hands plea should ring hollow.
Most of the discussion of dirty hands concentrates upon the situation
of the individual political leader who must dirty his or her hands,
but another interesting question concerns the dirt on the hands of
citizens themselves when their leaders act thus on their behalf. This
is particularly acute for democratic citizens to whom representative
theory applies more plausibly than to citizens of an autocracy. In
Walzer’s original discussion, he insists that part of the tension,
even agony, of the dirty hands problem arises from the fact that we,
the governed, want our leaders to be virtuous, but also want them to
have the sort of character that can act against deep moral principle
when the supreme emergency arises. Of the politician who dirties his
hands in a good cause but realises he is acting immorally, Walzer
writes: “Because he has scruples of this sort we know him to be
a good man. But we…hope that he will overcome his
scruples…We know he is doing right when he makes the deal
because he knows he is doing wrong” (Walzer 1973, 166; 1974,
68). But if so, our endorsement would seem to have some implication for
our own hands. This is not an implication that Walzer fully explores,
though he does say in the last sentence of his original article when
discussing the need to penalise dirty hands that we can’t punish the
dirty hands of the principal agents “without getting our own
hands dirty, and then we must find some way of paying the price
ourselves” (Walzer 1973, 180; 1974, 82).
  

Various other writers have however explored the implication, either
directly or as part of the discussion of the supposed need to
“punish” dirty hands (for this topic see below). Most
recently David Archard complains that “…there has been
little discussion of the putative complicity, and thus also dirtying
of hands, of a democratic public that authorizes politicians to act in
its name” (Archard 2013, 777). Here he echoes an earlier
position taken by Martin Hollis and also similar claims made by Dennis
Thompson. As Hollis puts it: “Political actors, duly appointed
within a legitimate state, have an authority deriving finally from the
People. Currently that means from you and me.… When their hands
get dirty, so do ours” (Hollis 1996, 146–7). Like Walzer
they assume that somehow the ruled require the rulers to dirty their
hands, and this opens the way to distribute some degree of
responsibility or “dirt” to them.
Taking Walzer’s claim first, it is not at all obvious that
“we” want or hope that our leaders will violate deep moral
prohibitions where they judge it necessary to achieve important
political ends or avoid very bad outcomes, even if they remain
conscious of their wrongdoing. No doubt some of us do and some of us
don’t, but the issue is not really one of counting the preponderance
of desire in the community; it is rather whether there is something
inherent in the relation of the democratic citizenry to its leadership
that authorizes the leaders to dirty their hands in the relevant
way. Archard explicitly argues for such an authorization, claiming
that it is this authorization that gives the citizens a share in the
taint of dirty hands. Hollis, Dennis Thompson, Neil Levy and Janna
Thompson rely upon some similar link. 
But what exactly is this the nature of this authorization? It must be
more than simply giving certain people the authority to govern on our
behalf since that seems compatible with implicit or explicit
restrictions upon what they can or cannot do. Clearly, Archard needs
some strengthening of what the authorization allows; he tries to
achieve this by using the idea of a division of labor. Specifically,
he argues that there is a both a political and a moral division of
labor (Archard 2013, 782). The political is relatively
uncontroversial: it is the thesis that efficiency is best served by
the legitimate, multiple tasks required in a community being divided
and the task of governing is one of them. This makes no further
normative claims about restrictions or entitlements related to the
exercise of those tasks, and is compatible with most forms of
government. The moral division asserts that the different roles in
society carry with them different moral prerogatives and duties
appropriate to the different roles. But whatever the merits of such
role morality, it is not clear that it permits rulers to do anything
at all that they believe will fulfill the purposes of their
role. Combining the idea of role with that of authorization cannot
show that the authorized role player is entitled to use whatever means
he or she judges the only effective way of achieving the role’s
purposes. If it did, then authorizing a debt collector would seem to
imply that the agent may torture the debtor if that is the only way to
collect a significant debt. 
It might be conceded that this is ludicrous in the debt-collecting
example, but that the political role is different because of the very
high stakes, not only for the politicians, but for the democratic
citizens. Yet we have already seen that it is hard to contain the
dirty hands story within the realm of the political, and very few
political decisions are momentous enough to give politics a status
sufficiently privileged to exempt its practitioners, through that
role, from those deep moral constraints that restrict the
debt-collector or other agents in non-political life.  Indeed,
consciousness of these facts helps explain why Walzer has
progressively tightened the conditions in which dirty hands apply. So
the question about authorization must focus on whether
“we” can plausibly be said to have authorized violations
of deep moral principle in supreme emergency situations. Dennis
Thompson insists we do when he says that the dirty hands politician
acts “not only for us, but with our consent—not only in our name
but on our principles” (Thompson 1987, 18).
This confident answer to the question is not however supported by
argument or even survey, and seems to assume unanimity amongst the
“we” of a pluralistic, democratic community that is
unlikely to obtain. Dennis Thompson relies upon the legitimacy of the
democratic process and citizens’ assent to its outcomes, but, aside
from any general problems with consent theory, the ruler’s dirty hands
acts are often enough illegal or unconstitutional, as in the case of
torture, or in violation of declared policies that got the ruler
elected. Moreover, what we want of our political leaders will
presumably depend upon who “we” are and what moral and
political principles “we” hold. Suppose a dirty hands
decision has been made by the leaders to torture an innocent child in
order to extract information from the child’s radical parent about a
“ticking bomb” (and suppose that this is a genuine dirty
hands decision and not one flawed by lack of knowledge or ignoring of
preferable alternatives) then it is plausible to hold that those
citizens who think that the moral politician should violate his (and
their) deep moral objections to torture in such circumstances must
share in the guilt or shame that should attach to the politician. But
there will surely be many citizens who either think that the moral
violation should not have occurred, even in these circumstances, or
who think that the prohibition is not as deep as commonly supposed and
hence that the politician’s decision is right but not immoral. It is
implausible to hold that both these groups are implicated in dirty
hands in the way Archard and others suggest that all democratic
citizens, merely by being citizens, are.  
Moreover there is a further question underlying the question of
consent or authorization or expectation, namely that concerning what
we ought to want, expect or authorize and what principles we ought to
have. This is the question whether politicians ought to get their
hands dirty, in any sense of “ought” that carries ultimate
weight. If the politicians are right (in certain, presumably extreme,
circumstances) to dirty their hands and they are right to do it on our
behalf, then at least those of us who agree that it is right are
involved in what they do and have some responsibility for it. Indeed,
we are more than tainted, we are complicit. 
Emphasizing the shared guilt of citizens has implications for a
further issue, concerned with how the dirty hands perpetrator should
be treated after the event. Walzer argues that the politician’s
genuine guilt means that she should suffer a penalty or a shaming for
having done what “we” want her to do (Walzer 1973,
177–8; 1974 79–80). Others have taken a similar line
though the position has been criticized by, for example, Tamar Meisels
and Neil Levy (Meisels 2008a, 227 and Levy 2007 throughout). There are
serious problems about moral responsibility in claiming that a dirty
hands agent who does what is morally wrong because he must should be
punished or publicly disgraced. After all, if the freedom to act is a
precondition of moral responsibility and therefore blame, then the
dirty hand agent who does what is (all-things-considered) necessary
and somehow right seems immune to the criticism involved in
blame. (For further elaboration of this and related objections see
Levy 2007; also Meisels 2008a, 226–27.) The point here, however,
is that, even if it is proper to blame and shame for dirty hands,
then, on the supposition that all citizens share in the taint,
selecting only one to shame seems distinctly unjust, indeed massively
hypocritical.  While the rest of us rejoice and celebrate the happy
consequences of our agent’s necessary misdeed, she is shunned or
worse. As already noticed, Walzer does think that punishing the dirty
hands conduct of the principal agents makes our own hands dirty
(though he doesn’t seem to think that our original authorization of
the conduct does this). He doesn’t elaborate the point, but it opens
up intriguing prospects since presumably we dirty “our”
hands in punishing these agents precisely because, in some sense, they
are “innocent” or at least do not deserve punishment
because they have acted “rightly”. This opens up bizarre
possibilities of regress since “we” now should have to pay
a further price for inflicting a price on ourselves when we have done
the right (but immoral) thing in punishing ourselves, and so on and
on. It seems the spreading of responsibility for dirty hands to the
governed community merely adds to worries about the coherence of the
concept. 
Claims of shared guilt or taint raise further questions about the
responsibility that democratic citizens as well as their leadership
have for remedying the evil done to the victims of the dirty hands
decision. Stephen de Wijze (de Wijze, 2018) argues that not only must
the leadership try to justify their decision to their constituents,
but they and all their democratic citizens are liable to make
restitution to victims for the “necessary” harm done by the dirty
hands decision. Admittedly, he thinks that that although the citizens
are complicit their “moral pollution” is generally less than the
leadership. Even so, they are obliged to make amends to the victims of
the decision. All citizens, he argues, even those dissenting from the
decision, must “share in the moral burden, and contribute to the
appropriate restitution” (de Wijze, 2018, 144). So they must pay “some
penalty” perhaps in the form to increased taxation to effect
reparations.
There is some plausibility in the claim that even strongly dissenting
democratic citizens incur some restorative and other moral obligations
as a result of their leaders’ dirty hands behaviour, but support
for this claim need not resort to dubious extensions of the idea of
collective guilt or moral taint. Membership in a democratic political
community (or even in some non-democratic ones) creates a set of
relationships that involve forms of identification such that a degree
of pride can be taken in good decisions by the leadership and by
fellow citizens and a degree of shame or alienation at bad ones. None
of this mans that the dissenting citizen is in any way morally
responsible for those decisions, but what it may mean is that the
dissenting citizen has some special moral responsibility to criticise
those decisions, including the dirty hands ones that she rejects, and
to do what is possible, in spite of her lack of pollution or guilt, to
repair the bad effects. Responsibility for bad acts should be
distinguished from responsibility to remedy or compensate for them,
though it is a complex matter how to sketch the lineaments of this
distinction.
Both dirty hands and moral dilemmas challenge the idea that some
moral prohibitions or negative duties are “absolute” though
they do so in different ways. If we deny that there are moral rules or
prohibitions that stand whatever the context, then it will not be
surprising that deep moral prohibitions may be legitimately overridden
in some circumstances. Indeed, many contemporary moral theories, other
than utilitarianism, insist that such overruling remains a permanent
possibility. The intuitionism of W.D. Ross and his followers, for
instance, insists that all duties and obligations are prima facie. It
is always possible that the prima facie duty not to kill the innocent
will clash with some other prima facie duty, such as the duty to
promote wellbeing or the ruler’s duty to preserve the state or
protect the community, and then one’s actual duty will be the
outcome of weighing the respective force of the clashing prima facie
duties. One might thus see the dirty hands story as merely a version of
this outlook, a version that insists that only a very great weighting
on the other side of the balance can tip the scales against some very
significant prima facie obligations. Using terminology of Thomas
Nagel’s, dirty hands would instantiate “threshold
deontology” with a very high threshold for certain action types.
To make this assimilation would be to take much of the sting out of the
dirty hands story, both because dirty hands would be part of a more
commonplace moral perspective rather than a quite special ethic for
emergencies, and because there seems to be no room in threshold
deontology, or what has been called “balanced exceptionism”
(Coady 2004, 778–9; Coady 2008, 285–7, 299). for the idea that one has
done wrong in doing what is nonetheless right. There may be a sense of
regret that one cannot avoid doing something that was prima facie
wrong—it would be more comfortable if one’s prima facie
duties did not conflict and therefore need resolution—but no
wrong can be attributed to you if you have done the
balancing
 conscientiously.[6]
The balanced exceptionist can of
course acknowledge that some prima facie duties are stronger than
others, and hence some presumptive wrongs carry more heft than others.
Indeed, the balancing story commits its supporters to this
acknowledgement since there would be no point to the talk of balancing
as a procedure for decision unless there were such differences of
weight. But the fact remains that the granting of exemption from the
prohibition on intentionally killing the innocent is part of a normal,
even routine, business of balancing presumptive obligations in order to
find what is finally obligatory or prohibited. If the scales tell you
that it is morally permitted or even morally obligatory intentionally
to kill the innocent, then in these circumstances it cannot be wrong to
do
 so.[7]
In fact, there is an interesting comparison here with
utilitarianism. As we have seen, it is common to contrast balanced
exceptionism or threshold deontology with utilitarianism and to
establish dirty hands as a form of deontology (or intrinsicalism) that
yields to the utilitarianism of extremity. But there may be room for a
utilitarian version of the threshold story, even possibly the dirty
hands story.  Surely a sophisticated version of utilitarianism, such
as rule or indirect utilitarianism, can have room for the idea that
duties, virtues etc. cannot be overridden by ordinary calculations of
utility since to allow this would be to risk too much overall
disutility. It is only in situations of dire or “supreme”
emergency that the disutility of abiding by the prohibitions or rules
would be great enough to override the utilitarian value of keeping to
the
 rule.[8]
So, depending upon
the empirical facts and calculations, a utilitarian can admit a role
for thresholds, supreme emergencies, and even dirty hands. But while
this might give us a utilitarian version of threshold deontology, it
will not do as a version of dirty hands, since the utilitarian
overriding at the supreme emergency stage will involve a decision that
is simply right, and not in any sense right but still wrong. The only
sense in which it remains wrong is that weak sense, akin to that
attributed to Ross in endnote 35, in which it would have been wrong but
for the supreme emergency. For the utilitarian, (as indeed for Ross)
there is no real moral remainder, though there may be some room for
psychological discomfort.
The moral remainder and the remorse it generates signals the tribute
that dirty hands pays to moral absolutism. While actually rejecting
moral absolutes, the dirty hands theorist remains entranced by the
significance they give to certain moral constraints. But how do we
decide whether moral absolutism should be rejected? It is difficult in
the nature of the case to see what could resolve a dispute between
absolutists and non-absolutists. Absolutists do not typically regard
all moral prohibitions as absolute; they restrict their claim to a few
such prohibitions, such as those against intentional killing of the
innocent, rape and (for some theorists) torture. Their opponents claim
that, even for these cases, emergency scenarios can be imagined in
which “our” intuitions accept the legitimacy of such acts.
Where absolutists don’t reject the scenarios as merely fantastic
(as some certainly are), they simply have different intuitions about
the force of the examples. Moreover, they can point out that most moral
theorists, including their opponents, are absolutists about some moral
issues. Utilitarians allow no exceptions “whatever the
circumstances” to their basic rule of maximising satisfactory
outcomes, Rawlsian contractualism gives an absolute priority to certain
principles of liberty, and similar points apply to other theories
normally opposed to absolutism. It might be replied that the level at
which absolutism applies is different, and this is true since the
absolutist endorses specific moral prohibitions such as that on murder
or torture whereas the other theories are usually absolute at a more
abstract level. Yet it is unclear why this is an important difference,
or why, if it is, it should count against the absolutist. After all, it
is surely plausible that our conviction that murder or torture is
always wrong has more authority than any conviction that we should
always maximise the greatest happiness of the greatest number or always
maximise preference satisfaction. Moreover, some specific moral
prohibitions seem proof against even fantastic counter-examples, e.g.,
the principle that it is wrong to torture an innocent child for fun.
But, even here, it may be hazardous to underestimate the ingenuity of
philosophers in constructing bizarre counter-examples. Clearly, more
remains to be said about the nature of a defensible (or objectionable)
absolutism, but our discussion at least serves to indicate the
significance of absolute prohibitions for the framing of dirty hands
scenarios.
Walzer’s attitude to absolutism is (as it has to be) one of
respectful rejection. He says: “I don’t believe that
terrorism can ever be justified. But I also don’t want to defend
an absolute ban. ‘Do justice though the heavens fall’ has
never seemed to me a plausible moral position” (Walzer 2006, 7).
Elsewhere, he says, after claiming that absolutism is “very old,
perhaps older than anything else in our moral understanding”,
that at the point of disaster or supreme emergency “absolutism
represents, it seems to me, a refusal to think about what it means for
the heavens to fall” (Walzer 2004a). Such a refusal can indeed be
represented as obtuse, but when we come to cash out contemporary
thinking about falling heavens we might think about the issue of
torture, an issue that was one of Walzer’s earliest examples
generating dirty hands. The easy acceptance since September 11, 2001,
amongst some intellectuals of the recourse to torture in situations of
emergency, frequently it would seem far short of “supreme”,
has raised questions of the relevance of absolutism even on the part of
those who had previously endorsed dirty hands or exceptionism of some
sort. So, Henry Shue, for instance, always a strong opponent of
torture, had nonetheless allowed in his original treatment of the issue
that torture might be morally permissible in certain
“extreme” circumstances (Shue 1977–78). But in a
recent article, Shue criticises his own admission and the widespread
intellectual acceptance of torture in extremis as a resort to
“dreamland” (Shue 2006). By this he means that the
philosophers’ stories about “ticking bomb” scenarios
are basically fantasies that distract from the reality of moral
assessment in the real world. Shue’s opposition is now, as a
matter of practice, resolute and absolute. Others have also expressed a
commitment to a sort of absolutism in connection with torture. Bob
Brecher, for example, provides a criticism of the ticking bomb scenario
(which is basically the scenario Walzer uses in his original paper on
dirty hands) and from a purely consequentialist perspective endorses
the need for an absolute condemnation of torture (Brecker 2007). So the
debate about torture largely engendered by the “war on
terror” has revived interest in the credentials of moral
absolutism, although much about the nature and types of absolutism
remain in need of clarification. In any event, there is clearly reason
to approach the topic of dirty hands with a degree of suspicion
regarding Lady Carbury’s enthusiasm for “beneficent
audacity” and her contempt for measuring exceptional people by
the “ordinary rule” appropriate to the rest of us.