The concept of the aesthetic descends from the concept of taste. Why
the concept of taste commanded so much philosophical attention during
the 18th century is a complicated matter, but this much is clear:
the eighteenth-century theory of taste emerged, in part, as a
corrective to the rise of rationalism, particularly as applied to
beauty, and to the rise of egoism, particularly as applied to virtue.
Against rationalism about beauty, the eighteenth-century theory of
taste held the judgment of beauty to be immediate; against egoism about
virtue, it held the pleasure of beauty to be disinterested.
Rationalism about beauty is the view that judgments of beauty are
judgments of reason, i.e., that we judge things to be beautiful by
reasoning it out, where reasoning it out typically involves inferring
from principles or applying concepts. At the beginning of the
18th century, rationalism about beauty had achieved dominance on
the continent, and was being pushed to new extremes by “les
géomètres,” a group of literary theorists who aimed
to bring to literary criticism the mathematical rigor that Descartes
had brought to physics. As one such theorist put it:
It was against this, and against more moderate forms of rationalism
about beauty, that mainly British philosophers working mainly within an
empiricist framework began to develop theories of taste. The
fundamental idea behind any such theory—which we may call the
immediacy thesis—is that judgments of beauty are not (or at least
not canonically) mediated by inferences from principles or applications
of concepts, but rather have all the immediacy of straightforwardly
sensory judgments. It is the idea, in other words, that we do not
reason to the conclusion that things are beautiful, but rather
“taste” that they are. Here is an early expression of the
thesis, from Jean-Baptiste Dubos’s Critical Reflections on
Poetry, Painting, and Music, which first appeared in 1719:
And here is a late expression, from Kant’s 1790 Critique
of the Power of Judgment:
But the theory of taste would not have enjoyed its
eighteenth-century run, nor would it continue now to exert its
influence, had it been without resources to counter an obvious
rationalist objection. There is a wide difference—so goes the
objection—between judging the excellence of a ragout and judging
the excellence of a poem or a play. More often than not, poems and
plays are objects of great complication. But taking in all that
complication requires a lot of cognitive work, including the
application of concepts and the drawing of inferences. Judging the
beauty of poems and plays, then, is evidently not immediate and so
evidently not a matter of taste.
The chief way of meeting this objection was first to distinguish
between the act of grasping the object preparatory to judging it and
the act of judging the object once grasped, and then to allow the
former, but not the latter, to be as concept- and inference-mediated as
any rationalist might wish. Here is Hume, with characteristic
clarity:
Hume—like Shaftesbury and Hutcheson before him, and Reid after
him (Cooper 1711, 17, 231; Hutcheson 1725, 16–24; Reid 1785,
760–761)—regarded the faculty of taste as a kind of
“internal sense.” Unlike the five “external” or
“direct” senses, an “internal” (or
“reflex” or “secondary”) sense is one that
depends for its objects on the antecedent operation of some other
mental faculty or faculties. Reid characterizes it as follows:
Because of the highly complex natures or structures of many
beautiful objects, there will have to be a role for reason in their
perception. But perceiving the nature or structure of an object is one
thing. Perceiving its beauty is another.
Egoism about virtue is the view that to judge an action or trait
virtuous is to take pleasure in it because you believe it to serve
some interest of yours. Its central instance is the Hobbesian
view—still very much on early eighteenth-century
minds—that to judge an action or trait virtuous is to take
pleasure in it because you believe it to promote your safety. Against
Hobbesian egoism a number of British moralists—preeminently
Shaftesbury, Hutcheson, and Hume—argued that, while a judgment
of virtue is a matter of taking pleasure in response to an action or
trait, the pleasure is disinterested, by which they meant that it is
not self-interested (Cooper 1711, 220–223; Hutcheson 1725, 9,
25–26; Hume 1751, 218–232, 295–302). One argument
went roughly as follows. That we judge virtue by means of an immediate
sensation of pleasure means that judgments of virtue are judgments of
taste, no less than judgments of beauty. But pleasure in the beautiful
is not self-interested: we judge objects to be beautiful whether or
not we believe them to serve our interests. But if pleasure in the
beautiful is disinterested, there is no reason to think that pleasure
in the virtuous cannot also be (Hutcheson 1725, 9–10).
The eighteenth-century view that judgments of virtue are judgments of
taste highlights a difference between the eighteenth-century concept
of taste and our concept of the aesthetic, since for us the
concepts aesthetic and moral tend oppose one another
such that a judgment’s falling under one typically precludes its
falling under the other. Kant is chiefly responsible for introducing
this difference. He brought the moral and the aesthetic into
opposition by re-interpreting what we might call the disinterest
thesis—the thesis that pleasure in the beautiful is
disinterested (though see Cooper 1711, 222 and Home 2005, 36–38
for anticipations of Kant’s re-interpretation).
According to Kant, to say that a pleasure is interested is not to
say that it is self-interested in the Hobbesian sense, but rather that
it stands in a certain relation to the faculty of desire. The pleasure
involved in judging an action to be morally good is interested because
such a judgment issues in a desire to bring the action into existence,
i.e., to perform it. To judge an action to be morally good is to become
aware that one has a duty to perform the action, and to become so aware
is to gain a desire to perform it. By contrast, the pleasure involved
in judging an object to be beautiful is disinterested because such a
judgment issues in no desire to do anything in particular. If we can be
said to have a duty with regard to beautiful things, it appears to be
exhausted in our judging them aesthetically to be beautiful. That is
what Kant means when he says that the judgment of taste is not
practical but rather “merely contemplative” (Kant 1790,
95).
By thus re-orienting the notion of disinterest, Kant brought the
concept of taste into opposition with the concept of morality, and so
into line, more or less, with the present concept of the aesthetic. But
if the Kantian concept of taste is continuous, more or less, with the
present-day concept of the aesthetic, why the terminological
discontinuity? Why have we come to prefer the term
‘aesthetic’ to the term ‘taste’? The not very
interesting answer appears to be that we have preferred an adjective to
a noun. The term ‘aesthetic’ derives from the Greek term
for sensory perception, and so preserves the implication of immediacy
carried by the term ‘taste.’ Kant employed both terms,
though not equivalently: according to his usage,
‘aesthetic’ is broader, picking out a class of judgments
that includes both the normative judgment of taste and the
non-normative, though equally immediate, judgment of the agreeable.
Though Kant was not the first modern to use ‘aesthetic’
(Baumgarten had used it as early as 1735), the term became widespread
only, though quickly, after his employment of it in the third Critique.
Yet the employment that became widespread was not exactly Kant’s,
but a narrower one according to which ‘aesthetic’ simply
functions as an adjective corresponding to the noun
“taste.” So for example we find Coleridge, in 1821,
expressing the wish that he “could find a more familiar word than
aesthetic for works of taste and criticism,” before going on to
argue:
The availability of an adjective corresponding to
“taste” has allowed for the retiring of a series of awkward
expressions: the expressions “judgment of taste,”
“emotion of taste” and “quality of taste” have
given way to the arguably less offensive ‘aesthetic
judgment,’ ‘aesthetic emotion,’ and ‘aesthetic
quality.’ However, as the noun ‘taste’ phased out, we
became saddled with other perhaps equally awkward expressions,
including the one that names this entry.
Much of the history of more recent thinking about the concept of the
aesthetic can be seen as the history of the development of the
immediacy and disinterest theses.
Artistic formalism is the view that the artistically relevant
properties of an artwork—the properties in virtue of which it is
an artwork and in virtue of which it is a good or bad one—are
formal merely, where formal properties are typically regarded as
properties graspable by sight or by hearing merely. Artistic formalism
has been taken to follow from both the immediacy and the disinterest
theses (Binkley 1970, 266–267; Carroll 2001, 20–40). If you take the
immediacy thesis to imply the artistic irrelevance of all properties
whose grasping requires the use of reason, and you include
representational properties in that class, then you are apt to think
that the immediacy thesis implies artistic formalism. If you take the
disinterest thesis to imply the artistic irrelevance of all properties
capable of practical import, and you include representational
properties in that class, then you are apt to think that the
disinterest thesis implies artistic formalism.
This is not to suggest that the popularity enjoyed by artistic
formalism during the late 19th and early 20th centuries owed mainly to
its inference from the immediacy or disinterest theses. The most
influential advocates of formalism during this period were
professional critics, and their formalism derived, at least in part,
from the artistic developments with which they were concerned. As a
critic Eduard Hanslick advocated for the pure music of Mozart,
Beethoven, Schumann, and later Brahms, and against the dramatically
impure music of Wagner; as a theorist he urged that music has no
content but “tonally moving forms” (Hanslick 1986, 29). As
a critic Clive Bell was an early champion of the post-Impressionists,
especially Cezanne; as a theorist he maintained that the formal
properties of painting—“relations and combinations of
lines and colours”—alone have artistic relevance (Bell
1958, 17–18). As a critic Clement Greenberg was abstract
expressionism’s ablest defender; as a theorist he held painting’s
“proper area of competence” to be exhausted by flatness,
pigment, and shape (Greenberg 1986, 86–87).
Not every influential defender of formalism has also been a
professional critic. Monroe Beardsley, who arguably gave formalism its
most sophisticated articulation, was not (Beardsley 1958). Nor is Nick
Zangwill, who recently has mounted a spirited and resourceful defense
of a moderate version of formalism (Zangwill 2001). But formalism has
always been sufficiently motivated by art-critical data that once
Arthur Danto made the case that the data no longer supported it, and
perhaps never really had, formalism’s heyday came to an end.
Inspired in particular by Warhol’s Brillo Boxes, which
are (more or less) perceptually indistinguishable from the
brand-printed cartons in which boxes of Brillo were delivered to
supermarkets, Danto observed that for most any artwork it is possible
to imagine both (a) another object that is perceptually indiscernible
from it but which is not an artwork, and (b) another artwork that is
perceptually indiscernible from it but which differs in artistic value.
From these observations he concluded that form alone neither makes an
artwork nor gives it whatever value it has (Danto 1981, 94–95; Danto
1986, 30–31; Danto 1997, 91).
But Danto has taken the possibility of such perceptual indiscernibles
to show the limitations not merely of form but also of aesthetics, and
he has done so on the grounds, apparently, that the formal and the
aesthetic are co-extensive. Regarding a urinal Duchamp once exhibited
and a perceptual indiscernible ordinary urinal, Danto maintains
that
 But the inference from the limits of the artistically formal to
the limits of the artistically aesthetic is presumably only as strong
as the inferences from the immediacy and disinterest theses to
artistic formalism, and these are not beyond question. The inference
from the disinterest thesis appears to go through only if you employ a
stronger notion of disinterest than the one Kant understands himself
to be employing: Kant, it is worth recalling, regards poetry as the
highest of the fine arts precisely because of its capacity to employ
representational content in the expression of what he calls
‘aesthetic ideas’ (Kant 1790, 191–194; see Costello
2008 and 2013 for extended treatment of the capacity of Kantian
aesthetics to accommodate conceptual art). The inference from the
immediacy thesis appears to go through only if you employ a notion of
immediacy stronger than the one Hume, for example, takes himself to be
defending when he claims (in a passage quoted in section1.1) that
“in many orders of beauty, particularly those of the fine arts,
it is requisite to employ much reasoning, in order to feel the proper
sentiment” (Hume 1751, 173). It may be that artistic formalism
results if you push either of the tendencies embodied in the immediacy
and disinterest theses to extremes. It may be that the history of
aesthetics from the 18th century to the mid-Twentieth is largely
the history of pushing those two tendencies to extremes. It does not
follow that those tendencies must be so pushed.
Consider Warhol’s Brillo Boxes. Danto is right to maintain
that the eighteenth-century theorist of taste would not know how to
regard it as an artwork. But this is because the eighteenth-century
theorist of taste lives in the 18th century, and so would be
unable to situate that work in its twentieth-century art-historical
context, and not because the kind of theory he holds forbids him from
situating a work in its art-historical context. When Hume, for
instance, observes that artists address their works to particular,
historically-situated audiences, and that a critic therefore
“must place himself in the same situation as the audience”
to whom a work is addressed (Hume 1757, 239), he is
allowing that artworks are cultural products, and that the properties
that works have as the cultural products they are are among the
“ingredients of the composition” that a critic must grasp
if she is to feel the proper sentiment. Nor does there seem to be
anything in the celebrated conceptuality of Brillo Boxes, nor
of any other conceptual work, that ought to give the
eighteenth-century theorist pause. Francis Hutcheson asserts that
mathematical and scientific theorems are objects of taste (Hutcheson
1725, 36–41).  Alexander Gerard asserts that scientific
discoveries and philosophical theories are objects of taste (Gerard
1757, 6). Neither argues for his assertion. Both regard it as
commonplace that objects of intellect may be objects of taste as
readily as objects of sight and hearing may be.  Why should the
present-day aesthetic theorist think otherwise? If an object is
conceptual in nature, grasping its nature will require intellectual
work. If grasping an object’s conceptual nature requires situating it
art-historically, then the intellectual work required to grasp its
nature will include situating it art-historically. But—as Hume
and Reid held (see section 1.1)—grasping the nature of an object
preparatory to aesthetically judging it is one thing; aesthetically
judging the object once grasped is another.
Though Danto has been the most influential and persistent critic of
formalism, his criticisms are no more decisive than those advanced by
Kendall Walton in his essay “Categories of Art.”
Walton’s anti-formalist argument hinges on two main theses, one
psychological and one philosophical. According to the psychological
thesis, which aesthetic properties we perceive a work as having depends
on which category we perceive the work as belonging to. Perceived as
belonging to the category of painting, Picasso’s
Guernica will be perceived as “violent, dynamic, vital,
disturbing” (Walton 1970, 347). But perceived as belonging to the
category of “guernicas”—where guernicas are works
with “surfaces with the colors and shapes of Picasso’s
Guernica, but the surfaces are molded to protrude from the
wall like relief maps of different kinds of
terrain”—Picasso’s Guernica will be
perceived not as violent and dynamic, but as “cold, stark,
lifeless, or serene and restful, or perhaps bland, dull, boring”
(Walton 1970, 347). That Picasso’s Guernica can be
perceived both as violent and dynamic and as not violent and not
dynamic might be thought to imply that there is no fact of the matter
whether it is violent and dynamic. But this implication holds only on
the assumption that there is no fact of the matter which category
Picasso’s Guernica actually belongs to, and this
assumption appears to be false given that Picasso intended that
Guernica be a painting and did not intend that it be a
Guernica, and that the category of paintings was well-established in
the society in which Picasso painted it while the category of guernicas
was not. Hence the philosophical thesis, according to which the
aesthetic properties a work actually has are those it is perceived as
having when perceived as belonging to the category (or categories) it
actually belongs to. Since the properties of having been intended to be
a painting and having been created in a society in which painting is
well-established category are artistically relevant though not
graspable merely by seeing (or hearing) the work, it seems that
artistic formalism cannot be true. “I do not deny,” Walton
concludes, “that paintings and sonatas are to be judged solely on
what can be seen or heard in them—when they are perceived
correctly. But examining a work with the senses can by itself reveal
neither how it is correct to perceive it, nor how to perceive it that
way” (Walton 1970, 367).
But if we cannot judge which aesthetic properties paintings and
sonatas have without consulting the intentions and the societies of the
artists who created them, what of the aesthetic properties of natural
items? With respect to them it may appear as if there is nothing to
consult except the way they look and sound, so that an aesthetic
formalism about nature must be true. Allen Carlson, a central figure in
the burgeoning field of the aesthetics of nature, argues against this
appearance. Carlson observes that Walton’s psychological thesis
readily transfers from works of art to natural items: that we perceive
Shetland ponies as cute and charming and Clydesdales as lumbering
surely owes to our perceiving them as belonging to the category of
horses (Carlson 1981, 19). He also maintains that the philosophical
thesis transfers: whales actually have the aesthetic properties we
perceive them as having when we perceive them as mammals, and do not
actually have any contrasting aesthetic properties we might perceive
them to have when we perceive them as fish. If we ask what determines
which category or categories natural items actually belong to, the
answer, according to Carlson, is their natural
histories as discovered by natural science (Carlson
1981, 21–22). Inasmuch as a natural item’s natural history will
tend not to be graspable by merely seeing or hearing it, formalism is
no truer of natural items than it is of works of art.
The claim that Walton’s psychological thesis transfers to
natural items has been widely accepted (and was in fact anticipated, as
Carlson acknowledges, by Ronald Hepburn (Hepburn 1966 and 1968)). The
claim that Walton’s philosophical thesis transfers to natural
items has proven more controversial. Carlson is surely right that
aesthetic judgments about natural items are prone to be mistaken
insofar as they result from perceptions of those items as belonging to
categories to which they do not belong, and, insofar as determining
which categories natural items actually belong to requires scientific
investigation, this point seems sufficient to undercut the plausibility
of any very strong formalism about nature (see Carlson 1979 for
independent objections against such formalism). Carlson, however, also
wishes to establish that aesthetic judgments about natural items have
whatever objectivity aesthetic judgments about works of art do, and it
is controversial whether Walton’s philosophical claim transfers
sufficiently to support such a claim. One difficulty, raised by Malcolm
Budd (Budd 2002 and 2003) and Robert Stecker (Stecker1997c), is that
since there are many categories in which a given natural item may
correctly be perceived, it is unclear which correct category is the one
in which the item is perceived as having the aesthetic properties it
actually has. Perceived as belonging to the category of Shetland
ponies, a large Shetland pony may be perceived as lumbering; perceived
as belonging to the category of horses, the same pony may be perceived
as cute and charming but certainly not lumbering. If the Shetland pony
were a work of art, we might appeal to the intentions (or society) of
its creator to determine which correct category is the one that fixes
its aesthetic character. But as natural items are not human creations
they can give us no basis for deciding between equally correct but
aesthetically contrasting categorizations. It follows, according to
Budd, “the aesthetic appreciation of nature is endowed with a
freedom denied to the appreciation of art” (Budd 2003, 34),
though this is perhaps merely another way of saying that the aesthetic
appreciation of art is endowed with an objectivity denied to the
appreciation of nature.
 The eighteenth-century debate between rationalists and theorists
of taste (or sentimentalists) was primarily a debate over the
immediacy thesis, i.e., over whether we judge objects to be beautiful
by applying principles of beauty to them. It was not primarily a
debate over the existence of principles of beauty, a matter over which
theorists of taste might disagree. Kant denied that there are any such
principles (Kant 1790, 101), but both Hutcheson and Hume affirmed
their existence: they maintained that although judgments of beauty are
judgments of taste and not of reason, taste nevertheless operates
according to general principles, which might be discovered through
empirical investigation (Hutcheson 1725, 28–35; Hume 1757,
231–233).
It is tempting to think of recent debate in aesthetics between
particularists and generalists as a revival of the eighteenth-century
debate between rationalists and theorists of taste. But the accuracy of
this thought is difficult to gauge. One reason is that it is often
unclear whether particularists and generalists take themselves merely
to be debating the existence of aesthetic principles or to be debating
their employment in aesthetic judgment. Another is that, to the degree
particularists and generalists take themselves to be debating the
employment of aesthetic principles in aesthetic judgment, it is hard to
know what they can be meaning by ‘aesthetic judgment.’ If
‘aesthetic’ still carries its eighteenth-century
implication of immediacy, then the question under debate is whether
judgment that is immediate is immediate. If ‘aesthetic’ no
longer carries that implication, then it is hard to know what question
is under debate because it is hard to know what aesthetic judgment
could be. It may be tempting to think that we can simply re-define
‘aesthetic judgment’ such that it refers to any judgment in
which an aesthetic property is predicated of an object. But this
requires being able to say what an aesthetic property is without
reference to its being immediately graspable, something no one seems to
have done. It may seem that we can simply re-define ‘aesthetic
judgment’ such that it refers to any judgment in which any
property of the class exemplified by beauty is predicated of an object.
But which class is this? The classes exemplified by beauty are
presumably endless, and the difficulty is to specify the relevant class
without reference to the immediate graspability of its members, and
that is what no one seems to have done.
However we are to sort out the particularist/generalist debate,
important contributions to it include, on the side of particularism,
Arnold Isenberg’s “Critical Communication” (1949) Frank
Sibley’s “Aesthetic Concepts” (in Sibley 2001) and Mary
Mothersill’s Beauty Restored (1984) and, on the side of
generalism, Monroe Beardsley’s Aesthetics (1958) and
“On the Generality of Critical Reasons” (1962), Sibley’s
“General Reasons and Criteria in Aesthetics” (in Sibley
2001), George Dickie’s Evaluating Art (1987), Stephen
Davies’s “Replies to Arguments Suggesting that Critics’ Strong
Evaluations Could not be Soundly Deduced” (1995), and John
Bender’s “General but Defeasible Reasons in Aesthetic
Evaluation: The Generalist/Particularist Dispute” (1995). Of
these, the papers by Isenberg and Sibley have arguably enjoyed the
greatest influence.
Isenberg concedes that we often appeal to descriptive features of
works in support of our judgments of their value, and he allows that
this may make it seem as if we must be appealing to principles in
making those judgments. If in support of a favorable judgment of some
painting a critic appeals to the wavelike contour formed by the figures
clustered in its foreground, it may seem as if his judgment must
involve tacit appeal to the principle that any painting having such a
contour is so much the better. But Isenberg argues that this cannot be,
since no one agrees to any such principle:
But if in appealing to the descriptive features of a work we are not
acknowledging tacit appeals to principles linking those features to
aesthetic value, what are we doing? Isenberg believes we are offering
“directions for perceiving” the work, i.e., by singling out
certain its features, we are “narrow[ing] down the field of possible
visual orientations” and thereby guiding others in “the
discrimination of details, the organization of parts, the grouping of
discrete objects into patterns” (Isenberg 1949, 336). In this way
we get others to see what we have seen, rather than getting them to
infer from principle what we have so inferred.
That Sibley advances a variety of particularism in one paper and a
variety of generalism in another will give the appearance of
inconsistency where there is none: Sibley is a particularist of one
sort, and with respect to one distinction, and a generalist of another
sort with respect to another distinction. Isenberg, as noted, is a
particularist with respect to the distinction between descriptions and
verdicts, i.e., he maintains that there are no principles by which we
may infer from value-neutral descriptions of works to judgments of
their overall value. Sibley’s particularism and generalism, by
contrast, both have to do with judgments falling in between
descriptions and verdicts. With respect to a distinction between
descriptions and a set of judgments intermediate between descriptions
and verdicts, Sibley is straightforwardly particularist. With respect
to a distinction between a set of judgments intermediate between
descriptions and verdicts and verdicts, Sibley is a kind of generalist
and describes himself as such.
Sibley’s generalism, as set forth in “General Reasons and
Criteria in Aesthetics,” begins with the observation that the
properties to which we appeal in justification of favorable verdicts
are not all descriptive or value-neutral. We also appeal to properties
that are inherently positive, such as grace, balance, dramatic
intensity, or comicality. To say that a property is inherently
positive is not to say that any work having it is so much the better,
but rather that its tout court attribution implies value. So
although a work may be made worse on account of its comical elements,
the simple claim that a work is good because comical is intelligible
in a way that the simple claims that a work is good because yellow, or
because it lasts twelve minutes, or because it contains many puns, are
not. But if the simple claim that a work is good because comical is
thus intelligible, comicality is a general criterion for aesthetic
value, and the principle that articulates that generality is true. But
none of this casts any doubt on the immediacy thesis, as Sibley
himself observes:
The “elsewhere” referred to in the first sentence is
Sibley’s earlier paper, “Aesthetic Concepts,” which argues
that the application of concepts such as ‘balanced,’
‘tragic,’ ‘comic,’ or ‘joyous’ is
not a matter of determining whether the descriptive (i.e.,
non-aesthetic) conditions for their application are met, but is rather
a matter of taste. Hence aesthetic judgments are immediate in
something like the way that judgments of color, or of flavor, are:
But Sibley recognizes—as his eighteenth-century forebears did
and his formalist contemporaries did not—that important
differences remain between the exercise of taste and the use of the
five senses. Central among these is that we offer reasons, or something
like them, in support of our aesthetic judgments: by talking—in
particular, by appealing to the descriptive properties on which the
aesthetic properties depend—we justify aesthetic judgments by
bringing others to see what we have seen (Sibley 2001, 14–19).
It is unclear to what degree Sibley, beyond seeking to establish
that the application of aesthetic concepts is not condition-governed,
seeks also to define the term ‘aesthetic’ in terms of their
not being so. It is clearer, perhaps, that he does not succeed in
defining the term this way, whatever his intentions. Aesthetic concepts
are not alone in being non-condition-governed, as Sibley himself
recognizes in comparing them with color concepts. But there is also no
reason to think them alone in being non-condition-governed while also
being reason-supportable, since moral concepts, to give one example, at
least arguably also have both these features. Isolating the aesthetic
requires something more than immediacy, as Kant saw. It requires
something like the Kantian notion of disinterest, or at least something
to play the role played by that notion in Kant’s theory.
Given the degree to which Kant and Hume continue to influence thinking
about aesthetic judgment (or critical judgment, more broadly), given
the degree to which Sibley and Isenberg continue to abet that
influence, it is not surprising that the immediacy thesis is now very
widely received. The thesis, however, has come under attack, notably
by Davies (1990) and Bender (1995). (See also Carroll (2009), who
follows closely after Davies (1990), and Dorsch (2013) for further
discussion.)
Isenberg, it will be recalled, maintains that if the critic is arguing for her verdict, her argumentation must go something as follows:
Since the critical principle expressed in premise 1 is open to
counter-example, no matter what property we substitute for p, Isenberg
concludes that we cannot plausibly interpret the critic as arguing for
her verdict. Rather than defend the principle expressed in premise 1,
Davies and Bender both posit alternative principles, consistent with
the fact that no property is good-making in all artworks, which they
ascribe to the critic. Davies proposes that we interpret the critic as
arguing deductively from principles relativized to artistic type, that
is, from principles holding that artworks of a specific types or
categories—Italian Renaissance paintings, romantic symphonies,
Hollywood Westerns, etc.—having p are better for having it
(Davies 1990, 174). Bender proposes that we interpret the critic as
arguing inductively from principles expressing mere tendencies that
hold between certain properties and artworks—principles, in
other words, holding that artworks having p tend to be better for
having it (Bender 1995, 386).
Each proposal has its own weaknesses and strengths. A problem with
Bender’s approach is that critics do not seem to couch their verdicts
in probabilistic terms. Were a critic to say that a work is likely to
be good, or almost certainly good, or even that she has the highest
confidence that it must be good, her language would suggest that she
had not herself experienced the work, perhaps that she had judged the
work on the basis of someone else’s testimony, and that she was,
therefore, no critic at all. We would therefore have good reason to
prefer Davies’s deductive approach if only we had good reason for
thinking that relativizing critical principles to artistic type
removed the original threat of counterexample. Though it is clear that
such relativizing reduces the relative number of counterexamples, we
need good reason for thinking that it reduces that number to zero, and
Davies provides no such reason. Bender’s inductive approach, by
contrast, cannot be refuted by counterexample, but only by
counter-tendency.
If the critic argues from the truth of a principle to the truth of a
verdict—as Davies and Bender both contend—it must be
possible for her to establish the truth of the principle before
establishing the truth of the verdict. How might she do this? It seems
unlikely that mere reflection on the nature of art, or on the natures
of types of art, could yield up the relevant lists of good- and
bad-making properties. At least the literature has yet to produce a
promising account as to how this might be done. Observation therefore
seems the most promising answer. To say that the critic establishes
the truth of critical principles on the basis of observation, however,
is to say that she establishes a correlation between certain artworks
she has already established to be good and certain properties she has
already established those works to have. But then any capacity to
establish that works are good by inference from principles evidently
depends on some capacity to establish that works are good without any
such inference, and the question arises why the critic should prefer
to do by inference what she can do perfectly well without. The answer
cannot be that judging by inference from principle yields
epistemically better results, since a principle based on observations
can be no more epistemically sound than the observations on which it
is based.
None of this shows that aesthetic or critical judgment could never be
inferred from principles. It does however suggest that such judgment
is first and foremost non-inferential, which is what the immediacy
thesis holds.
The Kantian notion of disinterest has its most direct recent
descendents in the aesthetic-attitude theories that flourished from the
early to mid 20th century. Though Kant followed the British in
applying the term ‘disinterested’ strictly to pleasures,
its migration to attitudes is not difficult to explain. For Kant the
pleasure involved in a judgment of taste is disinterested because such
a judgment does not issue in a motive to do anything in particular. For
this reason Kant refers to the judgment of taste as contemplative
rather than practical (Kant 1790, 95). But if the judgment of taste is
not practical, then the attitude we bear toward its object is
presumably also not practical: when we judge an object aesthetically we
are unconcerned with whether and how it may further our practical aims.
Hence it is natural to speak of our attitude toward the object as
disinterested.
To say, however, that the migration of disinterest from pleasures to
attitudes is natural is not to say that it is
inconsequential. Consider the difference between Kant’s aesthetic
theory, the last great theory of taste, and Schopenhauer’s aesthetic
theory, the first great aesthetic-attitude theory. Whereas for Kant
disinterested pleasure is the means by which we discover things to
bear aesthetic value, for Schopenhauer disinterested attention (or
“will-less contemplation”) is itself the locus of aesthetic
value. According to Schopenhauer, we lead our ordinary, practical
lives in a kind of bondage to our own desires (Schopenhauer 1819,
196). This bondage is a source not merely of pain but also of
cognitive distortion in that it restricts our attention to those
aspects of things relevant to the fulfilling or thwarting of our
desires. Aesthetic contemplation, being will-less, is therefore both
epistemically and hedonically valuable, allowing us a desire-free
glimpse into the essences of things as well as a respite from
desire-induced pain:
 The two most influential aesthetic-attitude theories of the 20th
century are those of Edward Bullough and Jerome Stolnitz. According to
Stolnitz’s theory, which is the more straightforward of the two,
bearing an aesthetic attitude toward an object is a matter of
attending to it disinterestedly and sympathetically, where to attend
to it disinterestedly is to attend to it with no purpose beyond that
of attending to it, and to attend to it sympathetically is to
“accept it on its own terms,” allowing it, and not one’s
own preconceptions, to guide one’s attention of it (Stolnitz 1960,
32–36). The result of such attention is a comparatively richer
experience of the object, i.e., an experience taking in comparatively
many of the object’s features. Whereas a practical attitude limits and
fragments the object of our experience, allowing us to “see only
those of its features which are relevant to our purposes,….  By
contrast, the aesthetic attitude ‘isolates’ the object and
focuses upon it—the ‘look’ of the rocks, the sound
of the ocean, the colors in the painting.” (Stolnitz 1960, 33,
35).
Bullough, who prefers to speak of “psychical distance”
rather than disinterest, characterizes aesthetic appreciation as
something achieved
Bullough has been criticized for claiming that aesthetic
appreciation requires dispassionate detachment:
But such a criticism seems to overlook a subtlety of
Bullough’s view. While Bullough does hold that aesthetic
appreciation requires distance “between our own self and its
affections” (Bullough 1995, 298), he does not take this to
require that we not undergo affections but quite the opposite: only if
we undergo affections have we affections from which to be distanced.
So, for example, the properly distanced spectator of a well-constructed
tragedy is not the “over-distanced” spectator who feels no
pity or fear, nor the “under-distanced” spectator who feels
pity and fear as she would to an actual, present catastrophe, but the
spectator who interprets the pity and fear she feels “not as
modes of [her] being but rather as characteristics of the
phenomenon” (Bullough 1995, 299). The properly distanced
spectator of a tragedy, we might say, understands her fear and pity to
be part of what tragedy is about.
The notion of the aesthetic attitude has been attacked from all
corners and has very few remaining sympathizers. George Dickie is
widely regarded as having delivered the decisive blow in his essay
“The Myth of the Aesthetic Attitude” (Dickie 1964) by
arguing that all purported examples of interested or distanced
attention are really just examples of inattention. So consider the case
of the spectator at a performance of Othello who becomes
increasingly suspicious of his own wife as the action proceeds, or the case
of the impresario who sits gauging the size of the audience, or the
case of the father who sits taking pride in his daughter’s
performance, or the case of the moralist who sits gauging the moral
effects the play is apt to produce in its audience. These and all such
cases will be regarded by the attitude theorist as cases of interested
or distanced attention to the performance, when they are actually
nothing but cases of inattention to the performance: the jealous
husband is attending to his wife, the impresario to the till, the
father to his daughter, the moralist to the effects of the play. But if
none of them is attending to the performance, then none of them is
attending to it disinterestedly or with distance (Dickie 1964,
57–59).
The attitude theorist, however, can plausibly resist Dickie’s
interpretation of such examples. Clearly the impresario is not
attending to the performance, but there is no reason to regard the
attitude theorist as committed to thinking otherwise. As for the
others, it might be argued that they are all attending. The jealous
husband must be attending to the performance, since it is the action of
the play, as presented by the performance, that is making him
suspicious. The proud father must be attending to the performance,
since he is attending to his daughter’s performance, which is an
element of it. The moralist must be attending to the performance, since
he otherwise would have no basis by which to gauge its moral effects on
the audience. It may be that none of these spectators is giving the
performance the attention it demands, but that is precisely the
attitude theorist’s point.
But perhaps another of Dickie’s criticisms, one lesser known,
ultimately poses a greater threat to the ambitions of the attitude
theorist. Stolnitz, it will be recalled, distinguishes between
disinterested and interested attention according to the purpose
governing the attention: to attend disinterestedly is to attend with no
purpose beyond that of attending; to attend interestedly is to attend
with some purpose beyond that of attending. But Dickie objects that a
difference in purpose does not imply a difference in attention:
There is again much here that the attitude theorist can resist. The
idea that listening is a species of attending can be resisted: the
question at hand, strictly speaking, is not whether Jones and Smith
listen to the music in the same way, but whether they
attend in the same way to the music they are listening to. The
contention that Jones and Smith are attending in the same way appears
to be question-begging, as it evidently depends on a principle of
individuation that the attitude theorist rejects: if Jones’s
attention is governed by some ulterior purpose and Smith’s is
not, and we individuate attention according to the purpose that governs
it, their attention is not the same. Finally, even if we reject the
attitude theorist’s principle of individuation, the claim that
there is but one way to attend to music is doubtful: one can seemingly
attend to music in myriad ways—as historical document, as
cultural artifact, as aural wallpaper, as sonic
disturbance—depending on which of the music’s features one
attends to in listening to it. But Dickie is nevertheless onto
something crucial to the degree he urges that a difference in purpose
need not imply a relevant difference in attention. Disinterest
plausibly figures in the definition of the aesthetic attitude only to
the degree that it, and it alone, focuses attention on the features of
the object that matter aesthetically. The possibility that there are
interests that focus attention on just those same features implies that
disinterest has no place in such a definition, which in turn implies
that neither it nor the notion of the aesthetic attitude is likely to
be of any use in fixing the meaning of the term
‘aesthetic.’ If to take the aesthetic attitude toward an
object simply is to attend to its aesthetically relevant properties,
whether the attention is interested or disinterested, then determining
whether an attitude is aesthetic apparently requires first determining
which properties are the aesthetically relevant ones. And this task
seems always to result either in claims about the immediate
graspability of aesthetic properties, which are arguably insufficient
to the task, or in claims about the essentially formal nature of
aesthetic properties, which are arguably groundless.
But that the notions of disinterest and psychical distance prove
unhelpful in fixing the meaning of the term ‘aesthetic’
does not imply that they are mythic. At times we seem unable to get by
without them. Consider the case of The Fall of Miletus—a
tragedy written by the Greek dramatist Phrynicus and staged in Athens
barely two years after the violent Persian capture of the Greek city of
Miletus in 494 BC. Herodotus records that
How are we to explain the Athenian reaction to this play without
recourse to something like interest or lack of distance? How, in
particular, are we to explain the difference between the sorrow
elicited by a successful tragedy and the sorrow elicited in this case?
The distinction between attention and inattention is of no use here.
The difference is not that the Athenians could not attend to The
Fall whereas they could attend to other plays. The difference is
that they could not attend to The Fall as they could attend to
other plays, and this because of their too intimate connection to what
attending to The Fall required their attending to.
Theories of aesthetic experience may be divided into two kinds
according to the kind of feature appealed to in explanation of what
makes experience aesthetic. Internalist theories appeal to features
internal to experience, typically to phenomenological features, whereas
externalist theories appeal to features external to the experience,
typically to features of the object experienced. (The distinction
between internalist and externalist theories of aesthetic experience is
similar, though not identical, to the distinction between phenomenal
and epistemic conceptions of aesthetic experience drawn by Gary
Iseminger (Iseminger 2003, 100, and Iseminger 2004, 27, 36)). Though
internalist theories—particularly John Dewey’s (1934) and
Monroe Beardsley’s (1958)—predominated during the early and
middle parts of the 20th century, externalist
theories—including Beardsley’s (1982) and George
Dickie’s (1988)—have been in the ascendant since.
Beardsley’s views on aesthetic experience make a strong claim on
our attention, given that Beardsley might be said to have authored the
culminating internalist theory as well as the founding externalist one.
Dickie’s criticisms of Beardsley’s internalism make an
equally strong claim, since they moved Beardsley—and with him
most everyone else—from internalism toward externalism.
According to the version of internalism Beardsley advances in his
Aesthetics (1958), all aesthetic experiences have in common
three or four (depending on how you count) features, which “some
writers have [discovered] through acute introspection, and which each of
us can test in his own experience” (Beardsley 1958, 527). These
are focus (“an aesthetic experience is one in which attention is
firmly fixed upon [its object]”), intensity, and unity, where
unity is a matter of coherence and of completeness (Beardsley 1958,
527). Coherence, in turn, is a matter of having elements that are
properly connected one to another such that
Completeness, by contrast, is a matter having elements that
“counterbalance” or “resolve” one another such
that the whole stands apart from elements without it:
Dickie’s most consequential criticism of Beardsley’s
theory is that Beardsley, in describing the phenomenology of aesthetic
experience, has failed to distinguish between the features we
experience aesthetic objects as having and the features aesthetic
experiences themselves have. So while every feature mentioned in
Beardsley’s description of the coherence of aesthetic
experience—continuity of development, the absence of gaps, the
mounting of energy toward a climax—surely is a feature we
experience aesthetic objects as having, there is no reason to think of
aesthetic experience itself as having any such features:
Dickie raises a similar worry about Beardsley’s description of
the completeness of aesthetic experience:
Though these objections turned out to be only the beginning of the
debate between Dickie and Beardsley on the nature of aesthetic
experience (See Beardsley 1969, Dickie 1974, Beardsley 1982, and Dickie
1987; see also Iseminger 2003 for a helpful overview of the
Beardsley-Dickie debate), they nevertheless went a long way toward
shaping that debate, which taken as whole might be seen as the working
out of an answer to the question “What can a theory of aesthetic
experience be that takes seriously the distinction between the
experience of features and the features of experience?” The
answer turned out to be an externalist theory of the sort that
Beardsley advances in the 1982 essay “The Aesthetic Point of
View” and that many others have advanced since: a theory
according to which an aesthetic experience just is an experience having
aesthetic content, i.e., an experience of an object as having the
aesthetic features that it has.
The shift from internalism to externalism has not been without
costs. One central ambition of internalism—that of fixing the
meaning of ‘aesthetic’ by tying it to features peculiar to
aesthetic experience—has had to be given up. But a second,
equally central, ambition—that of accounting for aesthetic value
by tying it to the value of aesthetic experience—has been
retained. Indeed most everything written on aesthetic experience since
the Beardsley-Dickie debate has been written in service of the view
that an object has aesthetic value insofar as it affords valuable
experience when correctly perceived. This view—which has come to
be called empiricism about aesthetic value, given that it
reduces aesthetic value to the value of aesthetic experience—has
attracted many advocates over the last several years (Beardsley 1982,
Budd 1985 and 1995, Goldman 1995 and 2006, Walton 1993, Levinson 1996
and 2006, Miller 1998, Railton 1998, and Iseminger 2004), while
provoking relatively little criticism (Zangwill 1999, Sharpe 2000, D.
Davies 2004, and Kieran 2005). Yet it can be wondered whether
empiricism about aesthetic value is susceptible to a version of the
criticism that has done internalism in.
For there is something odd about the position that combines
externalism about aesthetic experience with empiricism about aesthetic
value. Externalism locates the features that determine aesthetic
character in the object, whereas empiricism locates the features that
determine aesthetic value in the experience, when one might have
thought that the features that determine aesthetic character just are
the features that determine aesthetic value. If externalism and
empiricism are both true, there is nothing to stop two objects that
have different, even wholly disparate, aesthetic characters from
nevertheless having the very same aesthetic value—unless, that
is, the value-determining features of an experience are bound logically
to the character-determining features of the object that affords it
such that only an object with those features could afford an experience
having that value. But in that case the value-determining features of
the experience are evidently not simply the phenomenological features
that might have seemed best suited to determine the value of the
experience, but perhaps rather the representational or epistemic
features of the experience that it has only in relation to its object.
And this is what some empiricists have been urging of late:
But there is an unaddressed difficulty with this line of thought.
While the representational or epistemic features of an aesthetic
experience might very plausibly contribute to its value, such features
very implausibly contribute to the value of the object affording such
an experience. If the value of the experience of a good poem consists,
in part, in its being an experience in which the poem is properly
understood or accurately represented, the value of a good poem cannot
consist, even in part, in its capacity to afford an experience in which
it is properly understood or accurately represented, because, all
things being equal, a bad poem presumably has these capacities in equal
measure. It is of course true that only a good poem rewards an
understanding of it. But then a good poem’s capacity for
rewarding understanding is evidently to be explained by the
poem’s already being good; it is evidently in virtue of its
already being good that a poem rewards us on condition that we
understand it.
Other empiricists have taken a different tack. Instead of trying to
isolate the general features of aesthetic experience in virtue of which
it and its objects are valuable, they simply observe the impossibility,
in any particular case, of saying much about the value of an aesthetic
experience without also saying a lot about the aesthetic character of
the object. So, for example, referring to the values of the experiences
that works of art afford, Jerrold Levinson maintains that
There is no denying that when we attempt to describe, in any detail,
the values of experiences afforded by particular works we quickly find
ourselves describing the works themselves. The question is what to make
of this fact. If one is antecedently committed to empiricism, it may
seem a manifestation of the appropriately intimate connection between
the aesthetic character of a work and the value of the experience that
the work affords. But if one is not so committed, it may seem to
manifest something else. If, when attempting to account for the
aesthetic value of Bartok’s Fourth String Quartet in terms of the
value of the experience it affords, we find ourselves unable to say
much about the value of that experience without saying something about
the quartet’s “particular turns and twists,” this may
be because the value resides in those twists and turns and not in the
experience of them. To affirm such a possibility, of course, is not to
deny that the value the quartet has in virtue of its particular twists
in turns is a value that we experience it as having. It is rather to
insist on sharply distinguishing between the value of experience and
the experience of value, in something like the way Dickie insisted on
sharply distinguishing between the unity of experience and the
experience of unity. When the empiricist maintains that that value of
Bartok’s Fourth String Quartet, with its particular twists and
turns, consists in the value of the experience that it affords, which
experience is valuable, at least in part, because it is an experience
of a quartet with those twists and turns, one may wonder whether a
value originally belonging to the quartet has been transferred to the
experience, before being reflected back, once again, onto the
quartet.