Normativism in the theory of meaning and content is the view that
linguistic meaning and/or intentional content essentially is
normative. Both of its components, normativity and its
essentiality to meaning/content, can be interpreted in a number of
different ways, however; as a result, there is a whole family of more
or less closely related views laying claim to the slogan
“meaning/content is normative”.
To say that meaning/content is essentially normative is
making a claim about the nature of meaning/content, about what
meaning/content is. Consequently, it is at least a matter of
metaphysical necessity, possibly even of conceptual necessity, that
there is no meaning/content without
 norms.[1]
But which is prior?
Metaphysically speaking, are certain norms valid, or in force,
because certain things – such as linguistic
expressions/intentional states – have certain meanings/contents?
Or do such things have (a certain) meaning/content because
certain norms are in force? Accordingly, for a given set of norms, the
claim that meaning/content is essentially normative can be read in
different ways: As a claim that remains neutral on the question of
metaphysical priority, as claiming priority for meaning/content, or as
claiming priority for norms.
Assuming that one or the other is prior if the neutral claim is
 true,[2]
 we have distinguished between two forms of
normativity: meaning/content ‘engendered’ (ME/CE)
normativity and meaning/content determining (MD/CD)
normativity (cf. Glüer & Wikforss 2009). MD/CD norms are
such that they metaphysically determine, or constitute,
meaning/content; here, the norms are prior. ME/CE normativity is
normativity ‘engendered by’, or consequent upon,
meaning/content. Given the actual shape of the debate where it is
often argued that normative consequences can be more or less directly
derived from something’s having meaning/content while remaining
neutral on the issue of how this meaning/content is determined, we
shall here interpret ME/CE normativism as any position according to which
meaning/content is essentially such that it has normative
consequences, regardless of how meaning/content is
 determined.[3]
MD/CD normativism is an answer to the “foundational”
question: What is it that determines meaning (and/or content)?
In the context of such “foundational semantics” (the term
is Stalnaker’s), the relevant determination relations
aren’t merely mathematical, or functional, relations; rather,
relevant are those relations “in virtue of” which something
has meaning, i.e., relations “constitutive of”, or essential
to, having meaning. Relations of metaphysical determination are often
called “supervenience” relations. Such relations can be of
many kinds. For instance, they can be one-one (equivalence relations)
or many-one (“mere” supervenience relations). Some of them
allow for analytic or ontological reduction, others do
 not.[4]
But all of them involve three elements: a set of supervenient entities
SE, a set of entities forming the supervenience
base SB, and a principle according to which what
is in SB determines what is in
SE (a function from SB to
 SE).[5]
 What is important is that a principle of determination is required in
any foundational account. As long as only the supervenience base is
specified, its elements can be mapped onto meanings/contents in any
old way, thus leaving meaning/content completely
indeterminate. Arguably, this is one of the most important lessons of
Wittgenstein’s so-called rule-following considerations (Pagin
2002).
There is a tradition of reading these considerations as ruling out
realism about meaning/content (for instance Dummett 1959; Kripke 1982;
Wright 1986; Travis 2006; see also Hattiangadi 2007), the view that
having meaning/content consists in having, or determining, objective
judgment-independent conditions of truth or correctness. In this
tradition, an anti-realist, epistemic conception of truth is used as
the basic semantic concept, and it is often argued that this is
required precisely because there is no set of facts, no supervenience
base capable of determining realist meanings/contents. Despite its
partially revisionary character, semantic anti-realism does not rule
out a substantive metaphysics of (anti-realist) meaning/content,
however. It can be combined with both ME/CE and MD/CD normativism.
This is not true, however, of radically quietist readings of
Wittgenstein according to which substantive metaphysical claims about
meaning/content cannot (sensibly) be made at all (cf. Boghossian
1989a). While normativism does not commit its proponents to the
possibility of reducing meaning/content to the normative, or even to
the possibility of an account of meaning/content in terms of
substantive necessary and sufficient conditions, it does require the
possibility of stating substantive necessary conditions on
meaning/content (cf. McDowell 1991; 1992).
To say that meaning/content is essentially (ME/CE or MD/CD)
normative is to say that meaning/content is essentially such
that certain norms are valid, or in force, whenever something
has meaning/content. Being valid, or in force, however, can be
understood along cognitivist or non-cognitivist lines. Cognitivists
analyze normative statements as factual, truth-conditional claims
answering to an independent normative reality of normative facts.
Non-cognitivists claim that such statements are non-factual, and
typically analyze them in terms of the psychological states of their
subjects. Standardly, contemporary non-cognitivists (most prominently,
Simon Blackburn and Alan Gibbard) nevertheless hold on to a
“minimalist” realism about the normative. As the debate
between cognitivists and non-cognitivists is of some, but not central,
importance for our topic, we shall therefore assume that
non-cognitivism can be combined with normativism
about
 meaning/content.[6]
More central will be the question: What kind of norm, what kind of
normativity, are we dealing with here? Prima facie there might seem to
be as many possible readings of both ME/CE and MD/CD normativism as
there are kinds of norms or normativity. We shall go through the most
relevant distinctions (most of which can be found in the
classifications provided by von Wright 1963, chap. I; Schnädelbach
1990, 83ff). We shall see that there are at least some kinds of norms
or normativity that cannot be combined with the idea that
meaning/content is essentially normative.
The most basic distinction relevant here is that between norms
 for action and norms of
 being.[7]
Norms of being are often
associated with evaluations; they tell us that a certain state of
affairs ought to obtain, i.e., is valuable or good in a certain
sense. Norms for action, on the other hand, tell us what to
do. There is broad consensus that the normativity of
meaning/content involves norms for action, but there at least does not
seem to be anything inconsistent about construing it in purely
axiological terms.
Concerning norms for action, there are at least four more dimensions
along which relevant distinctions can be drawn. First, we can
distinguish between instrumental and non-instrumental norms. An
instrumental norm tells us what to do in order to reach a certain
goal, what means to employ to a certain end, where the relation
between means and end is contingent. An example von Wright gives
is:
(D)   If you want to make the hut habitable, you ought to heat it (von
Wright 1963, 10).
The normative force of instrumental norms characteristically is
contingent upon the agent’s having a certain goal, their
intending, or desiring, to reach a certain end, while that of
non-instrumental norms is not so dependent.
Among non-instrumental norms for action, many distinguish between
prescriptions and constitutive rules (cf. Rawls 1955; Midgley 1959; von
Wright 1963; Shwayder 1965; Searle 1969, chap. 2.5; Schnädelbach
1990). For reasons that will become clear shortly, we prefer to
distinguish between prescriptions and other norms for action, and
between constitutive and non-constitutive norms or rules. Thus, second,
prescriptions are norms that can typically be formulated in deontic
vocabulary, i.e., in terms of what an agent ought (not) to, or should
(not) do, or in terms of what is prescribed, forbidden or allowed. The
laws of the state are prime examples, and so are those of morals and
etiquette. Prescriptions can be conditional, as for instance
(P1), or unconditional, as for instance (P2):
(P1)   At a formal dinner, you ought to wear a tie.
(P2)   You ought to tell the truth.
For conditional prescriptions, we can, third, distinguish between
those where the deontic operator (‘ought’,
‘should’) takes wide scope over the conditional and those
were it takes narrow scope:
(CPw)   You ought to (if C then do
X).
(CPn)   If C, you ought to (do
X).
The main difference between (CPw) and
(CPn) is that on (CPw), there
are two ways of discharging your obligation: by doing X or by
making it the case that C is not fulfilled. On
(CPn) there is only one way of discharge: once
C is fulfilled, you must do X.  Only on
(CPn), that is, can the consequent be
detached.
For prescriptions, two principles are usually taken to hold
intuitively. First, the principle that ought implies
can, i.e., that to be prescribed, or allowed, actions have to
be such that it is at least in principle possible to perform them. And
second, the principle that ought implies the possibility of
violation; there would seem to be no point to forbidding impossible
things. Both principles are, however, slightly controversial.
Fourth, we can distinguish between constitutive and non-constitutive
norms or rules. Non-constitutive rules or norms are rules or norms for
a type of action, or activity, that exists independently of the rules.
The prescriptions of dinner etiquette are prime examples; they regulate
the independently existing practice of eating. Rules of games, on the
other hand, are prime examples of constitutive rules; in some sense,
they “create” the very actions, or activities, they
regulate. It would, for instance, be impossible to play chess, ice
hockey, or soccer, without the rules of chess, ice hockey, or soccer.
According to Midgley (1959) and Searle (1963, 33ff), constitutive rules
typically, and naturally, can be put into the following form:
(CR)   In C, doing X counts as doing Y.
According to this suggestion, constitutive rules tell us that, in a
certain context (for instance, a game of soccer), an action of type
Y (for instance, scoring a goal) can be performed by means of
performing an action of a different type X (for instance,
kicking the ball into the goal). Prescriptions do not naturally fit
this form. It has therefore been objected that this characterization of
constitutive norms is too narrow – there are prescriptions that
are constitutive of certain games (for instance, it’s
constitutive of ice hockey that spearing is forbidden). A wider
characterization of constitutive norms or rules thus counts rules or
norms as constitutive of a certain action, or activity, A iff
A cannot be performed, or engaged in, unless these norms are
in force (cf. Glüer & Pagin 1999).
Then, there are three more relevant distinctions that apply both to
norms for action and to axiological norms. First, we can distinguish
between prima facie and categorical norms (or obligations) (cf. Ross
2002 [1930]). Prima facie norms are norms that can be overridden by other
norms. Thus, it might be that under very many circumstances, you ought
to tell the truth, but not under all; under special circumstances this
obligation may be overriden by other obligations, for instance, the
obligation not to deliver your friend to the secret police. Categorical
norms are such that they cannot be thus overridden.
Second, we can distinguish between norms of different provenance.
There are the norms of morals, etiquette, and prudence, the laws of the
state, and the rules of games. Analogously, values of different kinds
can be distinguished.
And third, there are questions about what it means for each of these
different kinds of rules and norms to be valid, or in force for an
individual subject.[8] 
Does this force derive from the individual, from a
whole collective of individuals, or something else? If a norm or rule
R is in force for an individual subject S, what kind
of relation does S have to have to R? Is R
in force for S iff S follows R, i.e., acts
with the intention of doing what R requires? Or iff S
accepts R in some weaker sense such that R is in
force even for S‘s intentional violations of R?
Or can R‘s being in force for S be conceived of
in complete independence of S‘s intentional states
regarding R? The answers to these questions might, of course,
be different for different kinds of norms or rules.
These distinctions will be helpful in the following explorations
regarding the various ways in which meaning and content have been
considered to be essentially normative. Already now, however, we can
somewhat limit the possible readings of this claim. We can, for
instance, exclude the possibility that the norms of meaning/content are
instrumental: This would not at all sit well with the idea that these
norms or rules are essential to meaning. By the same token, we can
exclude the possibility that they are of any other provenance than the
semantic; their force must, in some way, derive from the possibility of
meaning/content itself. Moreover, if the claim is that the relevant
norms or rules are metaphysically prior to meaning/content, they have
to be of the constitutive kind.
We have distinguished two ways in which normativism about meaning
can be understood: ME normativism and MD normativism. The difference
between the two, again, is that the MD normativist is committed to the
metaphysical priority of norms, since the norms are said to determine
meaning, while the ME normativist remains neutral on the issue of
meaning determination. Both versions of meaning normativism, however,
claim that the following is both necessary, and essential to, an
expression e’s having meaning (for a speaker, or group
of speakers, S at a time t):
(M)   e means M for S at t
only if a norm for e is in force for S at
t.
 
Historically, MD normativism is associated with Wittgenstein (in
particular the ‘Middle Period’ writings) and the tradition
of appealing to linguistic conventions, prominent in the 1950’s and
1960’s (in the writings of Grice, Lewis, Searle and Strawson for
instance). A wider notion of the normativity of meaning, ME
normativism, appeared on the philosophical scene more recently, and is
associated with Saul Kripke’s book on Wittgenstein’s rule-following
considerations (Kripke 1982). In the book Kripke presents us with a
meaning skeptic who challenges the very idea that there are facts in
virtue of which our terms have a meaning.  Kripke’s skeptic puts down
certain constraints on the range of facts that could serve to
determine meaning, among these that the essentially normative
character of meaning has to be respected. The meaning determining
fact, Kripke argues, must be such that it follows from it how the term
ought to be applied (ibid: 11). Equipped with this
normativity constraint the skeptic goes on to argue against all
theories that fail to accommodate the required normative dimension of
meaning, in particular dispositionalist theories according to which
meaning is determined by the speaker’s dispositions to apply her terms
(ibid: 22–37).
Kripke’s discussion reignited interest in the question of
meaning and rules, and resulted in an enormous literature both on the
skeptical argument and the very idea that meaning is essentially
normative. Much of that discussion has been carried out without
reference to the earlier debate on meaning and conventions, but
attempts have also been made to relate the two debates. In what follows
we shall first discuss ME normativism, where the discussion following
Kripke’s book plays a central role, and then MD normativism.
It is clear that the type of normativity Kripke has in mind is
meaning engendered normativity, or ME normativity; i.e., the claim is
that meaning statements such as ‘expression e means
M for S’ have normative consequences, leaving
it open whether the norms are prior to meaning or not. Moreover, it is
clear that the relevant normativity is that of prescriptivity,
concerning what S ought to
 do.[9]
As noted above, arguments in support of the
thesis that meaning is essentially normative need to be based on
semantic premises – the normativity in question cannot
derive from external sources. In the case of ME normativity, the
arguments may be more or less direct, depending on more or less
substantial assumptions about meaning. On one end of the spectrum are
arguments that turn on the idea that there are direct conceptual entailments
from meaning statements to normative consequences; on the other end are
arguments that depend on substantial theoretical assumptions about
meaning. In the debate, direct arguments have played a prominent role
since these fit the idea, implicit in Kripke, that the claim that
meaning is normative provides a pre-theoretical constraint on any
acceptable theory of meaning; one that has to be accepted independently
of one’s specific semantic theory. However, the normativity
thesis need not serve as a pre-theoretical constraint – as long
as the thesis is that meaning is essentially normative it qualifies,
even if indirect arguments will be more controversial. Let us begin
with the most well known direct argument in support of ME normativity,
what we call ‘the simple argument’.
The classic defense of ME normativity can be found in Paul
Boghossian (1989a). According to Boghossian the normativity of meaning
derives from the fact that meaningful expressions have correctness
conditions. If ‘green’ means green, Boghossian
argues, it follows immediately that ‘green’ applies
correctly only to green objects, and this, in turn, has immediate
normative consequences for how a speaker S should apply ‘green’:
“The fact that the expression means something implies, that is, a
whole set of normative truths about my behavior with that
expression: namely, that my use is correct in application to certain
objects and not in application to others (513).” (See also
Blackburn 1984: 281, Miller 1998:198, Whiting 2007 and 2009.) The strategy,
therefore, is to move from (CM), to a normative conclusion,
(ME1):
(CM)   For any speaker S, and any time t: if
‘green’ means green for S at t,
then it is correct for S to apply ‘green’ to an
object x iff
x is green at t.
(ME1)   For any speaker S, and any time t:
if ‘green’ means green for S
at t, then S ought to apply ‘green’ to
an object x iff
x is green at t.
(CM) can hardly be challenged: Meaningful expressions have semantic
correctness conditions. Of course, there is some controversy as to how
these correctness conditions are to be construed, whether the basic
notion of semantic correctness is that of truth or warranted
assertability, for instance. However, it cannot be questioned that some
notion of semantic correctness is required. This, indeed, seems to be
part of the very concept of meaning. If, therefore, the notion of
semantic correctness is an essentially normative notion, we would have
a very direct argument in support of ME normativity, based simply on
conceptual entailments. Before discussing the argument, let us make
some preliminarily remarks concerning (ME1).
First, what is it to apply an expression? It should be clear that
the relevant notion of application is that of predication. For
instance, we apply a predicate such as ‘green’ when we use
it in an assertion, to predicate a property of an object x. In
the case of singular terms, similarly, what is of relevance is
referential
 use.[10]
The notion of application, hence, is more narrow than that of
use, since we use our terms in a wide variety of ways that do
not include the expression of judgments, as when we ask a question or
make a hypothetical statement (see Millar 2004: 162).
Second, how should the deontic operator in (ME1) be
construed? Since (ME1) involves an embedded conditional, we
may in fact distinguish between three readings, a narrow scope
reading, an intermediate and a wide scope reading:
(ME1′)    If ‘green’ means green
for S at t, then (S ought to (apply
‘green’ to x) iff
x is green).
(ME1″)    If ‘green’ means green
for S at t, then (S ought to (apply
‘green’ to x iff
x is green)).
(ME1′′′)    S ought to (if
‘green’ means green for S at t,
apply ‘green’ to x iff x is green).
In the debate, all three construals can be found. Thus, it has been
suggested that the intermediate scope interpretation best captures the
intuition that if S means green by
‘green’ she is thereby obligated to use the term in certain
ways (under certain conditions), without (as on the narrow scope
reading) implying that the obligation is conditional on x
being green (Hattiangadi 2006: 225, fn 4). Another issue concerns the
possibility of detaching. Some favor the narrow scope reading, since it
allows one to detach the ‘ought’, and supports the
intuition that the semantic obligation can only be discharged one way:
in this case, by applying ‘green’ to green objects (Bykvist
& Hattiangadi 2007: 283). Others prefer the wide scope reading,
precisely because it does not allow one to detach ‘ought’
and hence implies a more disjunctive obligation: S ought
either to apply ‘green’ to green objects, or not mean
green by ‘green’ (Gampel 1995: 228, Millar 2004:
168–169).
A related question is whether (ME1) clashes with the widely
endorsed principle that ought implies can. As it
stands, (ME1) can be read as implying that S has
an obligation to apply ‘green’ to all green objects, an
obligation that cannot possibly be fulfilled (Hattiangadi
2007: 180). One response to this is to endorse the wide scope reading,
(ME1′′′), since it allows the subject to
discharge her obligation by not meaning green by
‘green’ – something that does seem to be in her
power. Another response consists in removing the biconditional in
(ME1), replacing it with a weaker principle (Whiting 2007:
137):
(ME2)   For any speaker S, and any time t:
if ‘green’ means green for S
at t, then S ought to apply ‘green’ to
an object x only if
x is green at t.
The question has been raised, however, whether (ME2) is
sufficiently strong to support ME normativity. The trouble is that
(ME2) does not seem to place any normative constraints on
the subject’s behavior. If x is green, it no longer
follows that S ought to apply ‘green’ to
x, whereas if x is not green it just follows that it
is not the case that S ought to apply ‘green’ to
x. The latter, it has been stressed, is distinct from the
claim that S ought not to apply ‘green’ to
x – for instance, it is compatible with it being
permissible to apply ‘green’ to x (Bykvist &
Hattiangadi 2007: 280). This means that (ME2) fails to
support the claim that when S applies a term in a way that is
semantically incorrect, then she has done what she ought not do:
‘semantically incorrect’ and ‘ought not’ thus
come apart.
   

In response it has been suggested that ‘ought’ in (ME1) is
replaced by a ‘may’. This allows the normativist to retain
the biconditional and yet avoid the troubles caused by the principle
that ought implies can: That an action is correct
implies only that one may do it, not that one is
obligated to do it, and there is no principle that
ought implies can. If ‘green’ is true of
green objects only then S may apply ‘green’ to an
object if and only if it is green, and this is not in conflict with
the fact that the subject is not able to apply ‘green’ to
every green object there is (Whiting 2009: 544 and 2010: 216, Peregrin
2012: 88).
 There is therefore some initial unclarity as to precisely which
prescription is supposed to follow directly from (CM). A more
fundamental question is whether the strategy of the simple argument
can succeed in the first place. Opponents of ME normativity do not
challenge (CM) which, again, seems trivially true.  Rather, they deny
that (CM) has normative consequences just by itself. The crucial claim
here is that ‘correct’ can be used both normatively and
non-normatively (cf. Glüer 2001, Glüer & Wikforss 2009,
36 and 2015a). If that is true, the simple argument won’t go through:
Rather, an additional premise will be required to the effect that
‘correct’ in (CM) is used normatively. And whether or not
that premise can be supplied, the argument won’t be direct
anymore.
Anti-normativists usually go further and claim that the way
‘correct’ is used in (CM) in fact is non-normative. What
the appeal to correctness conditions gives us, it is claimed, is only
a way of categorizing applications of ‘green’ into two
basic kinds (the true and the false, for instance), and this does not
in itself entail that one ought to apply the term in any particular
way. The notion of semantic correctness is non-normative in just this
sense: That an application of e is correct, does not entail
that it ought to be made, and, conversely, incorrect applications do
not immediately imply that S has violated any semantic
prescription. If ‘green’ means green then
S applying it to a red object implies that her statement is
false, but it does not thereby follow that she has failed to do what
she ought, semantically, to do (Fodor 1990, Horwich 1995, Glüer
1999, 2001, Wikforss 2001, Dretske 2000, Hattiangadi 2006;
2009a).[11] ,
[12] 
Proponents of the direct argument respond by insisting that the notion
of semantic correctness is a normative notion. To many, this seems a
simple conceptual truth holding for the notion of correctness in
general, and therefore also for that of semantic correctness (Gibbard
2005: 358, Whiting 2007: 135 and 2009: 538). Normativists also appeal
to ordinary usage here, suggesting that ‘correct’ is
normally used normatively and should therefore be interpreted that way
in semantics as well (Whiting 2009: 538, Peregrin 2012: 84). That
hasn’t convinced anti-normativists who point out that
dictionaries such as Merriam-Webster’s commonly list normative and
non-normative usages for the adjective ‘correct’ (Glüer
&
 Wikforss 2015a).[13]
 Normativists have also argued that even if the basic semantic
concept itself wasn’t normative, the notion of semantic
correctness still would or could be. Semantic correctness, it is
argued, is not simply the same as, for instance, truth. Normativists
here appeal to a distinction stressed by Rosen (2001: 620) between
correctness and the ‘correctness making feature’, the
(non-normative) property something must have in order to count as
correct. According to Rosen, correctness is a higher-order
property. To say that something is correct is not just to say that the
correctness making features are in place (as when someone plays the
notes of the Moonlight Sonata) but to make the higher-order claim that
the action (the piano performance) possesses the feature that makes
for correctness in acts of that kind (the act of playing the Moonlight
Sonata).  Similarly, it is argued, to say that applying
‘green’ to a green object is correct, is to say that the
application has a certain non-normative property (the expression
applies truly) but it is also to make the higher-order statement that
the application possesses the feature that makes it correct in a
normative sense.  Even if the basic word-world relation is
non-normative, therefore, it does not follow that the property of
correctness does not have a normative dimension (Speaks 2009: 408,
Whiting 2009: 540, Fennell 2013: 58–59). It is difficult to see,
however, how something like ‘the correctness making
feature’ could strictly speaking be a second-order property
(i.e. a property of a property). It is one and the same object that
both has the correctness making feature and is correct, after
all. Rather, Rosen-style correctness is a first-order, second-level
property (to use the terminology of Russell’s ramified theory of
types). More importantly, even if that is the best way to construe the
intuitive general notion of correctness, all this means is that it
might be possible to provide arguments for the claim that the notion
of semantic correctness is normative even if we agree that the basic
semantic concept itself is not normative. But the basic
anti-normativist challenge applies to Rosen-style correctness just as
to any other construal of the intuitive, general notion of
correctness: Since ‘correct’ can be used normatively and
non-normatively, there is no simple, direct implication from
correctness to normativity (cf. Glüer & Wikforss 2009, 37, fn. 10;
2015).
This strand in the debate might seem to suggest that behind the
discussion of the simple argument lies nothing but a basic clash of
intuitions. The anti-normativist denies what the normativist asserts
– that the concept of semantic correctness is an essentially
normative concept. A possible conclusion, therefore, is that the
normativist and the anti-normativist operate with different concepts
of semantic correctness. This raises the question, however, whether
there is nevertheless co-extensionality between the two concepts. As
long as (CM) is the common starting point this would seem to be the
case; any sorting effected by the normative distinction between
correctness and incorrectness will coincide with the sorting effected
by the non-normative distinction. If so, it would seem that further
arguments are required to resolve the dispute, beyond the appeal to
intuitions: The normativist would have to provide some reasons why the
non-normativist notion of correctness is not a notion of semantic
correctness.  This poses a special challenge to normativists who
appeal to Rosen’s distinction and grant that the basic semantic
relation is non-normative: If this relation is non-normative then the
question is not whether the concept of semantic correctness
could be given a normative construal but whether semantics
needs such a construal (Glüer & Wikforss 2015a).
Another strand in the discussion of the simple argument concerns the
status of the relevant semantic obligations. Here it is often
emphasized that semantic obligations are merely prima facie and may be
overridden by other obligations, such as the obligation (in a certain
context) to tell a lie. It is therefore not an objection to ME
normativity that there are situations in which ‘green’ means
green for S, without it being the case that
S ought to apply ‘green’ to green objects only
(Whiting 2007: 139 and 2009: 546).
 

This appeal to prima facie obligations has been challenged. What is
distinctive of a prima facie obligation, as opposed to a mere
instrumental means-end imperative, is that it cannot be overridden by
mere desires. However, it is argued, if S has no desire to
speak the truth, then S has no obligation to apply
‘green’ to green objects. For instance, if neither
S, nor her audience, care whether S tells the truth,
then there is no obligation to apply ‘green’ correctly.
Hence, (CM) does not even yield prima facie obligations (Hattiangadi
2006: 232 and 2007:189). In response, the normativists suggest that in
such a situation the speaker’s use would nevertheless be
semantically incorrect and involve a violation of her semantic
obligations. The violation would not be very serious, but it would
still be a violation (Whiting 2007: 139). This has been challenged,
too. Verheggen, for instance, argues that Whiting’s attempt to back
this up by the possibility of criticising a speaker who misapplies an
expression out of mere desire is not convincing. After all, the
speaker acts as she does precisely because of what she means by the
expression – therefore, there is no semantic reason to criticize
her (Verheggen 2011, 562).
Nevertheless, it would be hasty to conclude that nothing but
instrumental norms can be derived from meaning facts in conjunction
with desires. As noted above, it is clear that an appeal to merely
instrumental norms, or means-ends norms, fails to support the idea
that meaning is essentially normative. Although facts about
correctness conditions may play a role in the generation of
instrumental norms such as “If you wish to communicate with ease
you ought to apply ‘green’ to x if and only if
x is green”, the ought in question derives from the
agent’s desires and intentions (given certain empirical facts,
regularities, or laws), not from the correctness conditions
themselves. Indeed, very many facts can play a role in the generation
of instrumental norms without thereby being intrinsically normative
– for instance, given the laws of nature, facts about the
weather, taken together with facts about my desires, have implications
for how I should dress (Coates 1986, Bilgrami 1993, Glüer 2001,
Wikforss 2001, Hattiangadi 2006, 2009b). Not all hypothetical
norms are instrumental, or based on contingent means-ends relations,
however. An example would be the following: If you want to castle in
chess, you should (or indeed: must) move your king and one of your
rooks in a certain way. Similarly, it has been suggested that there is
an important difference between hypothetical norms involving ordinary
non-normative facts (such as facts about the weather) and norms
involving meaning facts: Since meaning facts are constituted
by correctness conditions, meaning facts always dictate how I
should behave when I intend to produce a meaningful utterance. Even
though what they dictate depends on my particular desires in
the situation, the fact that they dictate something does not
depend on any desire – in contrast to the dictates derivable
from weather facts (Verheggen 2011: 563). One might wonder, though,
whether the cases ultimately really are disanalogous: Just as one
might not care whether one gets wet or stays dry, it might seem, one
might just not care whether what one says is semantically correct or
not – do correctness conditions really dictate anything if all I
want to do is say something
 meaningful?[14]
Before considering alternative arguments in support of ME normativity,
let us comment on the relation between Kripke’s normativity
constraint and the so called ‘problem of error’. As noted
above, Kripke takes his normativity constraint to rule out
dispositionalist accounts of meaning. Kripke formulates his objection
to dispositionalism in various ways: Dispositions only concern what
the agent will do, not what she should do (1982: 29;
37); the dispositionalist cannot account for mistakes
(ibid. 30–35); dispositionalist facts are not guiding
and cannot justify the agent’s actions (ibid. 37). In
the debate, the main focus has been on the question whether the
dispositionalist can account for the possibility of mistake or
error. For an expression meaning green, for instance, it is
just as much a platitude that mistaken or erroneous application is (in
principle) possible as that the expression has correctness
conditions. Indeed, for such an expression the possibility of error or
mistake is little more than a reflection of (CM): There must be a
distinction between correct and incorrect applications. The question,
then, is the following: If meaning is determined by how S is
disposed to use her term, then how could she use the term incorrectly?
It has been argued that she couldn’t – rather, every apparent
error would just indicate a difference in meaning. Hence, the
dispositionalist would be in danger of undermining the distinction
between what seems right to the speaker (in the sense of being
disposed to apply a particular expression) and what is right
(Boghossian 1989a:
 537–540).[15]
 It is much disputed whether the dispositionalist can solve this
problem. It should be noted, however, that the problem of error does
not seem to have much to do with semantic normativity (Fodor 1990:
135–136, Bilgrami 1992, Wikforss 2001: 208, Hattiangadi 2006:
229, 2007: 186). The error objection does not turn on the fact that
the dispositionalist cannot allow for semantic oughts but, rather, on
the fact that we must not construe the relation between the meaning
determining facts and meaning in such a way that mistake is ruled
out.
 

Of course, even provided with a solution to the problem of error
dispositionalism might come to grief with Kripke’s skeptic. Solving
the problem of error requires showing that there is a plausible
principle P assigning meanings to expressions on the basis of
the speaker’s dispositions to use them, a principle underwriting
plausible ascriptions of error. On a quite plausible interpretation of
the skeptic’s main strategy – i.e. that of
“quussing” candidate facts – this strategy is as
applicable here as elsewhere. If, for instance, P assigns
addition to ‘plus‘ on the basis of disposition
D, the skeptic will want to know why this is the right
principle – as opposed to some other principle P’
assigning quaddition to ‘plus’ on the basis of
D. As the mere fact of the speaker’s having D does
nothing to determine which of these principles is the right one,
dispositional facts are as quussable as any of the other candidates
– and this remains the case even if your dispositionalism comes
with a plausible principle of meaning determination (cf. Pagin 2002,
160f).
But pointing to the possibility of quussing is not the same thing as
raising a normativity objection. Raising a normativity objection to
dispositionalism requires additional considerations. Ginsborg (2011a,
b) and (2012) suggests some such additional considerations. Ginsborg
argues that dispositionalism can be defended against both
Kripke’s error and finitude objections and, further, that
dispositional facts cannot be quussed. According to her interpretation
of Kripke, the quus-hypothesis undermines those, and only those,
candidates for the role of meaning determining fact that aspire to
guide, instruct, or justify a
speaker’s use of their terms. Since dispositionalism has no such
aspirations, it is not vulnerable to quussing (2011b, 155; for
criticism, see Haddock 2012, Verheggen 2015). Nevertheless, Ginsborg
maintains, dispositionalism cannot be the full story; taken just by
itself, it ultimately does fall prey to a normativity objection.
 

To make this plausible, Ginsborg argues that there is a version of the
normativity objection that is more fundamental than those investigated
in the debate so far. In this version, the relevant norms are
not supposed to provide guidance, justification, or reasons
for using expressions one way or another – according to her, it
is precisely these requirements that generate vulnerability to
quussing. Rather, sensitivity to the relevant norms is needed to
secure understanding. The pure dispositionalist, Ginsborg
argues, cannot distinguish the intelligent use of language from mere
parroting or other automatic behaviour. Intuitively, the parrot, or
the automaton, do not use expressions with
understanding. Using an expression with understanding
requires grasping its meaning, and this involves not only being
disposed to use it in a certain way, but also being disposed to
‘take it’ that the expression ought to be used
the way one is disposed to use it. The attitude required is one of
“primitive appropriateness” – such
appropriateness cannot be explicated in terms of truth (Ginsborg 2012,
132), and taking something to be appropriate in this sense does not
require any prior grasp of rules, concepts, or meaning
(ibid. 137f). Primitive normativity thus is one of the central notions
in Ginsborg’s partially reductive account of meaning
determination, according to which “expressions have meaning only
in virtue of there being ways in which they [primitively] ought to be
applied” (ibid. 132). This is a (new) form of MD-normativism,
and we shall return to it below (in section 2.2, esp. 2.2.1 and
2.2.4).
Next, let us consider alternative arguments in support of ME
normativity.
An alternative to the simple argument is to suggest that there is a
further notion of semantic correctness, one that is not co-extensional
with that of (CM) but that is both essential to meaning and normative.
Thus, it has been claimed that there is a crucial ambiguity in the
notion of correct use (Millar 2004: 160). On the one hand, there is
the notion of semantic correctness as in (CM); on the other hand there
is the notion of correct use as in ‘using an expression in
accordance with its meaning’. That the two do not coincide is
clear from the fact that one may use an expression in accordance with
its meaning, and yet make a false statement, as when one has a false
belief about the world (McGinn 1984, Millar 2002, 2004: 160–175;
Moore 1954/1955: 308; Sellars 1956: 166, Buleandra 2008: 180, Fennell
2013: 69). We must distinguish empirical mistakes from
linguistic mistakes, it is argued, and it is essential that
we are able to allow for both. Moreover, it is said, this further
notion of semantic correctness is an essentially normative notion, one
that has implications for what S ought to do or is obligated
to do: if ‘green’ means green for S,
then S ought to use ‘green’ in accordance with
its meaning. (This idea, too, goes back to Kripke who, at points,
speaks of what I should do, if my use of the term is to be “in
accordance with how it was meant” (1982: 30, 37).)
How is the notion of ‘using an expression in accordance with
its meaning’ to be construed? According to one proposal, it
concerns which expressions are ‘appropriate’ or
‘suitable’ for expressing a certain belief. The notion of
‘suitability’, in turn, is derived from the ordinary
semantic correctness conditions taken together with what I intend to
express by my expressions: If ‘green’ applies correctly
only to green objects, and I mean to express my belief that x
is green, then I ought to use the term ‘green’ and not,
say, ‘red’. This allows for the possibility that my use is
correct in the sense of (CM), and yet linguistically incorrect (if
x is red and I use the term ‘red’ to express my
belief that x is green); and, vice versa, that my use is
incorrect in the sense of (CM), but linguistically correct (if
x is red and I use the term ‘green’ to express my
belief that x is green) (McGinn 1984: 60, Millar 2004:
162–163). Hence, in the place of (CM) we have:
(CM*)   For any speaker S, and any time t: if
‘green’ means green for
S at t, then it is correct for S at
t to apply ‘green’ to an object x iff
S intends to express the belief that x is green at
 t.[16]
Possible misuses are said to include both performance errors (such
as slips of the tongue) and so-called meaning errors (as when the
speaker thinks ‘arcane’ means ancient) (Millar
2004: 163).
This raises the question of what motivates this further notion of
correctness. While it is a platitude that meaningful expressions have
semantic correctness conditions, it is not a platitude that an
expression is meaningful only if there are these further correctness
conditions, and this leaves it open to opponents of ME normativity to
question the semantic relevance of (CM*). If ‘green’ means
green for S, and S uses ‘red’
to express her belief that x is green, she may fail in her
communicative intentions (although not necessarily, consider the use
of irony and metaphor), but does it follow that she has used her
expressions incorrectly in a semantically relevant sense? The added
notion of correctness, it may therefore be argued, simply does no
semantic work. In this respect there appears to be an important
difference between the notion of semantic correctness in (CM) and that
of (CM*): While it is essential that we allow for the possibility of
using an expression incorrectly in the sense of (CM), making room for
empirical error, it may not seem as important that we allow for the
possibility of using an expression incorrectly in the sense of (CM*),
making room for linguistic error. This concern has been raised by some
normativists as well. For instance, Whiting (2013) argues that it is a
mistake to try to defend normativism on these grounds, and that the
normativist should stick to the orthodox interpretation that takes as
its starting point (CM).
In the literature, the most common route to the conclusion that we
need some such further notion of semantic correctness goes via
assumptions about the nature of understanding (Wright 1980:
20, McDowell 1984, McGinn 1984:109, Kotatko 1998, Millar 2004,
Buleandra 2008, Fennell 2012). Understanding the meaning of a term, it
is argued, involves using it in accordance with its meaning and,
moreover, feeling obligated to thus using it. To learn the meaning of
an expression, McDowell writes for instance, “is to acquire an
understanding that obliges us subsequently … to judge and speak
in certain determinate ways, on pain of failure to obey the dictates
of the meaning we have grasped” (1984: 45). This motivates the
appeal to further correctness conditions, it is held, since a speaker
may fully understand a term while using it in a false judgment and,
conversely, use the term in a true judgment while failing to
understand the term properly.
The idea that understanding puts constraints on use is often combined
with the claim that there are rationality constraints on meaning
attributions. Thus, it has been suggested that the normativity of
meaning flows from the idea that when interpreting another speaker,
the interpretation is constrained by the principle that the other
should come out as being by and large rational and not wildly
mistaken.  Using an expression in accordance with its meaning, is
using the expression in a way that ‘makes sense’, and does
not violate these rationality constraints. The normativity of meaning,
on this view, simply follows from something like the Davidsonian idea
that meaning and intentional content are determined by the principle
of charity (McDowell & Pettit 1986, 11; Millar 2004; Zangwill
1998; Kriegel 2010). According to the principle of charity, the best
interpretation of a speaker S is that which optimizes overall
coherence and truth across S’s utterances and beliefs, but also
their desires and actions (e.g., Davidson 1991, 211; for more on the
principle of charity, see Glüer 2011, ch. 3).
The route via understanding depends on assumptions about the nature
of linguistic understanding that may be challenged. For instance, even
if it is granted that understanding the meaning of an expression
e involves using e in certain ways (something which
may also be questioned, see Williamson 2007), it is a further
supposition that this brings with it an additional notion of semantic
correctness/incorrectness. It might simply be said that unless one uses
‘green’ in certain ways one does not mean green by
‘green’. That is, if one does not use the expression in
accordance with the meaning green, then it does not follow
that one uses one’s expression incorrectly, but merely that one
uses it with a different meaning. This ties understanding to use
without appealing to the notions of correct and incorrect use. Thus,
the speaker who (regularly) uses ‘arcane’ in accordance with
the standard meaning of ‘ancient’, means ancient
and not arcane by her expression (Davidson 1986). In fact, it
has been suggested that the appeal to rationality constraints mandates
this: It is precisely because the standard interpretation would imply
attributing unacceptable error and irrationality that the term needs to
be reinterpreted (for a discussion of the principle of charity see
section 2.2).
A related argument appeals not to the nature of understanding, but
to the nature of intentions (Wright 1984, 1987, McDowell
1991). Kripke, at one point, stresses that the relation of meaning and
intention to future action is normative, not descriptive (1982: 37).
What he seems to have in mind is the idea that there is an
internal relation between an intention and what fulfills it:
if S intends to do A, only doing A will
fulfil her intention (ibid: 25). Similarly, it is suggested, if
S intends ‘green’ to mean green, then
S has to do certain things in order for her intention to be
fulfilled. Obviously, it cannot be that what she has to do is apply the
term correctly in the sense of (CM). That would have the disastrous
consequence that if she applies ‘green’ to a non-green
object, it immediately follows that S does not mean
green by ‘green’, and hence all possibility of
empirical error is ruled out. Rather, what S has to do to
fulfil her intention is to use ‘green’ in accordance with
its meaning.
It has been argued that this move fails to strengthen the
normativist case. If, indeed, the intention to mean green by
‘green’ is fulfilled only if S uses
‘green’ in accordance with its meaning, then there can be
no such thing as meaning green by ‘green’ while
not using the expression in accordance with its meaning. It follows
that failing to use an expression in accordance with its meaning is not
using the expression linguistically incorrectly, but using it with a
different meaning. Thus it is argued that the claim that there is an
internal relation between an intention and its fulfilment, far from
supporting ME normativity, is in tension with it (Glüer &
Wikforss 2009: 48–51). It should be noted that this objection is
premised on the principle, mentioned above, that ought implies
the possibility of violation: If the relation between intention and
future action is internal there is no possibility of violation, the
reasoning goes, hence the relation cannot be both internal and
prescriptive. (The principle is stressed by Mulligan 1999, Railton
1999, 3f; Williamson 2000, 241; Glüer 2001; Glüer &
Wikforss 2009.)
Questions can also be raised concerning the normative consequences
of the notion of ‘using a word in accordance with its
meaning’. Assuming that this further notion of correctness is
essential to meaning and that we need to be able to allow for meaning
errors, does it follow that speakers ought to use their terms
correctly, in this sense? Do we have a semantic obligation to use our
expressions in accordance with their meaning? As in the case of the
simple argument, it might be argued that the appearance of an
ought here derives from added normative premises, such as
instrumental norms concerning the ease of communication, or pragmatic
norms regulating speech acts.
In response it has been suggested that the relevant normative
consequences should not be understood in terms of obligations but,
rather, in terms of commitments. This is the line taken by Alan Millar
(2002 and 2004). Meaning statements, such as “‘Green’
means green”, Millar argues, are true in virtue of there
being a rule-governed practice. If S uses ‘green’
to mean green, therefore, she becomes a participant in this practice
and incurs a commitment to use the term accordingly. To be properly
committed, Millar suggests, S has to be disposed to adjust her
use if she discovers that it is not in keeping with the meaning of the
expression (as when S uses ‘arcane’ to mean
ancient). The commitment is not dependent on one’s
desire to communicate, or on the intention to speak the truth, but
merely on S participating in the practice of using
‘green’ with a certain meaning. However, Millar stresses,
it does not follow that she ought to use her expressions a certain way,
since it does not follow that she ought to participate in the practice
– there may be reasons to withdraw from the practice instead.
Hence, one may participate in a practice without it following that one
ought to “carry out the performances associated with one’s
role” (Millar 2004:
 173).[17]
This proposal illustrates how ME normativity might be derived from
MD normativity: Meaning statements have normative consequences,
according to Millar, because meaning is determined by the speaker
following certain rules. Metaphysically the rules come first and make
meaning possible. Before turning to a discussion of MD normativity, let
us briefly consider some other arguments put forth in support of ME
normativity.
The arguments above are all attempts to show that meaning statements
have normative implications. An alternative strategy is to suggest
that meaning statements simply are prescriptions. When we
state “‘Green’ means green” we may
appear to be making a descriptive statement whereas, in fact, we are
prescribing how ‘green’ ought to be used (Gauker
2007, 2011, Lance & O’Leary Hawthorne 1997, Peregrin 2012: 96,
Gibbard 2012). This proposal can either be construed as a claim about
the semantic content of meaning statements, or as a claim
about the typical use of meaning statements. Thus, a
statement may be used prescriptively, while having a descriptive,
factual content (‘In this classroom we raise our hands before
speaking’).
If the suggestion is that meaning statements have a prescriptive
content it would provide another very direct argument in support of ME
normativity, one that does not have to proceed via the controversial
claim that the notion of semantic correctness is an essentially
normative notion. This is an advantage over the simple argument.
However, there are also disadvantages. For instance, the question
arises whether the claim that meaning statements lack descriptive
content can accommodate the role of such statements in inferential
contexts. (See Gauker 2007: 194–195 for a discussion.) Another
question concerns the implications from ‘ought’-statements
to meaning statements. According to the simple argument,
“‘Green’ ought to be applied to x if and
only if x is green” follows immediately from
“‘Green’ means green”. According to
this argument the converse also holds: “‘Green’
means green” follows directly from
“‘Green’ ought to be applied to x if and
only if x is green” (c.f. Gibbard 2012: 12 and
113–115). The latter has been questioned on the grounds that even if
it is true that ‘green’ ought to be applied this way, the
‘ought’ in question may not have anything to do with
semantics but, say, with religious practices (Byrne 2002: 207).
These difficulties are avoided if, instead, meaning statements are
simply construed as having a prescriptive use (while having a
descriptive content). On either construal, however, the question
arises why we should believe that meaning statements are
prescriptive. One suggestion is that the prescriptive function of
meaning statements follows from their role in coordinating our
linguistic use (Gauker 2007 and 2012: 279). Meaning statements are
proposals about how terms ought to be used, and as such they
serve to determine meaning and remove an otherwise irresolvable
indeterminacy (see also Gibbard 2012: 109–112. As a result, “we
all think of meanings as standards that we are obliged to conform
to” (2007: 185). This defense of the normativity thesis
therefore turns on controversial issues concerning
indeterminacy. Another proposal shuns the metaphysical questions
concerning the nature of meaning and appeals to the function
of meaning statements in our practices (Lance & O’Leary Hawthorne
1997). Instead of asking for the facts that constitute meaning, it is
argued, we should consider the role of meaning statements in our
socio-linguistic practices. It then emerges that such statements serve
the regulative function of licensing and censoring certain uses. It
should be noted that unless this proposal about the function of
meaning statements is said to have some metaphysical
implications concerning the nature of meaning, it will fall short of
supporting the claim that meaning is essentially
 normative.[18] ,
[19]
In addition, there are a variety of other arguments in support of ME
normativity. One such argument grants that correctness conditions are
not themselves normative, but suggests that we derive the normativity
of meaning from the idea that we ought to speak the truth (Ebbs 1997,
Haugeland 1998, Soames 1997: 221, 224). As noted above, this only
succeeds if the obligation in question can be said to derive purely
from semantic sources. The question, then, is whether there is any
reason to suppose that we have a semantic obligation to speak the
truth. The impression that there is, it has been suggested, is a
result of a conflation of semantics and pragmatics. Thus, it is
commonly held that there are rules of assertion, and some of these are
such that they are violated when the speaker makes a false
judgment. For instance, it has been proposed that there is a
‘knowledge rule’: “One must: assert p only
if one knows p” (Williamson 2000: 242).  However,
opponents of ME normativity stress, these are pragmatic rules,
regulating the performance of speech acts, not semantic ones. If such
rules are essential for the possibility of assertion, then assertion
is essentially normative, but it does not follow that meaning is
(Glüer & Wikforss 2009a: 37–38, Speaks 2009). For
discussion of the claim that assertion is normative, see
the entry on assertion.
Another set of arguments reject the focus
on correctness conditions and appeal to other aspects of Kripke’s
normativity objection to dispositionalist theories. For instance, it
has been suggested that the claim that meaning is essentially normative
is primarily a claim about the justificatory role of meaning. Facts
about meaning are, essentially, such that they are able to justify
S‘s use of her terms, able to guide S‘s
usage. In this sense, meaning facts are like prescriptive rules, such
as the rules of etiquette – it is of their essence that they
guide action or give directions. The reason dispositionalism fails,
then, is not that the dispositionalist cannot account for error, but
that facts about what I am disposed to do are not essentially capable
of justifying (Gampel 1995: 225–231, Zalabardo 1997: 480–483, Kusch
2006: 50–94).
Whether this argument succeeds depends on whether it can be shown
that the role of meaning in motivating action is equivalent to that of
prescriptions. Thus, the fact that ‘green’ means
green may of course guide the speaker’s actions in the
sense that any facts do so – i.e., if S believes that
‘green’ means green. To show that meaning facts
play a normatively guiding role, therefore, it does not suffice to
appeal to the idea that meaning facts play a role in motivating action;
it also has to be shown that the motivating role is that of a
prescription rather than a belief (see section 2.2 below).
This raises the general question of the extent to which Kripekan
normativity considerations can be isolated from the larger context
within which they occur, i.e., the skeptical argument. It has been
suggested that the focus on semantic correctness deflates
Kripke’s arguments, leaving out his claims about justification
and guidance, for instance (Kusch 2006: 62–64). Even if the skeptical
conclusion can be avoided, it is held, the upshot of Kripke’s
discussion is that traditional conceptions of meaning have to be
rejected: Since there are no facts that serve to determine realist
correctness conditions, we need to replace the realist construal of
semantic correctness conditions as being judgment independent, with an
anti-realist account of correctness conditions in terms of
justification conditions. The normative dimension of meaning,
ultimately, is to be found in the communal practice of relying on
others and standing corrected (Wright 1980: 20, Hale 1997, Kusch
2006:
 177–206).[20]
However, arguments have also been made in the reverse direction,
suggesting that the dialectic in fact is quite different. Since
proponents of the revisionary approach rely on the idea that meaning is
normative, it has been suggested, their arguments do not touch the
philosopher who denies that meaning is normative and rejects the move
from correctness conditions to prescriptions. That is, if the
normativity constraint need not be met, and if it suffices that we
appeal to facts that serve to determine semantic (realist) correctness
conditions, the skeptical challenge may appear less formidable and, as
a result, the revisionary response less motivated (Hattiangadi
2007: 207).
In the discussion of ME normativity so far it is assumed that the
relevant norms are norms for action, prescriptions for the
speaker’s use of her expressions. This, again, is how Kripke
discusses the topic and how those writing on Kripke tend to construe
the relevant normativity. However, as far as ME normativity goes,
normative consequences might also be construed axiologically. Thus, it
might be argued that semantically correct applications, by themselves,
are valuable. This, too, would show that meaning is an
essentially normative notion, although in a different sense than the
standard one. And in this case too, the crucial question would be
whether the step from (CM) to normative consequences can be motivated.
Does sorting S’s applications into the semantically
correct and the semantically incorrect ones, by itself imply that
actions of one or the other of these kinds are valuable (Glüer
2001:
 60–61)?[21]
Another option would be to construe the rules or norms of meaning as
constitutive ones (cf. section 1.2 above). Rules of meaning, the idea
would be, are rules for the use of expressions that determine the
meaning of these expressions. Appealing to constitutive rules thus
would mean accepting what we call MD normativism: It would mean
accepting that expressions have meaning because there are rules or
norms in force for their use.
Meaning determining normativism (MD normativism) is the claim that
meaning is essentially such that it is (at least in part) determined
by
 norms.[22]
Prima
facie, this can either mean that the supervenience base for meaning,
the set of facts metaphysically determining meaning (see section 1.1
above) contains norms, or, more precisely, normative facts (cf.
Wedgwood 2007, Part II; 2009), or that the principle governing meaning
determination is a “normative principle” (Jackman
2004, Other Internet 
 Resources).[23]
 In the end, this might not be a substantive difference, however. A
natural idea would be that a normative determination principle
involves a mapping essentially mediated by norms, or normative
facts. But then, placing the relevant normative facts in the
supervenience base (and using one principle of determination), or
construing them as part of another principle of determination (working
on a supervenience base not containing any normative facts) might
amount to no more than notational
 variation.[24]
The single most common form of MD normativism holds that the meaning
of linguistic expressions is determined by rules for their
use. This idea was famously formulated by Ludwig Wittgenstein, and
we shall concentrate on it in this section. Drawing an analogy between
the rules of games and those of language, Wittgenstein wrote in his
so-called ‘Middle Period’:
At a minimum, MD normativism claims that the following not only is
essential for, but also metaphysically prior to, an expression
e‘s having meaning M (for a speaker, or group
of speakers, S at a time t):
(MD)   e means M for S at t only if
there is a rule R for the use of e in force
for S at
 t.[25]
But why should we think that meaning is (essentially)
rule-determined? And if it is, how exactly does this work? What kind of
rule could do this job? What does it mean for such a rule to be in
force for a speaker, and where does this force come from? We shall take
these questions up in turn.
Since ancient times, philosophers have observed the arbitrary,
contingent nature of the connection between linguistic expressions and
their meanings. Moreover, this connection seems to be somehow
‘made by us’; what could be more natural than to think that
it is established by convention?
But even though conventions might be norms or rules somehow made by us,
the MD normativist cannot simply claim, for instance, that it is a
convention of English that ‘green’ means green.
The MD normativist wants to provide an account of what meaning is, and,
to be informative, such an account needs to be formulated in
non-semantic terms (cf. Davidson 1982). Moreover, it does of course not
follow from a relation’s being ‘arbitrary’,
contingent, or even ‘made by us’, that it is conventional
in any interesting sense.[26] 
There are innumerable regularities in our
behavior (such as moving down hallways by putting one foot in front of
the other) that are neither necessities of any sort, nor due to
convention. An observation that might cast some doubt on the idea that
the regularities of linguistic usage are due to convention is the
following: People who follow rules, or conventions, when, for instance,
playing chess or driving cars on the right hand side of the road in
continental Europe, can usually, upon reflection, both at least roughly
formulate the relevant rule or convention and give it as their reason
for acting as they did. When it comes to the semantic rules of natural
language, this is strikingly far from being the case. There are various
ways in which the MD normativst could try to accommodate this
observation (see section 2.2.2 below), but some explanation clearly is
needed.
Over and above its intuitive appeal, there are various more
theoretical reasons for MD normativism. It is, for instance, plausible
to think that meaning, in some way or other, is determined by the
use speakers make of linguistic expressions. If meaning
determining rules are rules governing the use of linguistic
expressions, MD normativism provides the beginnings of an answer to the question of just
how use does this. A natural thought here is that semantic rules effect
a distinction between (semantically) correct and incorrect use of an
expression. An expression governed by such a rule consequently is an
expression that has (semantic) correctness conditions and, thus,
meaning (cf. Glock 2000). If meaning determining rules moreover are
prescriptions, MD normativism provides a metaphysics directly
underwriting the most common form of ME normativism: ME
prescriptivism.
MD normativism is often taken to provide solutions to certain
classical problems of meaning determination, most prominently the
“problem of error”. As we noted above (section 2.1.1), the
problem of error, by itself, would seem to be a problem for
naturalistic accounts of meaning determination quite independently of
normativity. It might be argued, however, that it is precisely because
meaning is determined normatively that any naturalistic account is
bound to misconstrue semantic correctness conditions. Or it might be
argued that MD normativism’s superior capacity to deal with the
problem of error provides evidence for its being the right account of
meaning determination.
An argument of the first kind might draw inspiration from the writings
of Donald Davidson. Davidson (1970) famously argued that meaning and
intentional content are determined by a constitutive principle called
the “principle of charity”, while physical predicates and
concepts obey constitutive principles of a nature so radically
different as to prevent any reductive account of the former in terms
of the latter. According to Davidson, speakers essentially are by and
large rational creatures and beliefs are by their nature
‘veridical’ (Davidson 1983), that is, by and large true in
the circumstances under which they are held.  According to the
principle of charity, the best interpretation of a
speaker S therefore is that which optimises overall coherence, or
rationality, and truth across S’s utterances, propositional attitudes,
and intentional actions (e.g., Davidson 1973, 1974, 1991; for more on
the principle of charity, see Glüer 2011, ch. 3). Because of its appeal
to rationality, the principle of charity has been interpreted as a
normative principle, and Davidson as a normativist (see for instance,
McDowell 1984; Hornsby 1997, 87; Gampel 1997; Hurley 1998, 5; Glock
2000; Jackman 2004; Wedgwood 2007, 161ff; Kriegel 2010).
This is disputed, however; it has been argued that precisely because
the principle of charity is the principle constitutive of meaning and
content in Davidson, it cannot play any normative role. It determines
what meaningful utterances (contentful mental states) are, not how
anything should be or what anyone should do (cf. Glüer 2001;
Wikforss 2001; Schroeder 2003; Engel 2008, 187ff; for a different
argument to the conclusion that charity is not a normative principle,
see Bilgrami 1992, 102ff.). Quite independently, the claim that
rationality is essentially normative might not appear any less
controversial than the claim that meaning is (cf.  Schnädelbach
1990; Kolodny 2005; Broome 2007; Glüer & Wikforss 2013a).
The MD normativist might also argue, as indicated above, that
normativism prevents the problem of error from arising. Such arguments
can take two forms. The normativist can argue that for instance the
supervenience base that non-normative dispositionalism works with needs
to be restricted: It is not the whole of a speaker’s dispositions
to use their terms that determines meanings, but only a certain kind of
disposition and this kind can only be specified by means of its
normative properties. In this vein, Wedgwood argues more generally that
it is only “rational” dispositions that determine
intentional content (where rationality is taken to be a normative
property; cf. Wedgwood 2007, 167ff; 2009). Normative teleosemantics can
be construed as making a similar move: Here, it is those dispositions
realizing the biological function of the mechanism of using an
expression that determine meaning (where ‘biological
function’ is taken to be something normative; cf. Millikan 1990,
Neander 1995).
More radically, the MD normativist can take problems such as that of
error as indicating that dispositionalism misidentifies the very kind
of entitities meaning supervenes on: It is not how you are disposed to
use an expression that determines its meaning, but how you are supposed
to use it, i.e., the norms that are in force for the use of the
expression in question (cf. Glock 2000, Brandom 1994, 159). Their being
in force then might, or might not, be further reducible or analyzable,
but not to dispositions for the use of expressions.
Alternatively, the MD normativist might adopt an account according to
which meaning determination has two components, a dispositionalist and
a normativist component. Ginsborg (2011a, b; 2012) argues that to mean
something by a linguistic expression, the speaker must not only be
disposed to use it in a certain way but also be disposed to take the
way she is disposed to use it to be “primitively
appropriate” (see above, 2.1.1). Her idea is that while
dispositions do suffice for determining meanings – in the
sense in which meanings can be correlated with the
dispositions of both the genuine speaker and the parrot or automaton
– (primitive) norms are nevertheless required for
genuinely meaningful speech or understanding (cf. esp. Ginsborg 2012,
138; Ginsborg 2011a, 244f). Such an account of meaning determination
would be “partially reductive” (Ginsborg 2011a, 230; 249):
it would combine a naturalist component with a non-semantic but
normative (and minimally intentional) component. On Ginsborg’s
account, however, the (primitive) normative attitudes required for
genuinely meaningful use of linguistic expressions do not determine
semantic correctness conditions for these expressions –
that job is to be done by the speaker’s basic dispositions to use
them.
There is a widespread tendency to see naturalism and normativism as
incompatible in the theory of meaning determination (see also section 4
below), but from what we just said, their relation would seem to be
more complicated. Prima facie, both reductive naturalism (such as, for
instance, a version of teleosemantics) and non-reductive naturalism
(such as, for instance, Davidsonian dispositionalism) would seem
compatible with (certain forms of) MD normativism. Normativism is
incompatible with reductive naturalism only if meaning is determined by
normative facts or properties that are not themselves naturalistic
(normative teleosemanticists, for instance, argue that the biological
notion of a function is normative). Normativism is incompatible with
non-reductive naturalism only if there are no non-normative facts
meaning supervenes
 upon.[27]
Other influential ideas behind MD normativism include
Wittgenstein-inspired skepticism towards meanings as ‘Platonic
entities’; in this tradition, meanings and concepts themselves
are construed as products of our norms or conventions (cf. for
instance, Baker & Hacker 1985, 269ff). Another idea derives from
meaning’s psychological role: It has been argued that, since
competent speakers are guided in their use of expressions by the
knowledge of their meanings, a knowledge that is general in form, such
guidance must be construed as guidance by rules (cf., for instance,
Boghossian 2008, 489; see also section 2.1.2 above). The question here
would be whether guidance by some state with general content is
sufficient for rule guidedness (cf. Glüer & Wikforss
2010a).
Assume that meaning is determined by rules. How exactly does this
work? What kind of rule could do this job? What does it mean for such a
rule to be ‘in force’ for a speaker or group of
speakers?
Meaning determining rules clearly would be constitutive
rules (see section 1.2 above): Meaningful use of linguistic
expressions is metaphysically impossible without such rules. Moreover,
meaning determining rules (usually) are supposed to determine not only
that an expression has meaning, but also which
meaning it has. These ideas are drawn on by a great number of
philosophers, including Wittgenstein scholars such as Baker and Hacker
or Glock, as well as philosophers such as von Wright, Sellars, and
Searle.
However, as we saw above there are different conceptions of
constitutive rules. On the traditional view, a constitutive rule is
such that it ‘creates’ new kinds of action, i.e., kinds of
action that could not be performed if the rule did not exist, or were
not in force. Such rules typically can be brought into the following
form:
(CR)   In C, doing X counts as doing Y.
 
Searle suggests that meaning is determined by such rules (1963,
42ff). It is not obvious, however, how this would work. Rules like this
cannot determine meaning by means of the line of thought sketched
above: By directly effecting a distinction between correct and
incorrect uses of an expression – rules of the form (CR) do not
make any such distinction (cf. Glüer & Pagin 1999). Such rules
might, however, determine meaning more indirectly (cf. Glock 2000). The
following might be such a rule, for instance:
(CR1)   In C, uttering s counts as saying
that p,
 
where s is a sentence. It has been argued, however, that
such a rule is not truly constitutive; it does not ‘create’
the possibility of performing actions of the relevant kind, i.e., saying
that p. Rather, saying that p seems to be possible
independently of (CR1), and (CR1) only provides
one (among many possible) means of performing such an action (cf.
Glüer & Pagin 1999, 218f).
It might be more promising to allow meaning determining rules to
have prescriptive force. In that case, it would be possible for them to
directly effect a distinction between (semantically) correct
(prescribed or allowed) and incorrect (forbidden) uses. They could
nevertheless be constitutive of using an expression with the determined
meaning insofar as it would be impossible to so use the expression
unless the prescription was in force for the speaker.
What, then, does it mean for a meaning determining rule R
to be in force for a speaker S’s use of an expression
e (at a time
 t)?[28] 
Broadly, there are three main
options for the MD normativist (see section 1.2 above). According to
the first, using e (at t) has to be
motivated by R. For R to be in force for
S’s use of e, S has to follow
R in the sense of attempting to do what is in accordance with
R. On the second construal, S has to accept
R in some sense not requiring (all) particular uses of
e to be motivated by R. Both of these would
plausibly seem to require S to have certain intentional
state(s). But, third, R‘s being in force for S
could also be construed as independent of any of S’s
intentional states (with respect to R).
The laws of the state, for instance, would seem to fall into the
third category; they are in force even for those individual citizens
who do not accept them. Analogously, meaning determining rules might be
in force in a speech community independently of an individual
speaker’s acceptance of them. Many games are in the second
category; they are such that even though participation requires players
to accept their rules, participants nevertheless can intentionally
violate these very rules within the game. For instance, intentional
spearing does occur in icehockey games, and will be punished precisely
because the rule against spearing is in force even for players who
spear intentionally. Again, in semantics the situation might seem
analogous: Speakers can intentionally say semantically incorrect things
without their expressions losing or changing their meanings (cf.
Railton 1999; Glüer & Pagin 1999; Glüer 1999; 2001; Wikforss
2001). Nevertheless, it might not be possible for these rules to be in
force in complete independence of a whole speech community’s
attitudes towards it, and even the individual speaker might need to at
least in general accept such rules.
The most common idea, however, is that expressions ‘get’
their meanings by speakers’ following the rules for
their use (see, for instance, Baker & Hacker 1985, 154ff, Glock
1996, 323ff); speaking meaningfully is conceived of as a form of
rule-guided action. Let’s call this form of MD
normativism ‘guidance normativism’.
Guidance normativism by itself is neutral on the question of whether
an individual speaker could adopt, and follow, rules for her own
idiolect (as, for instance, Baker & Hacker 1985, 169ff, hold), or
whether it necessarily takes a community of speakers to put semantic
rules into force. Many philosophers subscribe to
‘communitarianism’, however; they hold that so-called
‘solitary’ languages, i.e., languages spoken by only one
speaker, are impossible. When combined with MD normativism,
communitarianism usually construes meaning determining rules as
conventions adopted by whole speech communities. This is
often motivated by an interpretation of Wittgenstein’s rule-following
considerations and the so-called ‘private language
argument’ according to which these show that the notion of a
mistake does not have any application outside a whole community of
speakers (among others, Kripke 1982, Wright 1980: 218–220;
Peacocke 1981, McDowell 1984, Williams 1999). Another motivation is
provided by, among others, Dummett. Dummett argues, first, that
regular use by a whole community of speakers is a condition on an
expression’s having linguistic meaning, and, second, that therefore a
normative attitude towards the common language is required of each
individual speaker (Dummett 1991, 85). Davidson questioned both steps
of Dummett’s argument; while regularity of use usually makes
communication easier there is, according to him, no regularity such
that, on every particular occasion, accordance with it would be either
necessary or sufficient for successful communication (cf. Davidson
1986). Moreover, even if regularity were required, Davidson argued, it
would not matter how it came about; communication would be possible
whether or not the required regularity was a product of normative
attitudes (cf. Davidson 1994; Glüer 2013 provides a survey of
these discussions).
Even more radically, it has been questioned whether it is even
possible to draw any substantive distinction between rule guided and
merely regular behavior at this fundamental level. Yet such a
distinction is crucial for guidance normativism. As Quine classically
noted, on pain of vicious regress, meaning determining rules or
conventions cannot be explicitly and deliberately adopted; they must
somehow be “implicit” in the behavior of speakers. But
then, Quine argued, we risk depriving the notion of a linguistic rule
“of any explanatory force and reducing it to an idle label”
(Quine 1935, 106). The crucial question thus is what the distinction
between rule guided behavior and merely regular behavior amounts to
when it comes to meaning determining rules.
Intuitively, behavior guided by an (implicit or explicit) rule
R is behavior that can be explained by means of R or,
more precisely, behavior that can be given a
reasons-explanation involving R, an explanation in
terms of the reason-providing intentional states of the agent. Examples
of such an “intentional condition” on rule following would
be an intention to follow R (e.g. Baker & Hacker 1985,
155; Glock 1996, 325), or some other state of accepting or
internalizing R (Boghossian 2008).
Applying a traditional belief-desire model, Glüer and Pagin
(1999) suggest understanding guidance by a rule R in general
by means of the following practical syllogism:
(PA1)   I want to do what R requires,
(B)       R requires that I Φ,
(PA2)   So, I want to Φ,
where (PAi) is a pro-attitude (desire,
intention, acceptance), and (B) a belief. They also argue that if a
meaning determining rule R for an expression e
requires e to be used correctly, there is no room for such
rules in the explanation of speech acts: If a speaker wants to say that
p, a rule requiring them to use e correctly not only
is of no help, there is no “slot” in the practical
syllogism into which it would coherently fit (Glüer & Pagin
1999, 223f). It would thus seem that if an intentional condition on
guidance by meaning determining rules can be integrated into a general
model of reasons explanation, an alternative way of doing that is
required.
Another question concerns the relation between thought (or
intentional states in general) and language. On any account construing
thought as dependent on language, as well as on any account construing
thought and language as interdependent, and on any account according to
which mental content itself is determined by rules governing mental
expressions, an intentional condition on rule guidance would inevitably
lead guidance normativism back into vicious regress (cf. Boghossian
1989a; 2008). For instance, if having an intentional state with a
certain content is itself a matter of being guided by a content
determining rule, then another intentional state is required for having
the first one, and so on ad infinitum. It has therefore been argued
that according to Wittgenstein there must be a basic form of rule
following that is not subject to any intentional condition, but
“blind” (Wright 2007). Alternatively, it has been argued
that therefore the late Wittgenstein did not conceive of meaningful use
of language as rule guided anymore (Glüer & Wikforss
2010a).
An independent, general argument against an intentional condition on
rule guidance has been provided by Boghossian (2008, 493f): He argues
that the relevant intentional state would be a state with general
(prescriptive) content, and that acting under particular circumstances
on an intentional state with general content always involves some sort
of inference. Inference itself, however, essentially involves
following a rule, and thus a regress – reminiscent of that
familiar from Lewis Caroll (1895) – ensues. However, this
argument crucially depends on the assumption that inference is
essentially rule guided, an assumption which is at least controversial
(cf. Glüer & Wikforss 2010a).
Together with the observation recorded earlier – that speakers do
not usually seem to have the kind of privileged access to semantic
rules that we would expect if these were action guiding in the
intentional sense – considerations like these have driven some
philosophers to try to locate the explanatory power of meaning
determining rules elsewhere. Thus, some draw an analogy between the
explanation of speech dispositions by means of systems of semantic
rules and the evolutionary explanation of animal traits and behavior by
natural selection. In each case, there are regularities of behavior the
explanation of which is non-intentional, but which are nevertheless not
merely accidental. In contradistinction to truly evolutionary
explanations, explanations of speech dispositions by means of
(institutionalized) systems of rules remain only quasi-evolutionary;
the crucial explanans is not natural selection, but the system of rules
that exists prior to the individual speaker’s acquisition of
language (cf. Sellars 1954, Searle 1995). While such explanation might
work well for the use an individual speaker learns to make of the
expressions of an existing language, whether any distinction between
rule explained and merely regular behavior has been substantiated now
depends on substantiating a further distinction: that between a system
of rules and one of mere regularities. To take Sellars’ example:
Why would the bee dance instantiate mere regularities that receive a
truly evolutionary explanation, while a human natural language
instantiates a system of rules? (Cf. Glüer 2002, 173f.)
Another idea might thus be to locate meaning determining normativity
in the very idea of an evolutionary explanation, in the idea of a
biological function, for instance, the possession of which explains why
certain dispositions or mechanisms (for speech or mental
representation) are selected for, as in normative 
teleosemantics.[29] Yet
another possibility would be to combine computational and teleosemantic
ideas for rule following at the level of mental representation. Here, a
distinction between personal level rule following and sub-personal rule
following could be used. Thus, it has been proposed to construe
sub-personal rule following as analogous to computational rule
following, and semantic rules as rules deriving from the biological
functions of our cognitive apparatus (cf. Jacob 2005, 200f). Semantic
rule following would then allow for truly evolutionary explanation. It
has been argued that this would amount to a highly problematic
dispositionalism, not about meaning, but about sub-personal rule
following itself (cf. Boghossian 2008). However, if the notion of a
biological function helps solve the classical problems of meaning
dispositionalism, it might solve those of dispositionalism about
rule-following, too. Still, the basic question recurs: What it is that
distinguishes a sub-personal regularity from a performance governed by
a sub-personal rule? Since not everything with a biological function
would seem to be rule governed even in this sense, any account along
these lines will at least need to add further 
elements.[30]
Ginsborg (2011a, b; 2012) suggests that the normativity of meaning can
be defended by interpreting the relevant ‘ought’ in way
quite radically different from that dominant in most of the
normativity debates: as a “primitive ought”. Interpreted
as a primitive ought, it conveys the primitively normative attitudes
speakers must have towards their own uses of linguistic
expressions. Having primitively normative attitudes does not require
prior grasp of rules, concepts, or meanings. Moreover, the norms
speakers need to be primitively conscious of do not guide or
justify them in their use of expressions (Ginsborg 2011b,
170).[31] 
And finally, the primitive ‘ought’ relevant to meaning
cannot be explicated in terms of, or equated with, truth
– to be primitively correct is more fundamental than
being semantically correct: Primitive normativity is not required to
determine what is semantically correct (and incorrect), but rather to
“distinguish the production of a term from mere noise”
(Ginsborg 2012, 132, quoting Blackburn 1984, 281), or, more generally,
to determine which behaviour is “subject to normative evaluation
at all” (2011a, 243, fn.
 21).[32]
Primitive normativity thus is what distinguishes the behaviour of the
speaker who uses her terms with understanding from that of
the parrot, or automaton. Using a term with understanding requires
more than just being disposed to use it a certain way, Ginsborg
argues; it requires understanding that it has a certain
meaning. If a speaker for instance uses ‘slab’ to mean
slab, she needs to grasp or recognize that it means
slab (2012, 135). Ginsborg’s ambition is precisely to provide
necessary and sufficient conditions for what it is to have this
understanding.
 
The account of meaning determination she arrives at has two
components. Since one of them is a requirement of primitive
normativity, primitive normativity qualifies as a (new) kind of
meaning determining normativity. In rough outline, the account looks
like this:
If e has meaning, the first disposition suffices to
determine which meaning it has. But e has meaning only if the
second disposition is in place. Moreover, if both conditions are
fulfilled, having the primitively normative attitude of taking the use
one is disposed to make of e amounts to understanding that
e means M.
These conditions are not only necessary, but sufficient for meaning,
Ginsborg argues, because they allow us “to make sense of a given
response being correct or incorrect” (2011a, 245), where
correctness now is semantic correctness. Once these
conditions are fulfilled, a particular use of e might not
only be such that you “did not do what you were disposed to do,
but also did not do what you were disposed to regard as
appropriate” (ibid.). This, Ginsborg submits, is enough to make
such a use of e into a mistake. Once these conditions are
fulfilled, that is, the uses you are disposed to make of e
“can retrospectively be identified as the extension of
[e]” (2012, 138). And then, your primitively normative
attitude amounts to understanding that e means what it does.
At the time of this update, Ginsborg’s interpretation of the
normativity of meaning (and content) as primitive has not been widely
discussed. As the proposal is very interesting, and indeed rather
different from more established interpretations of the normativity of
meaning, this no doubt will change soon. Among the questions to be
asked, it seems to us, are at least the following: Is it really the
case that dispositional facts cannot be quussed (see above, 2.1.1;
Haddock 2012; Verheggen 2015)? And if not, can Ginsborg’s
two-component account be salvaged? If the account is extended to
intentional content (as Ginsborg herself hints it can, for instance in
2012, 127, fn.1) won’t that give rise to regress worries? Is it
really plausible to claim that a primitively normative attitude
towards the use one is disposed to make of an expression amounts to
knowing (or grasping or recognizing) what the expression means? How
are we precisely to understand the primitive notion of appropriateness
or correctness? On the one hand, there seems to be a need for
primitive and semantic correctness to coincide – if it is
to be plausible that awareness of primitive correctness amounts to
knowledge of meaning. As Ginsborg explains, once her conditions are
fulfilled, what is primitively correct can be identified with what is
in e’s extension, i.e. with what is semantically
correct. On the other hand, the two notions need to be distinct
– if it is to be plausible that having a primitive
normative attitude does not require concepts like those of rule or
truth. So what precisely is the difference between the two
notions?[33] And
if they are different, doesn’t that mean that an attitude of
primitively taking a use of an expression to be correct cannot amount
to semantically taking it to be correct? Simply because these
attitudes have different contents?
In the normativity debate the main focus has been on meaning: This
is true of the Kripke discussion as well as of earlier discussions
concerning the rulishness of language. However, parallel claims have
also been made about mental content and recently the thesis that
content is essentially normative has come into focus (McDowell &
Pettit 1986, Brandom 1994, Engel 2000, Boghossian 2003, Gibbard 2003,
Millar
 2004, Jarvis 2012).[34]
Content normativism claims that the following is both necessary, and
essential to, a mental state M‘s having a content
p:
(C)   M has content p only if there is a rule, or
system of rules, R in force for
 M.[35]
The relevant notion of content is that of propositional content,
something that can be judged, and the norms in question govern the
‘use’ of concepts. We intend the talk of propositions and
concepts in this context to be uncontentious, and not depend on any
specific construals of these notions. A proposition, simply, is
anything that has truth conditions essentially; it is whatever the
propositional attitudes are attitudes towards. And talking of
“concepts” should not be understood as implying a
commitment to either structured contents or to a language-like,
syntactically structured medium of representation. In this sense, a
concept is ‘used’ whenever a subject has an intentional
mental
 state.[36]
As in the case of meaning, we distinguish between CE normativity,
which is neutral on the question how content is determined, and CD
normativity which takes the norms to be metaphysically primary. We
shall begin by discussing CE normativity.
According to CE normativity statements of the form ‘mental
state M has content p’ have normative
consequences. The norms are typically construed as norms of action,
most commonly as prescriptions, but could also be construed
axiologically. That is, the claim need not be that the relevant norms
guide our use of concepts, but could just be that it is a property
essential to their having content that certain mental states (true
beliefs, for instance) are valuable.
As in the case of meaning, we may distinguish between more or less
direct arguments. One way to provide a direct argument for CE
normativity would be to proceed from the notion of correctness
conditions, in analogy with the simple argument (Boghossian 2003: 85).
Just as meaningful expressions have correctness conditions essentially,
along the lines of (CM), so do concepts: The concept green,
for instance, applies to an object x if and only if x
is green. However, unlike in the case of (CM), the application relation
here is just that between a concept and the objects that ‘fall
under’ it. For normativity to enter some connection has to be
made with the subject who employs the concepts, with her mental
states.
The standard normativist strategy consists in appealing to the use
of concepts in propositional attitudes, and to derive the normativity
of content from that of the propositional attitudes. Thus, the relevant
notion of application is suggested to be that of using the concept in a
propositional attitude, in particular that of belief. Arguments for CE
normativity, therefore, typically appeal to the connection between
content and the propositional attitudes. We shall consider two such
common arguments: one that goes via the nature of belief, and one that
goes via ideas about concept grasp.
The argument from belief proceeds in two steps: It is argued, first,
that belief is essentially normative, and second, that there is an
essential connection between belief and content such that if belief is
essentially normative it follows that content is, too. Our main concern
here is not with the normativity of belief, but some comments
concerning the first step are required.
According to the most common proposal, the normativity of belief
derives from the connection between belief and truth. It is in the
nature of belief, it is held, that it aims for truth. The proposal is
not merely that beliefs, essentially, have contents that are true or
false, but that beliefs, essentially, are correct or incorrect as a
result of the content being true or false. Belief is simply that state
which derives its correctness conditions from the content (Velleman
2000, Engel 2001, 2013, Nordhoof 2002, Wedgwood 2002, 2007, 2013,
Boghossian 2003, Gibbard 2003, 2005, 2012, Shah 2003, Speaks
2009).
In response, it has been argued that what is essential to belief is
merely that beliefs have contents that are true or false, not that one
ought to believe a content if and only if it is true. The appearance of
normativity, it is suggested, derives from other sources. For instance,
as epistemic agents, we seek truth. And having true beliefs is
essential to fulfilling our goals. This just shows that true beliefs
have an instrumental value, and fails to support the normativity of
belief thesis. Moreover, it is argued, even if it is claimed that truth
has a non-instrumental value, the value in question is derived from
moral or other values, not from the nature of belief as such (Papineau
1999, 2013, Dretske 2000, Davidson 2001, Horwich 2013).
Questions have also been raised concerning how the norm of belief is
to be understood. With respect to meaning the question arose whether
(ME1) violates the principle that ought implies
can. In the case of belief, a similar worry arises if the norm
of belief is formulated in a parallel fashion, by proceeding from the
correctness conditions of beliefs to normative consequences:
(CB)   The belief that p is correct if and only if p.
(NB1)   S ought to believe that p if and
only if p.
The trouble is that (NB1) implies that S ought
to believe everything that is true, an impossible task. This
difficulty, it has been argued, is not solved by appealing to a
wide-scope reading of ‘ought’ since there are values of
p that are such that S could neither bring it about
that p is false, nor bring it about that she believes
p (Bykvist & Hattiangadi 2007:
 284).[37]
The most common reaction,
instead, is to weaken the norm (Boghossian 2003: 37):
(NB2)   S ought to believe that p only
if p.
 
This norm does not imply that S ought to believe everything
that is true, and hence does not put impossible demands on S.
However, as noted in the discussion of (ME1) above, the
question arises whether (NB2) suffices to provide any real
constraints on S‘s belief formation. If p is
true it does not follow that S ought to believe p,
and if p is false it merely follows that it is not the case
that S ought to believe p – not that
S ought not to believe p (Bykvist & Hattiangadi
2007: 280).[38]
In response, normativists have made the same move as in the case of
meaning, and suggested that the ‘ought’ in (NB1) is
replaced with a ‘may’ (Whiting 2010: 216–217, 2013b:
125). It has been objected that this is too weak since it undermines
the fundamental role of the norm of truth when it comes to explaining
other evidential and inferential norms (Bykvist & Hattiangadi
2013: 113–114).
It has also been suggested that the normativity of belief should be
construed in terms of ‘role oughts’, and that these are not
subject to the principle that ought implies can
(Chrisman 2008, Feldman 2001). Each role comes with criteria of
excellence and these, in turn, imply obligations: Teachers ought to be
clear, parents ought to be caregiving, etc. Norms for actions,
therefore, derive from norms of
 being.[39]
Similarly, as human beings we play the role
of believers, of creatures with intentional states, and being engaged
in this role we ought to do it well: We ought to believe that which is
true (for instance). Hence, on this view, (NB1) is a norm of
belief even if it places impossible demands on ordinary
 subjects.[40] 
A related idea is that the relevant norms should be understood in
terms of the ‘telos’ of belief: Just as a map is a map
(giving a correct or incorrect picture of the world) only insofar as
it is designed to represent the world, and in this sense
ought to represent the world correctly, so a belief can be
said to be correct or incorrect only insofar as representing the world
belongs to its telos, to what it ought to do. Since this type of
‘ought’ applies to the representing objects (such as maps
or beliefs) and not to agents, it is argued, they are not
action-guiding and the principle that ought implies
can does not apply (Jarvis 
2012).[41]
 Another set of questions concerns the fact
that (NB1) is an objective
 norm.[42]
Unlike a subjective norm, such
as ‘S ought to believe that p only if
S has evidence for p’, (NB1) does
not engage with S‘s reasons, her beliefs and desires,
and this raises the question how (NB1) can serve to guide
our belief formation. In response, it has been suggested that many
norms are objective norms (‘Buy low and sell high!’) and
that the only consequence of (NB1) being an objective norm
is that it may not be transparent to S how to obey
(NB1) (Boghossian 2003: 38). However, it has been objected
that the main trouble with (NB1) is not a failure of
transparency. It is clear that objective norms can guide, but they do
so via our beliefs, and it has been argued that this causes trouble in
the case of (NB1). The trouble is two-fold. In order to be
guided by (NB1), S would have to have a belief about
whether p is true. This means, first, that in order to be
guided by (NB1) the subject would already have had to from
a belief as to whether p and hence the guidance comes too
late; and, second, that whatever conclusion the subject comes to as to
whether p, the norm tells her to hold that very belief (if
she forms the belief that p the norm gives her a reason to
believe p and if she forms the belief that not-p the
norm gives her a reason to believe not-p) (Glüer &
Wikforss 2009:
 44).[43]
It is therefore disputed whether (NB1) can be said to be
a norm of belief, regulating our belief
 formation.[44] 
Assuming that belief is intrinsically normative, however, the
decisive question is whether this has any implications for
content. Why should the fact that belief is normative imply that
content is? Indeed, it has been suggested that the opposite is true
since if belief is normative the appearance of normativity of content
can simply be explained by appealing to the normativity of belief
(Speaks 2009: 409). According to Boghossian, the normativity of
content derives from the fact that there is a constitutive connection
between the notion of content and the notion of belief (Boghossian
2003). This is so, he argues, since we could not grasp the notion of
content without first grasping the role contents play in
belief. Moreover, Boghossian argues, although contents play a role in
other attitudes as well, there are reasons to think that the concept
of belief is conceptually primary: For instance, S could not
have the concept of desire without first having the concept of belief
(ibid: 42–43). If so, the normativity of belief supports CE
normativity.
The claim that the concept of belief is primary to that of desire
can be questioned. Thus, there is empirical evidence from developmental
psychology that children acquire the concept of desire prior to
acquiring that of belief (Wellman 1993). It has also been argued that
belief and desire are conceptually interdependent (Miller 2008). More
importantly, even if it can be shown that the concept of belief is
primary to that of desire, and of the other propositional attitudes,
the question arises whether indeed one could not grasp the concept of
content without grasping that of belief. Prima facie, grasping the
concept of a propositional attitude such as belief is rather distinct
from grasping the concept of content, since it involves the idea of
taking up an attitude towards content.
 [45]
Moreover, Boghossian is committed to the
strong claim that opponents of content normativity fail to grasp the
concept of content (or, alternatively, that they operate with a
different concept).
 An alternative strategy would be to avoid
the appeal to conceptual entailments and argue that there is a
metaphysical connection between mental content and belief such that if
belief is essentially normative, content is. Such an argument may be
more or less direct, going via more or less contentious assumptions
about mental content. For instance, versions of conceptual role
semantics imply that there is an essential link between mental content
and belief as do versions of informational theories of content (Dretske
1981, Fodor 1990), although the latter are typically coupled with a
non-normativist account of belief. Another line of reasoning appeals to
the idea that there is a constitutive connection between grasping a
concept, understanding a content, and using it in the propositional
attitudes.
To possess a concept, it is sometimes suggested, is to have the
capacity to use the concept in various propositional attitudes. Since
it is essential to the propositional attitudes that they stand in
certain rational interconnections with one another, it is argued, this
essential normativity transfers to concepts and contents. Possessing a
concept, grasping it, incurs a commitment to use the concept ‘in
keeping with its content’, in the various propositional
attitudes. If the speaker fails to do so, she has misused the
concept in question (Millar 2004, McDowell & Pettit 1986, Gibbard
2012: chapter 6).
This argument runs parallel to the argument provided by Millar in
the case of meaning. Even if that argument is accepted, however, the
question arises whether it can be applied to concepts and content,
since the notion of failing to use a concept in ‘keeping with its
content’ appears more problematic than the notion of failing to
use a word in accordance with its meaning (McGinn 1984: 146–147, Millar
2004: 180–181). It is relatively unproblematic to speak of
understanding the meaning of an expression (or misunderstanding it),
but in the case of concepts there is nothing corresponding to the
expression. To ‘understand’ a concept is simply to possess
it, to use it in thoughts. Hence there seems to be little or no room for the idea
that S misunderstands a concept either. If S reasons
as if she possesses the concept ancient rather than the
concept arcane, it would seem to follow not that there is any
misuse of concepts but that she has another concept.
One strategy is to distinguish between possession conditions and
attribution conditions (Peacocke 1992: 27–33). This separates the
conditions that determine S‘s concepts from conditions
for the attribution of the concept to S. As a consequence,
there is a potential gap between how S uses the concept, her
grasp of it, and how it should be used if she were to use it in keeping
with its content. To illustrate the distinction, it is common to appeal
to Tyler Burge’s discussion of how social factors, under certain
conditions, serve to determine content (Burge 1979, Peacocke 1992: 29,
Millar 2004: 181–188). Burge gives an account of concept attribution
that goes via word meaning. To be attributed the concept
arcane, on this view, it suffices that S uses the
expression ‘arcane’ by and large correctly, ‘in
keeping with its content’ – if she is committed to her
community practice of using the corresponding expression
‘arcane’, and this practice determines that
‘arcane’ expresses arcane. What determines her
concept, thus, is not merely facts about her use and dispositions to
stand corrected, but facts about the use of the term in the wider
practice. It follows that speakers typically have an incomplete grasp
of the concepts they think with and, as a result, tend to misuse these
concepts.
Leaving aside the controversial question of whether we can separate
possession conditions of concepts from attribution conditions, it might
be asked whether Burge’s social externalism can be employed to
support CE normativity. Burge’s argument depends on the idea that
the individual is committed to the community practice (Burge 1979:
94–95, 101–102, Millar 2004: 182). But if the normativity in question
is made conditional on the individual’s commitment to the
community, it does not follow that content is essentially normative.
After all, an individual who is not thus committed would still have
concepts. (Equally, in the case of the experts, the suggested normative
dimension would seem to drop out.) What would seem to be required,
rather, is an argument to the effect that the concept expressed is
necessarily determined by the community practice, independently of
S‘s commitments.
Another argument for content normativity based on incompleteness of
understanding derives from Burge (1986). Burge suggests that meaning or
content characterizations, such as Sofas are artifacts to be sat
upon, have a normative function in our practices: They set
standards that guide our thinking. However, Burge argues, such
characterizations can be rationally doubted, even by the experts; they
are objectively right or wrong, independently of our practices (ibid:
704–707). It follows that content is ultimately not determined socially
but by the nature of the objects that we causally interact with, and
that there are “intellectual norms that govern thinking about
objective matters” (ibid:
 697).[46]
This argument from externalism therefore does
not depend on the assumption that individuals are committed to the
community practice. Instead, it depends on a version of physical
content externalism applied to all kind terms (not just the natural
kind terms), combined with the assumption that metaphysical necessities
should be construed as norms (see Wikforss 2003).
Arguments from concept grasp, again, typically appeal to the idea
that there are rationality constraints on concept attributions. As
noted in the discussion of ME normativity, the question has been raised
whether the idea that there are such constraints coheres with
normativism. It has been suggested that this question is particularly
pressing in the case of content. When it comes to meaning, there is the
option of attributing meaning errors and explaining the error by
appealing to the subject’s mistaken conception of the
meaning of an expression, thereby rationalizing her reasoning and
actions. In the case of concepts, this option is not available, since
the error is said to occur at the level of content. It would either
have to be argued that the error can be rationalized some other way,
or the claim that there are rationality constraints on content
attributions would have to be rejected (see Brown 2004, Wikforss
forthcoming-b).
Like MD normativism, CD normativism is a claim about the foundations
of intentional content: Intentional content is metaphysically
determined, or constituted, by rules or norms. Since the relevant norms
or rules govern intentional mental states, the CD normativist needs to
find a kind of state plausibly subject to rules or norms that by the
same token determine its content. Because of its intimate connection
with truth, knowledge, and inference, belief is the natural candidate.
Both truth and inferential connections in turn are intimately connected
with content.
Thus, there are three main candidates for CD norms or rules, two
objective and one subjective:
(NB1)   S ought to believe that p
iff p.
(NB3)   S ought to believe that p
iff S knows that
 p.[47]
(NB4)   S ought to believe that p iff it is
rational for
S to believe that p.
Note, that (NB1), (NB3), and (NB4)
each operate with a different underlying concept of correctness; if
belief is defined by its “aim”, it can therefore be defined
by only one them. Moreover, these notions of correctness can differ
even extensionally, i.e., give different verdicts regarding the
correctness of individual beliefs. Nevertheless, if conceived of as
prima facie norms, there is nothing incoherent in supposing them all to
be in force for belief simultaneously.
The idea is that beliefs have contents only if (one or more of)
these rules are in force and, moreover, that their being in force is
constitutive of the contents they have. And again, a rule
R‘s being in force can roughly be interpreted in three
ways: As requiring the subject to follow R, to
accept R in a sense not requiring (general)
following, or as independent of the subject’s attitudes and
intentional states towards R (see above, 1.2; 2.2.2).
As in the case of meaning, the most common idea on the market is
that the rules constitutive of content are rules that subjects having
contentful mental states need to follow. Thinkers inspired by
traditions such as pragmatism and/or Wittgensteinian anti-platonism
might also require these rules to be, in some sense, of our own making
(Baker & Hacker 1985, Brandom 1994). Let us, again, call the
version of CD normativism that requires rule following “guidance
normativism”. Since the idea of being guided by objective norms
is problematic for norms like (NB1) and (NB3)
(see above, 3.1), guidance normativists often conceive of the relation
between their favorite objective norm and (NB4) in
particular ways: If the objective norm is given priority, one
suggestion is that it is followed by means of following the
subjective rules (Boghossian 2003). If the subjective rules are seen as
basic, objective ones can be explained by means of them in some way or
other. For a normative inferentialist like Brandom, for instance, this
is the question of the relation between normative inferential role and
truth conditional content, and he tries to show that the latter can be
analysed in terms of the former. Gibbard (2005) suggests that, in
general, objective oughts can be reduced to subjective
 ones.[48]
Other options
for the guidance normativist are to conceive of (NB4) as the
basic norm for belief, or to construe the nature of belief as given by
both (NB4) and (NB1) (Wedgwood 2007, 162) or
(NB3).
Candidates typically given for CD rules are rules supposed to govern
(rational) reasoning. These can be rules of theoretical, as well as of
practical reasoning: Prime examples are inference rules such as modus
ponens or the law of non-contradiction, and the rule that, in the
absence of background belief to the effect that the senses are not to
be trusted in the given situation, a belief that p is to be
formed on the basis of a perceptual experience as of p. The
principles of rational decision making and those of epistemic
rationality (as, for instance, formalized in decision theory or
Bayesian epistemology) are further
 examples.[49]
Purely formal rules would
arguably not suffice for general content determination; normative
inferentialists such as Brandom (1994; 2000) or Peregrin (2008)
therefore include norms governing material implication among the
content determining rules. Brandom typically describes the relevant
norms as norms determining what a thinker is “committed”
and “entitled” to in holding a particular attitude towards
a particular content.
The plausibility of guidance normativism, be it with respect to
meaning or content, depends on whether it can account for the
difference between rule following and mere accordance with the relevant
rules. It has been argued by several authors that CD normativism, on
pain of vicious infinite regress, cannot put any intentional
condition on rule guidance (Boghossian 1989a; 2008; Glüer &
Wikforss 2009, see also above, 2.2): If another intentional state
M2 is required to make the formation an intentional
state M1 into a rule-guided performance and,
thereby, give it its content, yet another intentional state
M3 will be required to give M2
its content. And so on, ad infinitum.
A pragmatic conception of rule guidance might therefore seem to be
required. The single most elaborate such conception is Brandom’s
normative version of inferentialism (Brandom 1994). To avoid regresses,
Brandom takes norms implicitly “instituted” by our
practices to be basic and proposes a pragmatic phenomenalism
about such norms. Phenomenalism is the claim that objective
“deontic statuses” are to be explained in terms of our
normative attitudes. Something’s being correct, that is,
is to be explained in terms of the attitude of taking it to be
correct. Therefore, the norms in question are “in some sense
creatures of ours” (1994, 626). Nevertheless, Brandom explicitly
aims at securing, and explaining, the “objectivity of
concepts” (1994, xvii). Commentators such as Rosen (1997) and
Glüer and Wikforss (2009) therefore interpret Brandom as offering
a realist account of content, not some form of expressivism (as other
commentators, such as Gibbard (1996), attribute to Brandom). Brandom
aims at reducing the intentional to the normative, while holding the
normative itself to be irreducible. In this sense, it is “norms
all the way down” (1994, 44; 625). Ultimately, being
correct is to be explained in terms of being correctly taken
to be correct.
General questions that have been raised about this project include
the question of whether it ultimately can secure the possibility of
objective concepts or contents, contents the truth of which is
independent of our attitudes. It has been argued that since normative
statuses are explained by means of further normative statuses,
pragmatic phenomenalism cannot tell us anything informative about how
we make or “institute” the basic norms implicit in our
practices (cf. Rosen 2001, Hattiangadi 2003). In a similar vein, it has
been questioned that pragmatic phenomenalism manages to account for the
difference between mere accordance with these rules and
“instituting” them; if for any normative status to be
instituted by an implicit norm a further normative status already needs
to be so instituted, an infinite regress of (implicit) norms might
ensue despite the pragmatist nature of the proposal (cf. Hattiangadi
2007, 197; Glüer & Wikforss 2009, 60ff). This regress might
not be vicious if the project is interpreted as an expressivist one,
however.
Even if guidance normativism would ultimately not be able to sustain
a substantive difference between following a content determining rule
and mere accordance with it, one might still hold on to the claim that
there are contentful intentional states only if the rules of
rationality are in force for them. Such force might require acceptance,
but not (general) guidance, or it might be completely independent of
the attitudes of thinkers. Insofar as acceptance itself is intentional,
however, CD normativism might prove viable only if the force of the
relevant rules or norms is construed as completely independent of the
attitudes of the thinkers. Some relevant ideas as to how such rule
following might be understood were already discussed above, at the end
of section 2.2.
The idea that the normative in some sense is not part of nature goes
back at least to Kant (see, for instance, Critique of Pure
Reason (1781), A 547). Already Hume (in the Treatise
(1739–1740)) argued against the metaethical naturalist that
ought cannot be derived from is – to try to do
so would be to commit a so-called “naturalistic fallacy”.
With the “open question argument”, Moore (in Principia
Ethica (1903)) added a weapon to the anti-naturalist’s
arsenal also against giving naturalistic accounts of moral evaluations:
According to the open question argument, there is no naturalistic (set
of) concept(s) analytically equivalent to the moral concept of
goodness, since no matter what naturalistic definition is given, the
question whether all and only things satisfying it are good still makes
sense. Much of recent normativism about meaning/content continues in
this anti-naturalist tradition; many normativists about meaning/content
hold that the essential normativity of meaning/content makes at least (fully)
reductive naturalism untenable.
This is certainly how many have construed Kripke’s Wittgenstein; it is
part of his skeptical campaign against semantic facts in general that
such facts cannot be reduced to whatever precisely is allowed in a
naturalistic supervenience base for meaning/content. As we have seen
above (section 2.2), matters are rather more complicated here,
though. On the one hand, it is a matter of dispute among
teleosemanticists, for instance, whether the biological concept of a
function is a normative concept, or not. On the other, it is clearly
possible to endorse the claim that meaning/content supervenes upon
non-semantic, non-normative facts without thereby being committed to
reductive naturalism. In between, there is quite some room, for
instance for partially reductive accounts construing meaning/content
as determined by a dispositional and a non-semantic, but normative
component.
 Nevertheless, it seems clear that if there is an argument of the
general, a priori kind Kripke’s skeptic would need, it is
supposed to come from normativism (cf. Boghossian 1989a, 509; Wikforss
2001, 203; Hattiangadi 2007, 64).  Such an argument could take a
weaker, intensionalist, and a stronger, extensionalist, form
(cf. Boghossian 1989a, 532ff): The stronger argument concludes that no
reductive naturalist account of meaning/content will be extensionally
correct: For any meaning/concept, such an account will either include
objects in its extension that, intuitively, do not belong there, or
exclude objects from its extension that, intuitively, do belong there,
or both. As we saw above (section 2.2.1), this “problem of
error” is a problem for many naturalistic accounts of
meaning/content, but as such it does not yet have anything to do with
normativity. The normativist could, however, argue that it is
precisely because of their essential normativity that no naturalistic
account of meaning/content can be extensionally correct. The weaker
argument grants extensional correctness, but argues that no
naturalistic reduction will get the intension of the notion of
meaning/content right; it will inevitably miss the normative character
of what is semantically correct, its deontic or axiologic
characteristics.
Either way, these are at most argument templates; it seems fair to say
that at this point in time, the case from normativism against
reductive naturalism about meaning/content has not yet been fully
made.  It has been suggested that the semantic normativist look to
metaethics at this point; arguments in the tradition of Hume and Moore
might well be adaptable to their case (cf. Miller 1998, 188ff;
Hattiangadi 2007, 38ff; Gibbard 2012; Zalabardo 2012). As Hattiangadi
argues, the semantic normativist’s case might then prove hostage to
whatever controversial assumptions these arguments rely on
(motivational internalism, for instance, might be such an issue), thus
removing normativism further from being the pre-theoretical constraint
on acceptable accounts of meaning/content that Kripke’s skeptic meant
it to be.
Normativism about meaning/content might thus exclude (fully) reductive
naturalism about meaning/content, but it should be noted that adopting
normativism would not seem to be the only option for the
anti-reductivist (cf. Mulligan 1999, 136f; Glüer & Wikforss
2009, 63ff). What the normativist construes as norms or rules of
meaning/content, principles such as (CM) or inferential rules such as
modus ponens, might also be construed in a very different way: As, or
in analogy with what Frege called “laws of truth” (Frege
1918: 30). In the same vein, Husserl called the ‘laws of
logic’ “ideal” (Husserl 1913: 56)). These
‘laws’ are neither prescriptions for thinking, nor
nomological generalities of our psychology. Their
‘validity’ or necessity is sui generis; if
anything, it is what we might today call
 metaphysical.[50]