In the literature, rather than mass and count expressions,
there has been a tendency to focus on what are called mass and
count nouns. Mass nouns
include nitrogen, porridge, trash, 
china, traffic, data, shade,
music and furniture. Count nouns
include horse, futon, army, codicil,
proposition, and galaxy. It should be noted from the
outset that the relation between the mass/count distinction and the
stuff/thing distinction is not straightforward, as there are so many
different kinds of entities (e.g., events, concreta, sets, processes,
absences, conventional entities, etc.) referred to by both mass and
count expressions. 
Mass expression is a broader class, which, in addition to
mass nouns, includes phrases such as ‘the water in the
tub’, ‘the gold in France,’ and ‘the grape
juice Roderick drank.’ Similarly, ‘Robert’s car’,
‘John’s student,’ ‘a NATO signatory’ are count
expressions.
There is an issue, orthogonal to our discussion, about whether
expression -types or expression-instances are what
are primarily mass or count. Many hold that mass expressions are
ambiguous between mass or count senses depending upon context
(e.g., ‘Mary had a little lamb’ could mean she owned one,
or ate some (Quine 1960, p. 91)). This question can be
side-stepped by stipulating, in what follows, that the phrases
‘mass nouns,’ ‘mass terms,’ and ‘mass
expressions’ will mean “noun/term/expression occurrences
employed with a mass sense” (see Pelletier 1975 and Koslicki
1999, section II, for details on this issue).
Mass and count nouns act differently in relation to quantifiers and
non-logical determiners. Count nouns, but not mass nouns (when not
used in the kind sense), can be prefaced by ‘each’,
‘every’, ‘few’, ‘fewer’,
‘many’, and ‘a’. Mass nouns, but not count
nouns, can be prefaced by ‘much’, ‘little’,
‘a lot of’, ‘less’, ‘more’,
‘a quantity of’, and so on. Both mass and count nouns take
‘most’, ‘all’, ‘some’,
‘no’, ‘none of the’, ‘any’,
‘hardly any’, and ‘a little’. 
Only count nouns can be prefaced unqualifiedly by numerals or the
indefinite article, and be pluralized without a category shift. When
we switch from speaking of ‘a horse’ to ‘five
horses’ we have not switched from speaking of things to speaking
of kinds of things. However, when we switch from speaking of
‘wine’ to ‘a wine’ or ‘seven
wines’, we usually switch from speaking about wine, or portions
of it, to speaking about kinds of wine (Pelletier
1974). (Compare ‘The wine is over there’ to ‘Gallo
sells seven wines.’) While we do say things like “We’ll
have six beers,” or “I need five milks for the
children,” these are understood, depending on context, as
shorthand for ‘six bottles/kegs of beer,’ or ‘six
cartons/pints of milk.’ If you pour a glass of wine on the floor
you cannot, if grammar is your guide, count the number of
‘wines’ (in the non-kind sense) on the floor. There are no
things (or at least no commonsense things) which are wines, such that
there are a number of them on the floor. 
While mass nouns do not admit the indefinite article, they admit a use
of ‘some’ which acts like an indefinite article
(Cartwright 1965). We can say, for example, “Adam drank some
water which is worse than Onondaga Lake water,” or,
“Heraclitus bathed in some water yesterday and bathed in it
again today.” 
Both count and mass nouns admit the definite article. There are
sentence forms with a mass noun prefaced by the definite article, such
as “Socrates drank the hemlock in that cup,” “Bob
just wrote your name in the snow over there.” These sentences, if
true, will be cases of definite reference of mass expressions, in that
they pick out an actual, unique, and concrete referent. Both mass and
count nouns admit definite reference. But, it is controversial whether
definite reference to stuff is singular
reference. 
For our purposes, it is useful to lay down a limited taxonomy of mass
nouns, not based on their linguistic, logical, or semantic features,
but based upon prima facie salient metaphysical
criteria. Compare the following lists: 
(a) are definitely mass by the grammatical criteria discussed above,
and they refer to concrete entities. But, it is hard to see what
import they would have for supporting a metaphysics of stuff. These
words are devices for speaking about distinct, discrete objects in a
collective manner. In certain contexts, we seek to draw attention to a
bunch of distinct individuals, not as such, but, for pragmatic
reasons, as an undifferentiated mass or plurality of a certain
kind. Few have been led by thinking about the use of the
words furniture or silverware to conclude that there
is a category of stuff distinct from things. But, as we will discuss,
our metaphysical insouciance with regards to category (a) could very
well undermine the contention that concrete mass nouns do in fact have
metaphysical import, since there is little or no grammatical
difference between terms in category (a) or (b). 
Concrete mass nouns refer to the kinds of entities discussed most often
in the linguistically-informed metaphysics literature. They have also
been called ‘physical stuff-kind terms’ (Zimmerman 1995). 
Abstract mass nouns, if they do refer, do not, prima facie,
refer to physical stuffs or hunks of stuff. (And the possibility of
propositional or abstract stuff is dubious). 
Addressing issues surrounding abstract, psychological, and quantitative
mass nouns and their referents is beyond the scope of this article. Due
to the almost exclusive emphasis on concrete and quasi-concrete mass
nouns in the metaphysics literature, this article will follow suit.
While an analysis of concrete and quasi-concrete mass expressions could
possibly be carried over to
generate a general metaphysical theory of masses, the prospects for
this are dim. This is because, even given the grammatical similarities
between all mass expressions, there are far too many differences
between concrete stuff and the entities in categories (c)–(e).
Moreover, we should also be skeptical of the possibility of a
metaphysical analysis of concrete and quasi-concrete mass expressions
to straightforwardly deliver a linguistic or metaphysical
interpretation of mass expressions and their referents in general. 
In what follows, both concrete and quasi-concrete mass expressions will
be referred to as ‘concrete mass expressions,’ except when the
distinction is needed. Also, due to our focus, ‘mass expressions’
henceforth refers only to concrete mass expressions, except where
indicated.
There are conflicting intuitions
about the relation between objects and their constituting matter (see
the entry on
  “material constitution” 
for more details on this issue). Many make a strong case for an
ontological distinction between stuff (or matter) and things. Here are
some typical reasons to believe in the distinction:
But, if stuff and things are
distinct, they must be intimately related. It is tempting to
philosophers to try to reduce or eliminate one of the categories and
hold that only one category is fundamental
(or ‘ontologically basic,’ i.e., it must be mentioned in any true,
comprehensive, and non-redundant description of the world).
Reflection can lead us to believe that a familiar object, such as a
tree, is nothing more than some stuff in a certain arrangement. This
stuff could have been in a different arrangement, possibly constituting
two smaller trees, or perhaps nothing at all. This raises the
possibility that stuff is more fundamental than things.
But, when we look closely at stuff, or listen to scientists, we see
that it is likely particulate, and, if particles are objects, then it
appears that stuff is actually not fundamental after all—objects
are. Prima facie these positions
cannot both be true, and our conflicting intuitions call for an
explanation as to the relation between stuff and things.
The rest of the entry has the following structure. Our target
question, “what do nominal concrete mass expressions refer
to?”, can also be understood colloquially as, “what are we
talking about when we talk about stuff?” We will first look at
the three main answers given in
 section 2. 
The first answer, by far the most popular (and consequently
receiving the most attention), is that stuff-talk is talk about masses
of particles or molecules. The second is that stuff-talk is talk about
sets, and, lastly, that it is talk about many things (or
‘pluralities’). The views
in section 2, in one way or another,
hold that stuff is very thing-like or reducible to things.
In section 3. we will examine more radical
views which say that the moral to draw from reflection upon concrete
mass expressions, among other things, is that the world consists of
stuff, not things; or stuff in addition to things, where the
former is not thing-like.
A natural thought to have about sentences with referring nominal
concrete mass expressions (e.g., “Alvin drank the water
that Roderick poured” or “The coffee in that cup
is too hot”) is that the expressions refer to portions of
matter, which are themselves made up of smaller bits of
matter. It seems obvious that thinking this is what taking
such sentences at face value amounts to. Not obvious, though, is what
metaphysical commitments this requires, and what metaphysical problems
might come along with this thought. 
A general consensus has been reached that it is helpful to think
through these issues about matter within the framework of mereology, or
the logic of parts and wholes (although there is much disagreement
about what the correct mereology is).
Mereologies are formal systems, but we will be ignoring
technicalities in this entry as far as possible (for details, see the
entry on mereology).  Still, some
terminology is necessary and useful. Let us take the notion
of part as primitive. A ‘simple’ is a
non-composite entity, i.e., something with no parts. (Although, in an
attenuated sense even a simple object has at least one
part—itself. The everyday notion of ‘part’ implies
that any part is smaller than the whole thing it is part
of. Philosophers and logicians use the term of art ‘proper
part’ to mean what the folk mean by ‘part’. We will
follow ordinary usage, using ‘part’ to mean ‘proper
part’).
A composite thing has more than one part. The
verb fuse refers to an asymmetric relation between a whole
and its parts. If two things fuse they ‘join together’ to
make up a whole. For example, if the water in my glass and the water
in your glass fuse, then there exists a thing, a fusion,
which is made up of the two portions (sometimes it is said that the
two portions ‘have a fusion’). No literal contact or
fusion (e.g., welding two rods together) is implied by this usage. If
a fleet is a single thing, then it is arguably a fusion of the boats
making it up. The nouns whole and sum are synonymous
with fusion and composite. Overlap occurs
when distinct things share one or more parts. 
It is also necessary to make the following distinctions, which are
not standard. Any referring non-plural kind noun K (e.g.,
‘gold’, ‘lobster’) will fall into one or more
of the following categories. In these principles,
‘K’ is to be replaced by a concrete count or mass
term:
Electrons are atomic, since they have no parts which are electrons.
Also, if ships have no parts which are ships, then ‘ship’
is an atomic kind term as well (Zimmerman 1995, p. 75; Sider
2001). Portions of non-atomic gunk or infinitely divisible
matter of a kind K are K through-and-through, as
would an infinitely descending chain of ‘box-particles’,
each of which contains a box-particle (Gardner 1983,
p. 26). Fruit cake is arguably a fuzzy atomless substance,
since it can have parts (e.g., half a blueberry with some gluten
attached) that are not determinately fruit cake. Some mass terms,
e.g., ‘cutlery’ and ‘gold’ are
heterogeneous. While a fork is some cutlery, a tine is not, and,
presumably, an electron in a gold atom is not gold. Not all the
categories are mutually exclusive. 
In the various sum-theoretical analyses of mass expressions
(Cartwright 1965, 1979b; Burge 1977; Moravcsik 1973), all mass
expressions with their non-count features disappear upon analysis and
are replaced by talk of sums (the metaphysical significance of such
replacement is discussed in 3.1). 
These accounts can get quite technical, but the basic idea is
relatively easy to understand. Concrete mass expressions refer to
mereological sums. So, a sentence such as “Snow is white”
is, for example, understood to mean that there is a sum of all the
snow (flakes, bits, balls, etc.), and that this sum is part of the
fusion of all the white things (Quine 1960, chapter 20).  A sentence
such as “The water is in the tub” gets cashed out to mean
that there is a fusion of water molecules which is in the tub. While
there are many permutations on this strategy, sum theorists will,
whenever possible, paraphrase away talk of stuffs and talk instead of
sums. 
There are many possible positions for those who wish to analyze mass
expressions in terms of sums. What follows is a short survey of some of
the most salient decision points one must confront in constructing a
detailed view of this kind, and what problems emerge from deciding one
way or another.
In the literature on material objects, an oft-discussed question
is: when do two or more things compose a further thing (van Inwagen
1990)?  Some common answers are—never (Compositional
Nihilism—Unger 1979, Dorr and Rosen 2002);
always (Mereological Universalism—Lewis 1986,
pp. 212–213; Rea 1998); only when they form a
life (Organicism—van Inwagen 1990; Merricks 2001); whenever
the candidate fusion has non-redundant causal powers
(Merricks 2001); whenever (and only whenever) we intuitively
think they do (Intuitivism—Commonsense); or that composition is
a brute fact (Brutalism—Markosian 1998b). 
Perhaps the most commonly held view is Mereological Universalism, or
‘Unrestricted Mereology’ (‘UM’ for short). Two
or more things always have a fusion. For example, the Empire State
Building and the Dalai Lama compose an object.
The debates about composition largely focus on the fusion of
objects—but what of matter? A strong case can be made for what we
could call the Unrestricted Fusion of Matter principle: 
There are several ways to argue for this. Here’s one:
Summativity is a plausible principle. We believe that we refer when
we say things like ‘the water in your glass’. Now, if you keep half of
the water in your glass, and pour half in Larry’s, and Larry drives
off with his glass, does the water still exist? Supposing, for
simplicity, that none of the water is destroyed, the answer seems to
be clearly ‘yes’. 
Now, if this is so, and some water can exist while being spread
out, why suppose that that very same water came into existence only
when poured into your cup (from, say, two bottles)? It seems like it
could come into existence when joined only if it went out of existence
when scattered. But it didn’t go out of existence when
scattered—so it couldn’t have come into existence when
joined. So, there always was this water fusion (at least as long as
all the sub-portions of water existed). We can repeat the same
argument for the copper in those statues. There will also be the sum
of the gold in Sweden and the lead in Tanzania, if we can replace
the K in Summativity with ‘metal’. 
And it also seems true that matter is a genuine kind term. If
it wasn’t, it is hard to see how scientists could speak, as they do,
about universal properties of matter, or what kinds of matter there
are, or how philosophers could contrast matter with allegedly
non-physical minds, abstract objects, and so forth.  (There is also
the ‘argument from vagueness’ from Ted Sider, which was
inspired by the Lewisian idea that any restriction on composition
would entail indeterminacy in what exists, which is impossible. In
addition, any restriction on composition would be unacceptably
arbitrary and anthropocentric) (Lewis 1986, pp. 212–213;
Sider 2001, chapter 4). 
So, it seems that any two portions of matter whatsoever have a
fusion. Accepting this result leads to acceptance of ‘mere
sums,’ i.e.,
It has proven extremely tempting to identify matter with mere sums
in the mereologist’s sense, for the reasons just outlined.
Of course, if sums are object-like, and one has reason to believe
that the only objects are structured ones, then one would have reason
to reject Summativity and UFM which lead to the posit of unstructured
mere sums. Arguments against these principles can be found in
sections 2.4 and
 3.2
(see also Laycock 1972, pp. 4–5; 2006, Appendix III). 
Another crucial decision point in developing a sum theory of the
referents of mass expressions is deciding whether the elements in the
sum (e.g., the H2O molecules in some water, the gold atoms
in some gold) are essential to the sum. The case of the most general
kind, masses of matter, is a particularly important instance
of this question.
It seems intuitively obvious that when one takes a sip of water, or
adds a bit of water to a glass of water, that one does not have in the
glass precisely the same water both before and after. Even if the
same amount of water from a different batch replaces the
water which was taken away, we still would not have the same water
after the replacement. And, if we perform electrolysis on a batch of
water but preserve any matter from being lost we can rightly say we
have all the same matter as we did before, just not the same water
(since there is no water). We can construct similar examples for any
type of matter. What can explain and unify these obvious intuitions is
that there is a most general category of entity—masses of
matter, where all the fundamental parts of any
mass are essential to it. Such masses of matter cannot change parts
whatsoever.
The existence of entities like this could easily explain
why there is not precisely the same water through these changes. An
unqualified view of this kind would be that nothing whatsoever can change
parts—this is called ‘Mereological Essentialism.’ More restricted
views hold that at the very least masses of matter cannot change parts.
Mereological essentialism has been an extremely popular approach throughout history.
(Abelard, Reid, Bishop Butler, Locke, Hume, and Leibniz were all
mereological essentialists of some kind.)
There is much to say in favor of the following principle of
Mereological Essentialism for Masses of Matter in general (for early discussion of
Mereological Essentialism, see Chisholm 1973, 1975; Plantinga 1975):
We can argue for a principle like this by first stating that masses
of
matter at a time are individuated by having the same parts, and then
arguing that no mass can change parts over time.
Our more restricted ‘Mereological Essentialism for Masses’
(MEM) seems prima facie consistent with allowing ordinary
objects to change parts. MEM seems less controversial than
‘Mereological Essentialism for Objects’ (MEO). MEM seems
like something of a truism, and perhaps part of the nature of the
category of matter. But let us turn to an argument for MEM. 
At a time, it is easy to distinguish and identify
masses. It is trivial that if x is identical to y at
a time, then x and y would have all the same parts,
whether or not x and y are sums. This follows
straightforwardly from Leibniz’s Law. Since no sum of matter can have
different parts from itself at a time, then x and y
can only be identical sums if they have all the same parts. 
One can make a further case that sums’ parts are essential to
them over time. Suppose that simples 1–9 exist at
t1. Assuming UFM, then 1–9 fuse to give us
the sum S.  At t1, also by UFM, there is
the fusion of 1–8, which we can
call S−.  S− ≠ S,
since they have different parts (by Leibniz’s Law). If a sum could
lose a part and persist, then it could be possible for the
fusion S to come to be made up of different parts. Suppose
that only part 9 is destroyed. If MEM is false, then S could
come to be composed of exactly what S− is. So, if MEM
is false, either (i) S became S−,
(ii) S− went out of existence, or (iii) S
and S− coincide as distinct sums.  But, (i) cannot be
true: two things cannot become one (although this has been challenged,
see Gallois 1998); (ii) cannot be true—how can a mere mass of
matter go out of existence without undergoing any intrinsic change?
(for challenges to this see Markosian 1998a and 2004); (iii) violates
a very clear intuition—if you have some stuff, and take some of
it away, then you do not have the very same stuff.  So (iii) is
false. But then all of (i)–(iii) are false. And so MEM is
true. (For another challenge to an argument like the foregoing, see
van Inwagen 2009.)
So, if there can be mere
sums, and UFM is true, then we ought to believe in
mereological essentialism for masses of matter, even if we do not
accept MEO.
 (Arguments against MEM can be found in the supplement
Challenges to Mereological Essentialism for Masses
and arguments against UFM in section 3.2.)
Of course, if ordinary objects can change parts, but sums can not,
then it seems that ordinary objects are not mereological sums. But
then, what are they, and how do they relate to the sums which obviously
seem to constitute them? 
If one is serious about the existence of sums of matter, it seems
there are only a few ways they could relate to ordinary objects.
  (The story is more complicated than this. See the entry
on material
constitution for more details. We are focusing on issues in
material constitution especially salient for those who take stuff
seriously and hold identity to be absolute.)
One way is to say that sums constitute ordinary objects
by coinciding with them. That is, sums are distinct objects
which share all of their parts with the commonsense objects they make
up. One could also eliminate ordinary objects. Ordinary
objects either do not exist, or exist in some kind of shadowy or
derivative sense (think of ‘the average man’). Another way
is to say that while sums are in fact things or objects, ordinary
objects are a different kind of entity. These dual-category
views hold that commonsense objects are in a different ontological
category than sums.
Those who wish to explore in more detail the metaphysics of masses,
objects, and their relations, can read the supplement on
 Sums and Ordinary Objects.
Godehard Link and Harry Bunt have argued that the best models of natural
language use of mass expressions will distinguish mass entities from
count by treating the former as if they are non-atomic, whether or not
they actually are. Godehard Link (1998) argues that the reference of
mass expressions is best understood via the development of a rich
model-theoretic semantics, which algebraically models the interrelated
network of talk of mass, plural, and particular entities. Harry Bunt
(1985) subsumes both set theory and mereology into an axiomatic system
called “Ensemble Theory” in order to model the structure
of talk about mass expressions. Link’s account in particular embraces
coincidence on a massive scale. 
Since Link and Bunt’s views are put forward in a relatively
metaphysically neutral way, we will relegate more information about
these views to an appendix. But, if the modeling they propose handles
the linguistic data better than other views then that will give further
support to a theory which embraces both coincidence and infinite
divisibility. Hence these treatments are ontologically relevant.
Examining Link’s theory in some detail can show us just how far
distinguishing mass- and count- via the atomic/non-atomic distinction
can take us, and what it can’t do for us. See the supplement
 Non-Atomicity and the Mass/Count Distinction
A slightly less popular way to answer our question is to treat mass
expressions as referring to sets. For instance, suppose there’s some
wine on the floor. Roughly, according to the masses-as-sets theorist,
this is equivalent to there being a set of wine bits (whatever they
are) on the floor. If Nancy’s ring is gold, then there is a set
of gold molecules which compose or constitute the ring. If ‘the
gold’ is identified with a set, then some problems faced by the
mereologists are avoided. While a mereologist who is committed to the
existence of the mass of gold is under pressure to deny the existence
of the ring if she wants to avoid coincidence, the masses-as-sets
theorist has a great advantage in that she can say that both the ring
and gold exist but are not coinciding material things, since the gold,
unlike the ring, is a set and not an object. 
The masses-as-sets theorist reduces mass expressions to count
expressions, by treating concrete mass expressions (e.g., ‘the gold’) as
veiled count-expressions (e.g., ‘the set of gold atoms’). 
One stark problem for the masses-as-sets view (henceforth we will
identify a proponent of this view as a ‘set theorist’), is
that it identifies paradigmatically concrete stuffs with what are
usually regarded as paradigmatically abstract objects—sets. How
could some gold be a set? Suppose we can pick out a definite portion
of gold which makes up a ring. If sets are abstract, then the set
theorist must say that the gold is abstract. This is pretty hard to
swallow. Abstract things are not in time or space, but gold is. Also,
sets are not identical to their members. But the gold in the
ring does seem identical to the members of the set of gold
atoms, not the set itself (for issues regarding ‘many-one
identity’, see Baxter 1988 and Wallace forthcoming). 
Perhaps the set theorist can instead maintain that masses are sets,
but deny that sets (or at least sets of bits of matter) are abstract.
Perhaps sets of physical objects (such as gold atoms) can be said to be
in space in virtue of their members being in space. The gold, construed
as a set of gold atoms, can be said to weigh ten ounces in virtue of
its members collectively weighing ten ounces. Massy sets have their
physical properties ‘by proxy’. So, some gold (a set) has a
spatial location in virtue of where its members are, has a weight in
virtue of its members’ weight, and so on (Zimmerman 1995,
sections 3 and 9).
But, when we try to unpack exactly in which sense the set of gold
atoms is non-abstract, we can see that it is hard to distinguish the
masses-as-sets view from the plurals approach which we will examine
below. The non-abstract set theorist will hold that a set of gold
atoms can in fact have physical properties, in virtue of the
properties of its members. So, a non-abstract set theorist would first
paraphrase “the gold weighs ten ounces” into “that
set of gold atoms weighs ten ounces.” But, in order to explain
how a set weighs ten ounces, they would have to again paraphrase and
analyze the latter as something like “the set’s members
collectively weigh ten ounces.” But if the set theorist has to
paraphrase their paraphrase, then there is considerable pressure for
the set theorist to instead switch over to the stuff-as-plurals view
(section 2.4) and
just talk directly about the members. If we are just talking about the
members, or the gold atoms, and we can say what we want about many
things without talking about the set of those many things, then why
complicate matters by introducing sets? 
There are some problems for the set-theoretic paraphrase. Suppose
one truly says “the melted sugar here is the same sugar that was
in the packet.” If ‘sugar’ in this context referred
to the various lumps and grains of sugar in a packet, then, if there
are no more lumps or grains after the melting, then the set-equality,
and hence the identity-claim, comes out false. As Pelletier points
out, when we identify some stuff, there are many different
individuating standards available (e.g., ‘packets of__’,
‘bottles of ____’, ‘granules of___’), and
different divisions will yield different sets (1974,
p. 94). This ends up either under-determining which identities
hold, or, absurdly, entailing that some stuff is distinct from
itself. 
In addition, as Zimmerman points out, the set theorist assumes that
matter is atomic (1995, section 9), yet it seems possible that there
is gunky non-atomic stuff (Zimmerman 1996b; Sider 1993). If there are,
or could be, stuffs like this, then standard set-theoretic treatments
will not work, since such theories require all sets to be
well-founded. Another problem is that for some stuffs it is (or seems
to be) indeterminate what, if anything, will count as a smallest unit
of it—e.g., minestrone soup or beer. So, the set theorist has a
problem with non-atomic or fuzzy atomless stuffs
(see 2.1 for terminology). In what immediately
follows, we will only discuss the issue of non-atomicity.
Suppose there is a cube of completely homogenous and gunky jello on
the table, with no empty space inside. Suppose that the cube can’t
survive being sliced or having its parts scattered. Suppose that the
jello composing the cube is a fundamental stuff-kind. On the
set-theoretic proposal, to say that the jello constitutes the cube is
to say that a set of jello-individuals constitutes the cube. Which
individuals? One non-option is the set {cube}, for then the jello would
be identical with the cube, and could not undergo any changes which the
cube could not. So, the set must include at least two jello
individuals. Suppose that the set’s members are the left and
right halves of the jello—call them ‘Lefty’ and
‘Righty’. So, saying that the jello constitutes the cube is
to say that {Lefty, Righty} constitute the cube. But, of course, there
is also the set of Lefty’s left half, right half, and Righty’s left and
right halves. This set, {Lefty’s left half, Lefty’s right half,
Righty’s left half, Righty’s right half}, is a
better candidate to identify with the jello stuff, since it will
survive if cut into four pieces the right way, whereas {Lefty, Righty}
will not. We want to pick out the set of jello-individuals which can
survive any kind of scattering. But, the problem, of course, is that
Lefty’s left half is composed of Lefty’s left half’s
left half, and so on. Since the postulation of gunk rules out employing
a set of point-particles, there appears to be no set of
jello-individuals that we can identify the jello stuff with which can
serve to pick out all the jello stuff and
account for the persistence conditions of the stuff (=set) in the right
way. So, there is absolutely nothing
which is the set of
individuals which make up the cube. If we wish to identify the jello
stuff with every set that is some of it, since the members of every set
are themselves composed of further sets, then it is sets ‘all the way
down’, where we never arrive at members which are not composed of
further members of sets of stuff. Dean Zimmerman notes,
For masses of stuff composed of simples, however, the procedure is
relatively simple—“whenever you have a larger mass compounded
out of smaller masses of the same kind, identify the larger mass with
a set of these smaller masses.” There is no way to do this with
gunky masses, since, for any arbitrarily chosen constituting
individual, it itself is a constituted object that needs to have the
same treatment applied to it. 
The set-theoretical interpretation has many difficulties, and few
champions. But, this should not be regarded as the last word on the
subject. There are non-well-founded set theories, which could perhaps
get around the foregoing difficulties. 
We do not only speak of individual things, we speak of many things.
Sentences such as “The cheerleaders formed a human
pyramid,” or “Those dogs are sick” are examples of
plural predication, quantification, and reference. Some hold that some
plural referring expressions are irreducible to singular predication,
quantification, and reference (Boolos 1984; McKay 2005; Yi
2005). According to standard logic, “some things
are F” is true only if each of those things
is F. But, as McKay and others point out, “The students
surrounded the building” could be true even though it is false
to say of Bob (one of the students) that he surrounded the building
(McKay 2005, chapter 1). Those in favor of plural logic argue that we
need not countenance sums or sets to account for plural logic, rather,
we can take such sentences at face value. Those tigers may be distinct
from those lions, but this doesn’t require ‘the tigers’ to
refer to a collection, sum, or particular thing of any stripe. 
Some ‘pluralists’, as we may call those who analyze
mass expressions in terms of plural expressions, hold that mass terms
are used, generally, to refer to many things at once (Nicolas 2002).
‘Gold’, on most occasions of use, does not refer to a
thing—it refers to many things.
According to an early account (Laycock 1975) statements such as
“the water is boiling” or “Bob took out that
trash” mean “those water molecules are
boiling” and “Bob took out those pieces of
trash.” The idea (also developed more fully later by Nicolas
2008, who, in turn, was inspired by Gillon 1992) that mass expressions
are used to refer to several things at once seems especially promising
for concrete quasi-mass nouns such as silverware
and furniture, whose reference is particular pieces of
silverware or furniture. Concrete mass nouns such as beer
will be paraphrased as referring, depending on context, to bottles,
drops, glasses, gallons, or quantities (in Cartwright’s 1979b sense) of
beer. 
Pluralists about mass expressions differ most markedly from sum and
set theorists as follows. The set theorist would take ‘the water
in Merrihew’s cup’ to refer to the set of water molecules in his
cup, and the sum theorist would take it to refer to a fusion. These
are both particular entities. But, for the Pluralist, the water is not
a particular thing—it is many things. For example, the account
that Nicolas recommends
associates to a mass noun [M], not a set of things, but
some things, each of which is M…the denotation of the
expression the gold on the table, the as, comprises
any things that are gold on the table. (2008, 22)
Many claim that plural logic, reference, predication, and
quantification is ontologically innocent. That is, we are not
committing ourselves the existence of new entities by employing
plurals, even if we believe that some usage featuring plural reference
is irreducible. Being committed to the existence of ‘those
cats’ (while adverting to Mr. Furrikens, Chairman Meow, and
Magnificat) is not an additional commitment over and above the
commitment to Mr. Furrikens, Chairman Meow, and Magnificat. When one
pays for this apple, and that apple, one gets ‘the apples’
for free. (In this respect the ontologically innocent Pluralist has a
leg up over the set and sums theorists, since the former posits no
novel entities.) 
In some of his early work Laycock makes arguments by analogy to support
the proposal that mass expressions are veiled plural expressions, so
that water, in its analysis,
gets treated like apples or Hobbits does. We turn to the
analogies. 
Both mass and plural terms refer cumulatively. Just as any two
portions of water considered together are water, so these apples and
those apples together are apples. 
Also, Hobbits, just like water, resists
pluralization. For the former, this is because Hobbits is already
plural: ‘Hobbitses’ does not make sense. Water
cannot be pluralized and retain its standard reference, since
‘waters’ either means kinds of water, or
different bodies of water (e.g., lakes, rivers, pools, seas,
rather than numerous water per se, which doesn’t make sense
unless used in a technical or stipulative way). One way to explain
this is to suppose that water is already plural. 
Both Hobbits and water do not take the indefinite
article. Neither ‘a water’ (when not understood in the
kind sense or with an implicit partitioning e.g., ‘bottle
of’) nor ‘a Hobbits’ are grammatical. Both mass and
plural expressions take the definite article since ‘the’
“does not discriminate between singular and plural”
(Laycock 2006, p. 35). Both Hobbits and water
take the non-singular analogue of the indefinite
article—‘some’. Some Hobbits and some water can both
surround a castle, and neither use implies singularity. 
Both mass and plural terms can be prefaced by partitioning and
measurement terms. One could buy seven pounds of applesauce, or seven
pounds of apples. One could sell a jar of applesauce, or a box of
apples, a gallon of marbles, or a gallon of milk. 
But, even given the aforementioned similarities, there are significant
differences between mass and plural terms. While one can infer from
“There are peppercorns in the sauce” that there is at
least one peppercorn in the sauce, one cannot infer from “There
is wine in the sauce” that there is at least one (non-kind
usage) wine in the sauce. Furthermore, every plural term (except for
plural invariable terms such as ‘cattle’ and
‘groceries’) e.g., ‘cats’, is correlated with
a singular cognate, e.g., ‘cat’. But there are no singular
cognates for mass terms e.g., ‘water’ or
‘silverware’ 
There is much to say for the pluralist position. Plural logic is
becoming better understood, less controversial, and a case can be made
that standard first-order logic will be subsumed under, or merged with,
plural logic (for discussion of these issues, see the entry on
  plural quantification). 
 If this is so, and mass expressions are plural
expressions, then mass expressions can be accounted for in a relatively
well understood and uncontroversial logic which accounts for a wider
range of commonsense inferences than standard logic does. 
The pluralist account is quite plausible when we consider atomic
mass expressions, or mass expressions with atomic denotata (def.
‘atomic’ in 2.1) such as
‘silverware’, ‘furniture’, and
‘water’. It will become easy to cash out the truth
conditions of such talk in terms of the atomic units, such as pieces
of silverware, furniture, and H2O molecules (Nicolas
2008).
Also in favor of the account is that it does at least as good a job
as the set-theoretical view since it explains the relationship between
a thing and its constituting matter in a similar way, yet posits no
novel entities like sets. There are just the many bits, and the
constituted object of which they are parts. This point has been stated
forcefully by Laycock (1972) and Burke (1997), yet these accounts have
the worrying feature of not being truly reductive. See
section 3.2 for an ‘ontologically serious’ view of
pluralities.
Many of the problems which beset the set theorist confront the
Pluralists as well.  What about fuzzy atomless or gunky stuff?  If
talk of stuff is to be paraphrased in terms of plural reference, what
are the individuals slotted for this role? With atomic stuffs, it is
clear. But with ‘fruitcake’ and ‘taco sauce’
it is not. Why suppose there is a fact of the matter as to what counts
as stuffs of these kinds? And if there is no fact of the matter then
what are the individuals we are speaking of when we speak of
fruitcake? And our Pluralist has just as much trouble chopping up the
Jello cube as the Set Theorist (see
section 2.3).
Of course, vagueness and indeterminacy are problems for most
theories of masses, so it could be unfair to overstress this point, and
it is not at all clear that the pluralist can’t augment her account
with standard logics of vagueness or employ analogues to set-theoretic
non-well-foundedness moves. Given the many salutary components of
plural logic in relation to mass expressions, this remains a promising
area of inquiry.
  
 The first three approaches to the referents of concrete mass
expressions are all relatively conservative. All three are compatible
with what one might call ‘Thing Theory’. In this section we will
examine views which posit non-thing-like stuff in addition to things,
or eliminate things altogether.
The relatively orthodox view vis-a-vis things and stuff in
contemporary analytic metaphysics is what we could call
’Thing Theory.’ Thing Theory,
very roughly, is the view that (excluding properties and relations)
all concrete existents, are either things fundamentally, or reducible
to fundamental things.
What things, individuals, or objects are is itself a controversial and
murky matter, and goes beyond the purview of this article (for more,
see these related entries:
 object,
 sortals,
 substance).
Related terms in philosophy for ‘thing’
are substance, primary substance, particular,
existent, being, entity, and so on. For the
purposes of this entry, we will take a rather minimalistic view of
thinghood. We will regard a thing or object as whatever satisfies this
definition:
And now, using the notion of Thinghood, a minimalist Thing Theory can
be captured as follows:
Thing theorists hold that whatever exists is unqualifiedly
countable as one, or reducible to such things. For the Thing Theorist
“to be is to be countable.” Some Stuff Ontologists would
counter—“to be is to be either countable or measurable”
(a gloss on Burge 1975, p. 459).
All three views in section 2 can
maintain that, fundamentally, everything boils down to things.  Sums,
it is usually held, are always sums of things, and these sums are
themselves things, and can even be counted. (If there are n
simple things, then there are
2n − 1 sums). Masses-as-sets can
always be held to be sets of things, and plural reference can always
be held to be reference to a number of things. 
We can view ‘Stuff Ontologies’ as views which, in some sense, depart
from this picture and ‘take stuff seriously’. That is, a Stuff Ontology
is any view which departs from Thing Theory in important respects so as
to allow non-thing-like stuff to be part of the fundamental furniture of the world.
Thing Theorists believe that
stuff-talk modeled on mass term use has no
proper place in the fundamental correct description of the world. 
Stuff Ontologists can either (i) eliminate things,
or, (ii)
accept that there are things, but hold that they are merely derivative
entities which are parasitic on the
fundamental stuff of the world.
Thing Theory can be enriched with various
supplemental hypotheses to generate a more informative theory. Sum
theorists believe in the existence of mere sums (defined
in 2.2.1) and hold that
sums are things. If sets of physical things are physical (at least in
a derivative sense by having their physical properties by proxy), then
the masses-as-sets theorist can count as a Thing Theorist as well. The
Plural Theorist of the ontologically innocent stripe, who need admit
neither sums nor sets (at least for the purposes of mass reference),
does not have any entities which are not things or reducible to
things.
We will now examine two views, one which
states that there are entities which are not things
(3.2), and another which states that there are no
things in addition to stuff (3.3).
Some have taken a view of pluralities which is not
ontologically innocent. Henry Laycock and Michael Burke, at times,
have tentatively favored the notion that there is a novel ontic
category of plural entities which are not individual items of
quantification. 
What is the difference between the ontologically innocent and
ontologically serious pluralists, and what is the case for the serious
position? The serious pluralist can have several motivations. Laycock
(1972) argues that there is definite reference of mass expressions,
such as ‘that water’, ‘the water in the tub’,
but that this reference is not singular reference. ‘This
water’, on a demonstrative occasion, refers, but, “my
contention is that this water, unlike this or that drop, is
not a particular object” (1972, p. 4).  Laycock claims
that “we can and do think of stuff as having
an independent reality [from things]” (1972,
p. 27, italics his).  While saying “that there is gold in
a certain region is certainly to assert the existence
of something” (1972, p. 28), he does deny that
this ‘something’ is particular, and, throughout his work,
denies that it is a set or a fusion. What definite singular terms like
‘the gold in the…’ “designate is a quite
distinct type of item, concrete but not particular” (1972,
p. 28). 
If one really believes that i) there is water, ii) we make definite
reference to it, iii) water is not a thing (i.e., not a sum or set),
and iv) plural quantification and predication is irreducible to
singular quantification and predication, then one might feel compelled
to accept that mass expressions like water and gold
refer to genuine entities distinct from (or ‘over and
above’) the water and gold molecules. Let us call whatever it is
that is referred to with definite reference by mass expressions in
this way ‘pluralities’ (Laycock and Burke do not use the
phrase, and Laycock would probably find it at best infelicitous, and
at worst a grave source of metaphysical error).
Belief in irreducible pluralities gets more traction when combined
with a denial of unrestricted mereology, which is just what Laycock
does: 
If one accepts (i)–(iv), and has reason to reject both UFM
(see 2.2.1) and the set-theoretical view,
and one wants commonsense sentences featuring mass expressions to come
out true, then what is left to be referred to by nominal statements
about water, lead, etc. except pluralities? 
Another motivation can be found in Burke (1997), inspired by
Laycock. Burke was concerned to resolve the coincidence puzzle between
not only a thing and it’s constituting piece of matter, but between
these things and the matter per se.  (Since some copper can
persist past the shattering of a piece of copper which constitutes a
statue, then presumably the copper is distinct from either).  Burke’s
account, all the details of which do not concern us here (see the
entry on
 material constitution
and the supplement 
 Sums and Ordinary Objects
 for details) requires
that the statue and piece of copper be identical. If this is so, and
the statue comes into existence, and is identical with its
constituting piece, then a new piece must come into existence and the
old one cease to be. One of the options Burke canvasses to explain why
it is that we (mistakenly) assume the piece continues in existence is
because the copper persists through the change:
Burke denies the identification of the
many copper bits and the piece of copper:
It is doubtful, though, that postulating pluralities which are not
things can solve the coincidence puzzles. Burke, who himself brought
up a similar objection to coincidence in general, faces the following
problem. How are distinct entities, such as the statue and the copper,
different in sort, given that they both have the same intrinsic
properties? There seems to be a one to one correspondence between the
features of the statue and those of the copper. Why isn’t the copper a
statue, for the same reasons the piece of copper is? Burke can insist
that the main difference is that the statue/piece is one thing,
whereas the copper is many things, but it is not clear why withholding
the honorific thing from ‘the’ copper plurality
solves the problem (Zimmerman 1997, p. 23). 
It is unclear what the addition of the attribution of
‘concrete non-particulars’ to the plural analysis is
doing, and doubtful that it clarifies matters. Indeed it seems to
somewhat back away from the plural analysis. The initial reason for
analyzing concrete mass expressions in terms of plural quantification
and predication is that talk about ‘the lions’ and
‘those Hobbits’ is relatively unproblematic. But then, why
reduce mass expressions to plural reference if one holds
that water or a water plurality is something over and
above those water molecules, yet denies that the lion
plurality is something over and above those lions? It’s
not clear why both water and lions get a plural reference treatment,
yet the referents of mass expressions get to retain some kind of
ontological halo which distinguishes their referents from non-mass
plural expressions. Laycock (2006) no longer holds (and only
tentatively held) that mass expressions are plural.
Some stuff ontologists eliminate concrete things altogether. There
is only stuff, objects being accidental phases of objectively
non-objectual stuff. Alternatively, concepts are thought of as
‘cookie-cutters’, which conventionally carve
pseudo-objects out of the amorphous world-blob, which itself contains
no objects (cf. Dummet 1981, chap 16; Horgan and Potrč 2000).
Alan Sidelle, in various places (1989, 1991, 1998) argues that while
stuff exists, there are no things which exist and actually have the
essences we believe they do. In 1998 he argues that we should regard
the unraveling of a sweater or the chopping down of a tree as not
substantial changes, in which things cease to be, but accidental
changes in underlying, persisting stuff: 
What is more basic? Stuff. Supposed substantial change
in objects is actually accidental change to some stuff. Sidelle
diagnoses the phenomenon of coincidence as a species of the problem of
individuation:
He claims that the problem of coincident entities arises not due to
the diversity of individuals in a region, but rather due to the fact
that the world as it is under-determines which principles of
individuation are the correct ones to employ. We can treat any
property as accidental or as essential by employing different sortals,
or nominal essences, to describe a thing. When a cow dies, we can
describe this either as the accidental change in some flesh-and-bones,
or the substantial change in a cow which is no more.  Sidelle
concludes, in a Lockean vein, that which changes we conceive of as
substantial and which as accidental is more a function of us and our
interests than of the way things really are (1998, p. 439).
Sidelle goes on to note that our problems with things come about
from supposing that there are any. That is, these problems arise
because of our concept of an object.
 It is objects which have made the problem,
and the solution isn’t to switch which objects we allow, but
to disallow objects altogether. (1998,
p. 441)
 Sidelle recommends, tentatively, that we describe the world
without quantification over things, and deny that “there is
genuine, world-given individuation.” Furthermore, as it is
supposedly obvious that there is at least stuff, we should suppose so,
and theoretically regard the role of the ‘world-stuff’ as
“the mind-independent matter of the world which, among other
things, determines our perceptions” (1998, p. 443).
One problem for this view is that it is virtually indistinguishable
from a Quinean view according to which a physical object is just
“the content, however heterogeneous, of some portion of
space-time, however disconnected and gerrymandered” (Quine 1960,
p. 171). Our sortals, according to a type of Quinean, are used
to pick out definite filled portions, and any and all of these are
objects. What Sidelle calls ‘stuff’ Quine (or Jubien in
1993) is happy to call an ‘object’. If Sidelle’s stuff
talk is inter-translatable into Quinean thing-talk then there is
merely a terminological difference between the posit of World-Stuff
and the posit of arbitrary things.
A further strange point about this view is that it entails that,
just as there are no objects which have the persistence conditions that
we think, there are no non-fundamental stuffs. The very same arguments
given for rejecting ordinary objects and reducing them to world stuff
can be given for water molecules and sodium chloride. Electrolysis can
be seen not as the destruction of water but as a change in persisting
underlying stuff. This can be carried on until we get to the
fundamental stuff(s). Hydrogen can be seen as a phase of a proton and
an electron, and a proton can be seen as a phase of quarks and gluons.
So, it seems that
elements and complexes, since they are not the fundamental or
non-individuated world-stuff, must also be the result of conceptual
carvings.
What about fundamental particles (assuming there are some)?
They’ve got to go as well, if we assume they are objects. If
there are in fact gluons and electrons which exist, are objects, and
are particular things with identity and persistence conditions, then,
if they are in fact simple they form the basis out of which we
could construct the other objects. So, if non-individual world stuff is
going to play a role, it seems that we must eliminate fundamental
particles as well. This approach allows too much physics to be done
from the armchair.
It must be noted, though, that such a World-Stuff view is similar
to some interpretations of elementary particle physics and quantum
theory.  Some scientists and philosophers of science do in fact argue
that at bottom the world is not a world of things. Rather, the basic
stuff is non-particular ‘quantum foam’, or
mass-energy, fields, or structures. Some argue that the only real
entity is the space-time fabric, ordinary objects just being temporary
warpings or disturbances in it. On such views both ordinary
macroscopic objects and putative fundamental particles are only
epiphenomenal entities or temporary manifestations in the
electromagnetic or gravitational fields, which are fundamentally
non-individual—some kind of world stuff (for details, see the
entry
 identity and individuality in quantum theory).
 So, one should not rule out
such views tout court. But, given the flux and opacity of
such views, one should not quickly and whole-heartedly embrace the
notion of a fundamental non-particular stuff either. These views merit
further examination.
Mass expressions and their relations to count expressions, and how
they are interpreted and employed by metaphysicians, offer us an
interesting and voluminous case-study of recent metaphysics informed
by lexical and syntactic considerations.  The careful student of this
material can take away many cautionary tales and useful tools. This is
a very difficult and woolly area of inquiry where there is almost no
consensus—not even consensus about the basics. But there is some
interesting empirical work on mass and count expressions being done
which is shedding some new light on these issues (see Casati 2005 for
details), and there has been an explosion of recent work in
linguistics (see the bibliographies from Link 1998, and the Pelletier
and Schubert classic paper on the subject linked in
the Other Internet Resources). Hopefully,
philosophers can work together with linguists, computer scientists,
cognitive scientists, and others to help achieve some kind of
breakthrough. 
The category of ‘Stuff’ seems to be where the category
‘Event’ was thirty or so years ago. It is an important ontological
category which remains poorly understood. In the absence of consensus
on the referents of mass expressions, controversy about stuff is bound
to continue.