In its broadest extant sense, “digital art” refers to
art that relies on computer-based digital encoding, or on the
electronic storage and processing of information in different
formats—text, numbers, images, sounds—in a common binary
code. The ways in which art-making can incorporate computer-based
digital encoding are extremely diverse. A digital photograph may be
the product of a manipulated sample of visual information captured
with a digital camera from a “live” scene or captured with
a scanner from a traditional celluloid photograph. Music can be
recorded and then manipulated digitally or created digitally with
specialized computer software. And a movie is now the product of an
extremely complex sequence of choices between analog and digital
processes at the stages of image and sound capture or composition,
image and sound editing, color correction or sound mastering, special
effects production, and display or projection.
 The complexity of the digital cinema workflow draws attention to a
further difference concerning whether reliance on the digital is
restricted to the way an artwork is made or extends to the display of
the work. A work may be made on a computer—say, a musical work
composed with Sibelius or a play written in Microsoft Word—and yet meant
for apprehension in a non-digital format—say, performance on
traditional musical instruments or enactment on stage. Similarly, a
movie could be captured and edited digitally before being printed on
traditional 35mm photochemical film for projection in theaters. By
contrast, works which are purely digital include a film made and
projected digitally—for example, Avatar (2009), a
piece of music composed and played back electronically—for
example, the electroacoustic works of Gottfried Michael Koenig
(see Other Internet Resources), and a work of
ASCII art—an image made up from the 95 printable characters
defined by the ASCII standard of 1963 and displayed on a computer
monitor.
An example of ASCII art is:
Purely digital works include interactive works such as videogames and
digital installations. Videogames are arguably the newest digital
works to be recognized as a potential art form, although Brock Rough
(2018) claims that under certain circumstances, videogames and art are
incompatible. Additionally, many interactive digital installations in
the museum borrow videogame mechanics, which factor as prominent
features to appreciate (Paul 2008).
Each of the examples above incorporates a computational process, to
some degree, in the presentation of the work. In many ways, works
comprised of digital media stand in stark contrast to those made by
completely analog means.
The classical account of the analog-digital distinction is found in
Nelson Goodman’s Languages of Art (1976). In fact
Goodman’s account remains practically the only general
account of the distinction. While David Lewis (1971) raises a series
of objections to Goodman’s account, Lewis’ alternative
account applies only to the representation of numbers. And while John
Haugeland (1981) returns to the general distinction, he effectively
qualifies and re-frames Goodman’s account in order to overcome
Lewis’s and other potential objections. A few philosophers
interested in clarifying the concepts employed by cognitive scientists
have recognized the need for a general account of the analog-digital
distinction (e.g., Dretske 1981; Blachowicz 1997; Katz 2008; Maley
2011). But in this context, as well, Goodman’s account is the
essential point of reference. In some ways, this is surprising or at
least striking: As Haugeland points out, the digital is a
“mundane engineering notion” (1981: 217). Yet the
philosophical context in which the notion receives its fullest
analysis is that of aesthetics. As is well-known, Goodman’s
interests in this context center on the role of musical notation in
fixing the identity of musical works. But a musical notation is also a
standard example of a digital system.
 On Goodman’s broad, structuralist way of thinking,
representational systems in general consist of sets of possible
physical objects that count as token representations. Objects are
grouped under syntactic and semantic types, and interesting
differences between kinds of representational system track differences
in the way syntactic and semantic types relate to one another. Digital
systems are distinguished by being differentiated as opposed
to dense. The condition of syntactic differentiation
is met when the differences between classes of token representations
are limited such that it is possible for users of the system always to
tell that a token belongs to at most one class. The condition
of semantic differentiation is met when the extension of each
type, or the class of referents corresponding to a class of token
representations, differs in limited ways from the extension of any
other type; so that users of the system can always tell that a
referent belongs to at most one extension.  Goodman provides the
following example of a simple digital computer, a system that meets
the conditions of both syntactic and semantic differentiation: Say we
have an instrument reporting on the number of dimes dropped into a toy
bank with a capacity for holding 50 dimes, where the count is reported
by an Arabic numeral on a small display (Goodman 1976: 159). In this
system, the syntactic types are just the numbers 0–50, which
have as their instances the discrete displays, at different times, of
the corresponding Arabic numerals. Both conditions of syntactic and
semantic differentiation are met because the relevant differences
between instances of different numbers are both highly circumscribed
and conspicuous. This means that users of the system can be expected
to be able to read the display, or determine which number is
instantiated on the display (syntactic differentiation) and which
numerical value, or how many coins, is thereby being indicated
(semantic differentiation).
 Analog representation fails to be differentiated because it is
dense. With an ordering of types such that between any two types,
there is a third, it is impossible to determine instantiation of at
most one type. Not every case involving a failure of finite
differentiation is a case of density. However, a traditional
thermometer is such that heights of mercury that differ to any degree
count as distinct syntactic types, the kinds of things that can differ
semantically. Similarly, for pictures distinguished according to
regions of color, for any two pictures, no matter how closely similar,
one can always find a third more similar to each of them than they are
to each other. Density is a feature of any system that measures
continuously varying values. That is, as long as the system in
question is designed so that any difference in magnitude indicates a
difference in type.
 Returning to the digital, some commentators have questioned
whether Goodman’s condition of (syntactic and semantic) finite
differentiation is sufficient to distinguish the kind of
representation in question (Haugeland 1981; Lewis 1971). John
Haugeland, for example, argues that there can be differentiated
schemes without the “copyability” feature that defines the
practical significance of digital systems. Haugeland’s solution
is to require the practical and not just the theoretical possibility
of a system’s users determining type membership. In fact,
however, Goodman himself would likely accept this modification. In a
later work, Goodman explicitly states that finite differentiation must
make it possible to determine type membership “by means
available and appropriate to the given user of the given scheme”
(Goodman and Elgin 1988: 125). 
Whether or not a work of digital art is a work of representational
art, and even with the most abstract works of digital art, there are
layers of representation involved in the complex processes of their
production and presentation. Most of these layers, and arguably the
most important ones, are digital. Where there are analog systems
involved, digital translation makes possible the realization of the
values of the final work. This is perhaps best seen with paradigmatic
cases of digital art. Consider the following two early works:
The first of these works involves digital moving imagery that is
entirely generated by a computer program. At the same time, the video
looks like it was or could have been recorded in an actual office
setting. The particular significance of the work depends on the viewer
being aware of its digital composition while at the same time being
struck by its photorealistic familiarity. According to the San Francisco
Museum of Modern Art (SF MoMA),
 Kalpakjian thus reveals the complete artificiality
of the built environments we inhabit, and their aesthetic distance
from more humanistic forms.  (SF MoMA n.d.)
 The second work involves imagery that was initially captured
digitally. Arcangel began by taking 360-degree photographs of his
hometown of Buffalo, New York.  He scanned and modified the
photographs on his computer so that they could be coded according to
the graphics capabilities of the Nintendo gaming system, and in order
to give the images the distinctive look and feel of the Mario Bros
game. Arcangel then programmed the landscape imagery to scroll
continuously across a TV screen, as in the Mario Bros game. Finally,
Arcangel melted the chips in a Super Mario cartridge, replacing them
with his self-manufactured chips so that his landscape
“game” could be run on any Nintendo system. As well as all
the ways in which Arcangel’s work relies on both the technology
and aesthetics of videogames, there are clearly ways in which it
deliberately removes or blocks certain key features or capacities of
videogames, perhaps most notably their robust interactivity. Playing a
videogame essentially involves the prescribed creation of new display
instances of a work. But we do not “play” Landscape
Study #4, and its imagery is fixed by the artist. The kind of
interactivity typical of videogames can also be found in artworks made
without computers (see Lopes 2010: 49). But this type of interactivity
is most closely associated with digital art because it is so much
easier to achieve with the use of computers. This suggests a high
degree of self-consciousness in Arcangel’s decision to block the
interactivity of his reverse-engineered videogame. From the
perspective of the philosophy of digital art, such a decision
highlights the need for further discussion of the link between the
nature of the digital and the nature of interactivity.
 What is it about the ways in which the works by Arcangel and
Kalpakjian are made that makes them digital in an appreciatively
relevant sense? Computer imaging depends on the inherent
programmability and automation of digital computers. Digital image
capture depends on sampling and subsequently on the near-instantaneous
processes of discrete coding.  None of this would be possible without
a series of linked systems each with finitely differentiated
settings.
At the most basic level, the myriad transistors in a computer are
essentially tiny digital schemes, each with two types: the
“on” and “off” settings of the
transistor-capacitor switch. The settings are discrete and
distinguishable, as are their compliance classes, of 1s and 0s. The
ubiquity of binary code in computer processing is a consequence of the
fact that a digital computer is essentially a vast collection of
on-off switches. A particular sequence of 1s and 0s realized at a
particular time in virtue of the requisite arrangement of transistors
is a binary instance of a particular number, interchangeable with all
other instances of the same number and with no instances of different
numbers. The difference between instances of one number and instances
of other numbers is strictly limited to the difference in the ordering
of 1s and 0s. In other words, Goodman’s condition of finite
differentiation is clearly met. In turn, the numbers can refer to
other values, including the light-intensity values of an image. A
computation simply involves the generation of output strings of binary
digits from input strings in accordance with a general rule that
depends on the properties of the strings (Piccinini 2008). The modern
(digital) computer encodes both data and instructions of human
readable code and assembly languages as sequences of binary digits, or
bits, and allows for the internal storage of instructions. This makes
the computer essentially programmable in the sense that it can be
modified to compute new functions simply by being fed an appropriate
arrangement of bits.
 A program is a list of instructions, and instructions are strings
of digits. The modern digital computer has components that serve to
copy and store programs inside the machine, and to supply instructions
to the computer’s processing units for implementation in the
appropriate order. The outputs of a system can be dependent on
specific inputs often in tandem with the conditional if-then
statements. This is what is involved in a computer executing
conditional branching instructions such that it can monitor and
respond to its own intermediate computational states and even modify
instructions based on its own processes. Such modifications are
dictated by an algorithm—the program’s set of rules and
operations. It is the digital computer’s capacity for branching,
due to its digital programmability, that allows for the kinds of
higher-level automation involved in the use of imaging applications
and sequential image-generation. Our artists, Kalpakjian and Arcangel,
do not have to enter the strings of digits for every basic operation
of the computer that underlies the complex operations involved in
describing and manipulating images (among other features). If they did
have to do this, they would never finish making their
artworks. Rather, artists can rely on open-source code, libraries, or
commercial software that automatically and instantaneously supplies the
lines of code required for the execution of their decisions.
 The imaging software with which Kalpakjian works allows him to
generate architectural interiors in rich detail. Arcangel does not
require as much from his imaging software given that he is
manipulating previously captured and scanned images. The process of
scanning the photographs, just like the process involved in digital
photography, involves sampling and quantization of a visual source;
assigning an integer, from a finite range, to the average
light-intensity measured across each small area of source-space
corresponding to a cell in a grid. This process involves averaging and
rounding up values, and it involves measurement, or sampling, of light
intensities at (spatially and temporally) discrete intervals. Some,
indeed many, of the differences in light intensity across the source
image or scene (and at different times, in the case of moving imagery)
are thereby dropped by the process of digital image-capture. Among
some media theorists, this fact has led to deep suspicion of the
digitally recorded image, prompting the feeling that the digital image
is always a poor substitute for the analog. Current digital
technologies for image-capture and display have such high rates of
sampling frequency and resolution that the values dropped in
quantization are well below the threshold of human perception. At the
same time, Arcangel’s Landscape Study #4  reminds us
that digital artists may choose to exploit visible pixellation for
particular artistic ends.
 A digitally recorded image need not appear any less richly
detailed or varied in color than an analog image. All the same, in the
terms of D. N.  Rodowick, whereas the analog photograph is an
“isomorphic transcription” of its subject, a digital
photograph is a “data-output”, with a
symbolically-mediated link to its subject (Rodowick 2007:
117–8). This ontological divide—described by William
J. Mitchell as a “sudden and decisive rupture” in the
history of photography (1994: 59), is then assumed to have aesthetic
implications: Rodowick insists that the “discontinuities”
in digital information “produce perceptual or aesthetic
effects”. Despite this insistence, however, Rodowick goes on to
acknowledge that, with enough resolution, “a digital photograph
can simulate the look of a continuously produced analogical
image”. This concession would seem to work against any attempt
to identify the aesthetic effects of pixellation, even if “the
pixel grid remains in the logical structure of the image”
(Rodowick 2007: 119). But if we are to interpret Rodowick charitably,
he could be implying that ontology at least partly determines
appropriate appreciation; even if a digital photograph can look just
like an analog photograph, its (known) digital status affects which of
its perceptible features are aesthetically relevant and how we
appropriately engage with them.
The media theorists’ worry about the impoverished digital
image primarily refers to the production of digital images
with its reliance on sampling and quantization. But there are also
analogous worries one could have about the
digital presentation of images, worries about deep structural
changes to analog images once they are displayed digitally—for
example, on a liquid crystal display (LCD) screen or when projected
digitally on a flat surface. Of course one could simply be interested
in investigating these structural changes without being particularly
worried about them.  This shall be our approach.
 The traditional method of film reel projection has been a
remarkably stable and entrenched technology, remaining largely
unchanged for over a century.  But digital projection is on the rise,
particularly in conjunction with the networked distribution of
movies. And although movie audiences may not be able to see the
difference on screen between analog and digital projection, their
expectations are changing—for example, about what can go wrong
in the presentation of a movie. A deeper assumption that has not
changed, one that is almost universal among film scholars, is that
cinema fundamentally depends on an illusion. Cinema is the art of
moving images and thus its very existence depends on our being tricked
into seeing a rapid succession of static images as a persistent moving
image. In the philosophy of film, there is a small debate about the
status of cinematic motion—whether it really is an illusion as
is commonly assumed. An analysis of digital projection technology
reveals new complexities in this debate but ultimately provides
additional reasons to stick with the popular illusionist view.
 Traditional and digital projection methods could not appear more
different: the former involves running a flexible film strip through a
mechanical projector; the latter involves a complex array of
micromirrors on semiconductor chips, which, in combination with a
prism and a lamp, generate projectable images from binary
code. Nevertheless, both are methods for generating the impression of
a continuously illuminated, persistent moving image from a sequence of
static images. Compared with traditional projection, however, digital
projection includes an extra step, whereby the images in the static
sequence are generated from flashes of light. In order to generate
each image in the digital projector, a light beam from a high-powered
lamp is separated by a prism into its color components of red, blue,
and green. Each color beam then hits a different Digital Micromirror
Device (DMD), which is a semiconductor chip covered with more than a
million tiny, hinged mirrors. Based on the information encoded in the
video signal, the DMDs selectively turn over some of the tiny mirrors
to reflect the colored lights. Most of the tiny mirrors are flipped
thousands of times a second in order to create the gradations of light
and dark making up a monochromatic, pixellated image—a mirror
that is flipped on a greater proportion of the time will reflect more
light and so will form a brighter pixel than a mirror that is not
flipped on for so long. Each DMD reflects a monochromatic image back
to the prism, which then recombines the colors to form the projected,
full-color image. This image—if it were held for long enough on
the screen—would be perceived as static. In order then to
produce the impression of motion in the projected, full-color image,
the underlying memory array of the DMDs has to update rapidly so that
all the micromirrors are released simultaneously and allowed to move
into a new “address state”, providing new patterns of
light modulation for successive, slightly different images.
 The two-stage process of digital projection, whereby each image in
a static sequence is generated by flashing light and the impression of
a moving image is then generated by the rapid execution of the
sequence, draws attention to the metaphysical complexity of the
question of how movies move. In particular, one is unlikely to
determine the status of the impression of motion that makes possible
the art of cinema unless one can determine the status of the imagery
that is seen to move. Given that motion involves an object occupying
contiguous spatial locations in successive moments of time, a moving
object must be re-identifiable over time. A moving image in a film,
arising as it does out of the rapid display of a succession of still
images, is not obviously a persistent object that can be seen to
move. Then again, perhaps it is enough that ordinary viewers identify
an image—say of a moving train— as the same image, for the
moving image to persist (Currie 1996).  Alternatively, the moving
image could be thought to persist as a second-order physical entity
constituted by a sequence of flashing light (Ponech 2006).
 The second proposal immediately runs into trouble with digital
projection. If the traditionally projected moving image exists as a
series of flashes of light, in digital projection, other
“intermediate” objects must be granted existence—for
example, the stable point of light consisting of the rate of flashes,
and gaps between them, of a single micromirror on the DMD. At the same
time, the moving image itself must be stripped of its existence since
it does not consist of flashes of light. This is due to the fact that,
in digital projection, there are no gaps between frames and so no
underlying, imperceptible alternation of light and dark. This leaves
the realist in the awkward position of claiming that the moving image
goes in and out of existence with the switch between analog and
digital projection technologies.
 The first proposal, on which cinematic motion is a secondary
quality, threatens to destroy the distinction between the apparent and
the illusory. It suggests a way of reinterpreting any case of
perceptual illusion as a case involving the ascription of secondary
qualities. That is, unless it can be shown that there are independent
means of checking that we are mistaken about genuine illusions. But
even if this can be shown, a problem remains: While there may not be
an independent check for the motion in an image, there is likewise no
independent check for a genuine illusion of color. Given the contrived
conditions of movie viewing, there is more reason to think of
cinematic motion as akin to an illusory, than to a genuine, experience
of color. With the introduction of digital projection, the conditions
are arguably even more contrived. For it is not just movement in the
image but the image itself that is constituted by rapid flashes of
light. And the technology involved is far less accessible than that of
a traditional mechanical projector in the sense that one cannot, just
by looking at the projection device, see (roughly) how it works. In
this way, an analysis of digital movie projection serves to reinforce
the traditional assumption that cinema is an art of illusion. In
addition, however, the analysis suggests that the illusion at the
heart of cinema is particularly impenetrable—akin to an illusion
of color, and thus an illusion of a mere appearance that cannot be
checked (Thomson-Jones 2013).
With digital movie projection, we begin to see the importance of
understanding the technology of display for understanding the nature
of digital art. Another way we see its importance is in relation to
images displayed on LCD screens. According to Goodman, images are
essentially analog. Nevertheless, there seems to be a way for
engineers to circumvent the essential analogicity of pictorial schemes
by using digital technologies for encoded subphenomenal
discrimination. Arguably, finite differentiation can be imposed on the
scheme of all possible images displayed on high-resolution LCD
screens.  As we shall see, this has far-reaching implications for the
ways in which we think about and properly appreciate image-based
art.
 Both in his earlier and in his later work in aesthetics, Goodman
commits to “a special relation” between the analog and the
pictorial, one that is seen when we compare “the presystematic
notions of description and picture in a given culture”. Given
two schemes, S and S′, where S
consists of all descriptions or predicates in a language such as
English, and S′ consists of all pictures, if we were
told only of the structures of S and S′, we
could distinguish the pictorial scheme by its being analog (Goodman
and Elgin 1988: 130). The special relation remains, Goodman claims,
despite the possibility of a digital sub-scheme made up of black and
white grid patterns all of which happen to be pictures. In such a
scheme, the differences between patterned types that matter for the
scheme’s being digital do not include all of the differences
that matter for distinguishing pictorial types. Pictures are
distinguished by color, shape, and size, which vary continuously; any
variation in color, shape, or size potentially results in a different
picture. When we impose limits on the differences that matter for
distinguishing one grid pattern in the scheme from another, we are not
interpreting the grid patterns as pictures; if we were to do so, we
would have to treat them as members of a syntactically dense, an
analog, scheme.
 Goodman’s insight about grid patterns and pictures suggests
an immediate difficulty for explaining the digital status of images
displayed on LCD screens: Clearly it will not be sufficient to point
out that such images are pixellated, and therefore made up of small
identical building blocks that impose a lower limit on the differences
between display-instances. Remember that pictures are defined by
color, shape, and size, which vary continuously. This means that even
if the physical pixels of an LCD screen are such that there are gaps
between the possible shapes, sizes, and colors that the screen can
instantiate, and there are a finite number of shapes, sizes, and
colors that the screen can instantiate, there is still going to be
vagueness at the limits of types. Any means of discretely carving up
the property spaces of color, shape, and size has to involve grouping
into types what are in fact (subphenomenally) distinct shapes, sizes,
and colors, some of which may differ less from adjacent properties
grouped into other types. This makes it impossible always to determine
unique class membership; hence, finite differentiation is not
achieved.
 Pixellation alone, no matter the resolution, cannot account for
images displayed on LCD screens belonging to a digital scheme; digital
images qua images thus remain stubbornly analog. But perhaps
Goodman’s condition of finite differentiation can still be met
with a closer analysis of digital image technology. Current
technologies for sampling and instantiating light intensities group
objective colors well below the level of phenomenal
discrimination. For example, in the standard “Truecolor”
system, a display pixel has three 8-bit subpixels, each of which emits
a different visible wavelength with an intensity from a range of 256
values, yielding over 16 million objective colors. Such a large number
of available colors gives the impression of a color continuum when, in
fact, digital sampling technology has been used to carve up the
objective color space into a disjoint series of wavelength
intensities. On the one hand, from the fact that display pixels can be
lit at intensities between and indiscriminable from adjacent
discriminable intensities, it seems to follow finite differentiation is
defeated. On the other hand, precisely because digital technology
involves microtechnology and metrology for subphenomenal
discrimination between colors, the light intensity groupings that are
expressed numerically as red-blue-green triplets in a system like
Truecolor can be narrower than the objective color types that
contribute to the resultant image scheme. The key is keeping the
variations in the essentially analog properties of color, shape, and
size small enough so that they cannot accumulate to the point of
making a difference to image perception (Zeimbekis 2012). The types in
the scheme of digital images are technologically segmented, transitive
groupings of the same color-, shape-, and size-experiences.  The
carving out of a transitive sub-set of magnitudes has to occur
relative to the needs of the users of the system. In the case of
digital color, the types are classes of light intensities
sufficient to cause the same color experience for normal
human perceivers. The replicability of digital images is made possible
by the gap between the discriminatory limits of the human visual
system and the discriminatory limits of digital sampling
technology.
 Digital images can be replicated insofar as they are digital and
thus finitely differentiated. They are finitely differentiated because
they rely on subphenomenal sampling and display technology. In
practical terms, replication depends on the use of binary code, even
though this is not in fact what makes images qua images
digital. Of course binary code representations are themselves part of
a digital scheme. But the role of binary code in image-instantiation
is just one of consistent preservation; preservation for long enough
to permit reproduction. Despite the inherent replicability of digital
images, it does not appear to follow automatically that artworks
involving these images are multiples. 
 The SF MoMA is in possession of the original of Kalpakjian’s
work, Corridor; they control access to the video imagery. At
present, the work is not available to be viewed: it cannot be viewed
on-line as part of a digital archive or collection, nor is it
currently on view in the physical space of the museum. The image
sequence comprising the work could be multiply instantiated and widely
distributed, but in fact it is not. Similarly with Arcangel’s
work, Landscape Study #4: described as an installation, it is
to be exhibited in a physical gallery alongside an arrangement of
printed stills, with a television connected to a Nintendo
Entertainment System. Again, the image sequence displayed on the
television could be multiply instantiated and widely distributed, but
it is not. Clips and copies of the landscape imagery are available
on-line, but these are not taken to instantiate parts of the work
itself. By contrast, works of net art are instantiated whenever they
are accessed by someone on-line.
 There are many kinds of net art, including various forms of
experimental on-line literature, conceptual browser art, and works
drawing on software and computer gaming conventions. Extensive on-line
collections of visual and audiovisual net art are rigorously curated
and at the same time immediately accessible to ordinary Internet
users. The contrast is striking, between the conventions of access and
presentation, for works of net art and for works like those by
Kalpakjian and Arcangel. Perhaps a digital artwork comprising multiply
instantiable images need not itself be multiply instantiable. At this
point, in considering the factors determining the status of a digital
visual artwork, the philosophy of digital art joins an ongoing debate
about the ontology of art.
 On the question of whether artworks are all the same kind of thing
or many different kinds of things, ontological pluralism is often
taken to be implied by the primary role of the artist in
“sanctioning” features of his or her work (Irvin 2005,
2008; Thomasson 2010). A sanction can consist simply in a
self-professed artist painting a canvas, say, and handing it over to a
gallery with a title attached. The artist has sanctioned those
features of the work that make it a traditional painting. But what was
once largely implicit is now often explicit: many contemporary works
of art are defined by a set of instructions for their presentation
(e.g., aspect ratio, resolution). We can find similar examples of
non-digital works that are defined by a set of instructions such as
Felix Gonzalez-Torres’ Untitled (Portrait of Ross in L.A.) (1991),
which is given to a gallery to display by way of nothing other than a
set of instructions for constructing and maintaining a pile of
candies. Whether non-digital or digital, the instructions determine
what is part of the work and what is not, and whether the work is
singular or multiply instantiable. As a result, the instructions guide
appropriate interpretation of the work. On this view, ontology
precedes interpretation: we cannot properly and fully appreciate a
work, for the work that it is, without a prior determination of what
it comprises.  This is a matter of contention, however. On another way
of thinking, artworks just are objects of interpretation, and there is
no artwork prior to interpretation whose boundaries can be identified
before we begin interpretation (Davies 2004).
 The issue of the relation between ontology and interpretation is a
complex and difficult one, but progress likely can be made on the
issue through an examination of digital art practices. This is
particularly in light of the high degree of self-consciousness with
which many digital artists and digital art curators specify the
features of digital art works. It is common practice, for example,
when archiving net art, to have artists fill out a questionnaire in
order to specify which features of a work are crucial for its
preservation—whether features of appearance, timing and motion,
interactivity potentials and methods, linking to other sites, or
hardware and software. When a work of net art is individuated by its
imagery, the artist has chosen to make the inherent replicability of
digital imagery part of his or her work. That this is a choice is
suggested by the existence of singular works of digital visual art,
like the examples discussed above. If indeed the works by Kalpakjian
and Arcangel can function allographically—and certainly, this
question requires further investigation (see D’Cruz and Magnus
2014)—this would support a primary role for the artist’s
presentation instructions in fixing, not just the art form
(installation, movie, conceptual work, etc.) but the basic structure
of the work: for example, whether the work is singular and thus
identical with a certain kind of physical display or multiple with no
original display. Where interactive digital works are concerned,
individuation is determined by the algorithm. An algorithmic account
of interactive digital art suggests that, although the code is
important for adequate instantiation of the work, it is the algorithm
that specifies the crucial features of the work (Lopes 2010; Tavinor
2011; Moser 2018). Since the code is, ontologically speaking, less
relevant than the algorithm, this account also makes allowances for
the variability that may be found in the code when an instance of a
program is run on different kinds of devices. 
Reflection on the kinds and significance of choices available to an
artist contributes to a full appreciation of his or her work. For any
artwork, appreciation begins with recognition of its status as
a work, the product of artistic activity of some kind, and
thus something to be appreciated as the achievement of an artist or
group of artists. Most commonly, this achievement is understood in
terms of the aesthetically significant effects achieved by an artist
with certain kinds of tools and materials and in light of certain
appreciative conventions. In other words, the achievement is always
relative to an artistic medium. Returning to the case of an artist
choosing what to do about the inherent replicability of digital
imagery, another way of thinking about this choice is in terms of the
artist recognizing the limits and capacities of her chosen
medium. Images conveyed digitally are always replicable and so when an
artist aims to convey artistic content through digital imagery, she
either has to accept the inevitable multiplicity of her images or
resist the tendency of the medium and somehow specify the work’s
singularity in presentation. At a more fine-grained level, our
appreciation of particular effects—of color and composition,
expression, narrative structure, and so on—depends on the
effects themselves but also on background acknowledgment of their
degree of difficulty or innovation in the relevant medium. One worry
with digital art is that its production relies on the computer
automation of many of the tasks, both manual and cognitive,
traditionally involved in making art. The effects achieved by computer
automation cannot be assessed in the same way as those achieved by
traditional “hands-on” artistic methods. The terms of our
appreciation, therefore, need to be adjusted in the digital age. This
is certainly compatible with the continued relevance of medium-based
appreciation, as long as we can make sense of digital media as
artistic media (Binkley 1998). But there is a strong tendency in film
and media studies to assume that the medium has absolutely no role to
play in the appreciation of digital art.
 Summing up this view, it supposedly follows from the fact that
modern (digital) computers encode every kind of information in the
same way—i.e., as a sequence of binary digits—that an
artwork that crucially relies in its production on computer processing
is no longer defined by its mode of presentation, whether in images,
moving images, sound patterns, or text. A work’s display is
rendered merely contingent by the fact that it is generated from a
common code. By adding a particular instruction to the code sequence
specifying a work, imagery associated with that work could be
instantaneously converted into sounds or text, or just into different
imagery. This possibility alone supposedly renders meaningless all
talk of an artwork being in a particular medium and being properly
appreciated in terms of that medium (Kittler 1999; Doane
2007).
 Given the considerable effects of digital technology on artistic
production, it is perhaps understandable that some commentators are
inclined toward a radical overhauling of art theoretical concepts. But
their arguments in support of such an overhaul are, at best,
incomplete. We see this once we cite some important continuities
between ways of making and thinking about art in the analog age and in
the digital age. It has always been the case, for example, that
“any medium can be translated into any other” (Kittler
1999: 1): without using a computer, someone could manually devise a
set of rules (an algorithm) for the translation of image values, say,
into sounds or text. Moreover, a common storage and transmission means
for (moving) imagery and sound is not unique to digital technology: As
Doron Galili points out (2011), electronic image transmission going
back to the late nineteenth century—in other words, precursors
of the TV—relies on the conversion of both images and sound into
electronic pulses.
 Apart from these important continuities, the media
theorist’s inference from translatability to medium-free art
simply does not hold. That we could set about
“translating” the imagery of Citizen Kane into a
symphony does not mean that the original artwork lacks a medium; it is
a movie, after all, and as such, it has to be in the medium of moving
images. The symphonic translation of Citizen Kane is not the
same work as the 1941 movie by Orson Welles. This reminds us that, in
deciding whether there is a digital medium, we must not reduce the
medium to the artist’s materials, for it also matters how the
artist uses those materials. Nor must we limit the constitutive
materials of a medium to physical materials. The case of literature
shows that neither the materials of an art form, nor their modes of
manipulation, need be physical. The medium of literature is neither
paper and ink nor abstract lexical symbols, but letters and words used
in certain ways. There are, of course, many different ways of
physically storing and transmitting literary works, including by the
printed page, in audio recordings, and by memory (human or computer).
But from the fact that The Tale of Two Cities can be
preserved in many different formats, it does not follow that this
novel is any less decisively a novel and, as such, in the medium of
literature.
 Just as with a literary work, the preservation and transmission of
digital works in different formats depends on the use of a common
code, but a binary numeric code rather than a lexical one. If words
and their literary uses constitute the medium of literature, then
binary code, along with the information it implements, and its
artistic uses constitute the medium of digital art. This allows for
the possibility that the digital medium contains various sub-media, or
“nested” media (Gaut 2010). For instance, within the
medium of digital art, the medium of digital visual art comprises
artistic uses of computer code specifically to create images. In
technical terms, such uses can be referred to as (artistic)
“bitmapping”, given that a computer ultimately stores all
images (2D and 3D vector) as bitmaps, code sequences that specify the
integers assigned to light intensity measurements in a pixel grid. The
medium of bitmapping is thus distinguished by a kind of digital
technology, but the kind used to produce just those items belonging to
the traditional medium of images.
 Once the notion of digital media is revealed to be no more
confused or mysterious than the familiar notion of literary media, its
irreducible role in appreciation becomes apparent. To take just one
example, proper appreciation of movies in the digital age depends on
recognizing that digital movie-making tools do not just make
traditional movie-making easier; they also present new creative
possibilities and challenges. Given the maturity and mass-art status
of the cinematic art form, it is easy to take for granted the medium
of moving imagery; we may think we know precisely its limits, and we
may even think we have seen everything that can be done with it. The
digital medium is different, however, and digital cinema is in both
the medium of moving imagery and the digital medium.
 At first glance, it might seem odd to speak of
“challenges” or “limits” in relation to
digital processes, which allow for instantaneous and endless
modification with increasingly user-friendly applications and
devices. The high degree of automation in the process of capturing an
image with a digital video camera, along with increasingly high image
resolution and memory capacity, could make it seem as though digital
images are too easily achieved to be interesting. Then there are the
practically endless possibilities for “correcting” the
captured image with applications like Photoshop. Digital sound
recording is likewise increasingly automated, increasingly
fine-grained, and reliant on ever-larger computer memory
capacities. Modifying and mastering recorded sound with digital
editing software allows for an unlimited testing of options. In
digital movie editing, sequence changes are instantaneous and entirely
reversible—quite unlike when the editing process involved the
physical cutting and splicing of a film (image or sound)
strip. Digital tools thus allow moviemakers to focus (almost) purely
on the making of choices about the look and sound of the movie without
having to worry about the technical difficulty or finality of
implementation.
 Rather than dismissing all digital works as too easily achieved to
be interesting, medium-based appreciation requires that we consider
the digital on its own terms and allow for the possibility that
certain kinds of increased technical efficiency can bring new creative
risks. For example, even though committing to certain editorial
decisions does not entail irreversible alterations to a filmstrip,
arriving at those decisions involves sifting through and eliminating
far more options, a process which can easily become overwhelming and
therefore more error-ridden.  When we properly appreciate a digital
movie, therefore, part of what we need to appreciate is the
significance of any scene or sequence looking just the way it does
when it could have, so easily, looked so many other ways. Similarly,
when we properly appreciate an interactive digital installation or
videogame, we are, in part, appreciating certain representations,
functions, and capabilities of the input-output system that are made
possible by digital media. This is undeniably a form of medium-based
appreciation, but the medium to which we appeal is the digital medium
rather than traditional media. If the digital medium is computer code
used in certain ways—for example, to make moving images, then it
is only when we think of a digital movie as in this medium that we can
appreciate it as a particular response to the creative problem,
introduced by coding, of finalizing selections from a vast array of
equally and instantly available options.
 The case of digital cinema is perhaps a useful starting point for
work in the philosophy of digital art. Digital cinema is a multi-media
art form, after all, involving 2D and 3D moving images as well as
sound, and with the potential for robust interactivity, whereby
audiences select story events or otherwise modify a movie’s
screening in prescribed ways (Gaut 2010: 224–43). Many of the
digital tools developed by the movie and video game industries are now
available more widely to artists interested in making other forms of
digital art, including net art, digital sound installations, and
virtual reality art (Grau 2003; Chalmers 2017; Tavinor 2019). In terms
of how the use of these tools affects proper appreciation, there are
important continuities between the movie-making context and the wider
digital art world. In addition, the philosophy of film is a
well-established subfield in aesthetics, one that engages with both
film theory and cognitive science in order to explicate the nature of
film as a mass art (Thomson-Jones 2014, Other Internet Resources). For
many of the standard topics in the philosophy of film, interesting and
important questions arise when we extend the discussion from analog to
digital cinema.  There is a question, for example, about the kinds and
significance of realism that can be achieved with traditional
celluloid film as compared with manipulated digital imagery (Gaut
2010: 60–97). The philosophy of film can provide some of the
initial terms of analysis for artworks in a broad range of digital
media. At the same time, it is important to approach the digital arts
on their own terms under the assumption that the digital is an
artistically significant category.
More and more, contemporary artists are taking advantage of the
dynamic and responsive capabilities of digital media to make their art
interactive. The experimental online literature, conceptual browser
art, and videogames mentioned above require user interactivity, but
all to varying degrees. Therefore, if interactivity plays a
distinctive role in the digital arts, there are good reasons to
analyse the nature of these works more deeply.
Not all digital works are interactive, and not all interactive works
are digital. However, since computers are inherently interactive, much
of the early philosophical literature on interactivity arose from the
emergence of computer art (also see Smuts 2009; Lopes 2001; Saltz
1997). The distinctive character of interactive digital art is best
considered in tandem with the work’s ontology.
All interactive artworks, digital and non-digital, have dual
ontological structures that consist of properties belonging to the
work and properties that belong to the work’s instances. So far,
this is not so different than performance works like music and dance,
or even digital photographs that can be multiply instantiated. Where
digitally interactive works are concerned, certain properties of the
work are borne by the work’s algorithm, whereas properties of
the instances are brought about by the user’s interaction.
Given that appreciation of certain artworks is embedded in a
user’s interactivity, philosophers are then tasked with defining
interactive art in a manner that eliminates unsanctioned actions from
constituting a kind of interactive work. One could imagine, for
example, someone hacking into a digital file to manipulate a digital
image, thus generating new instance-properties of the work. That, and
more benign actions such as reading chapters of, let us say, a
digitized copy of The Brothers Karamazov in random order may
change the properties of the work, but such activities are not
prescribed. This, once again, underscores the importance of the
artist’s sanction. Bearing this in mind and relating it to
computer art, Dominic Lopes offers the following definition, “A
work of art is interactive just in case it prescribes
that the actions of its users help generate its
display” (Lopes 2010:36, original emphasis). Similarly, Berys
Gaut’s definition states that “a work is interactive just
in case it authorizes that its audience’s actions partly
determine its instances and their features” (Gaut 2010: 143,
original emphasis). In specifying certain actions as prescribed and
authorized, these often-cited definitions restrict the kinds of works
that ought or ought not be considered candidates for an interactive
art category.
The capability of a work to generate instance-properties from the
user’s actions is recognized within philosophical aesthetics as
a distinctive feature of interactive artworks. However, given the
ontological similarities between performance works and interactive
ones, it follows that one may question the specific roles of
‘user’ and ‘audience’ in the definitions presented
above. Lopes clarifies that,
A person plays the role of a user in generating a display of a work
only if he or she (1) generates the display, (2) exploring the work,
so that (3) an audience attends to the work partly by attending to his
or her doing (1) and (2) (Lopes 2010: 82).
Users explore a work by generating the display via a computational
process. For Lopes, the user and audience can be the same, but they
need not be. For philosophers of art, the above conception falls just
shy of fully excluding performance works from a category of
interactive art (Gaut 2010; Kania 2018). Afterall, it can be argued
that a musician similarly engages in (1), (2), and (3) when she
performs a specific work. If this is the case, the terms
‘user’ and ‘audience’ are not always
synonymous, unless it is stipulated that for interactive works the
identity of users and audiences are identical. This is atypical of
non-interactive performance works where a performer plays for
an audience, beyond him or herself. This distinctive user-audience
relationship also suggests that adequate appreciation of a work is not
granted by merely observing a user interact with it (Kania 2018:
188).
The aforementioned words ‘instance’ and
‘display’ (used interchangeably here) can be applied to
both interactive and non-interactive works characterized by a two-level
ontology. Nevertheless, there are significant metaphysical
differences between works like an interactive digital installation or
videogame and others like a digital photograph. One of the more
significant distinctions has to do with the structure of the displays;
displays of interactive works are variable in ways the displays of
non-interactive works are not (Lopes 2010). More precisely stated, the
displays of interactive works are considered variable if they have a
succession of states or they are repeatable (Lopes 2010: 37–38). To
characterize the first kind of variability, consider the following
description of the digital installation “Universe of Water
Particles on a Rock where People Gather” (henceforth, where
People Gather) by TeamLab:
The Rock where People Gather is reproduced in a virtual
three-dimensional space. Water is simulated to fall onto the rock, and
the flow of the water draws the shape of the waterfall. The water is
represented by a continuum of numerous water particles and the
interaction between the particles is then calculated. Lines are drawn
in relation to the behavior of the water particles. The lines are then
“flattened” using what TeamLab considers to be
ultrasubjective space.
When a person stands on the rock or touches the waterfall, they too
become like a rock that changes the flow of water. The flow of water
continues to transform in real time due to the interaction of
people. Previous visual states can never be replicated, and will never
reoccur (TeamLab 2018).
Users interact with the work to generate variations in the succession
of displays, but none of the previous states are repeatable. Compare
this with the second kind of display variability. Digital works that
are networked, such as most net art and videogames, are repeatable
because they can be multiply accessed and instantiated by different
users, in different places, and all at once; variations are generated
when the work is repeated. Although repeatable digital works are
possible due to digital media’s unique transmissible nature,
more needs to be said about how this trait distinguishes interactive
digital works from non-interactive digital images.
If the displays of digital photographs vary from instance to instance
due to different settings on different devices (e.g., brightness,
resolution, intensity), then the aesthetic and structural differences
of all works with multiple displays need to be considered in greater
detail. Consider, for example, that with many videogames, players can
choose which route to take, quests to accept, characters to
kill or save, personalities to adopt, and the like. These sorts of
in-game player choices are not merely features that generate varying
resolutions and the like: the interactivity shapes the stories that
unfold, which can be reshaped during another playing of the same game
for very different outcomes. In these cases, strong variability occurs
because the works consist of differing multiple displays
(Preston 2014). For clarification, Dominic Preston says,
for any given artwork, each possible set of structural and aesthetic
properties F is a display type of that artwork.  (Preston 2014:
271, original emphasis).
From the above, we can briefly infer the following scenarios: digital
photographs are ontologically similar to plays and music because they
consist of one display type, but multiple displays given subtle
variances between the particular tokens. Works that instance a
succession of states such as “where People Gather” consist
of multiple potential display types but where only one display is
instantiated at any given time. Now, compare such works with those
like videogames and comparable interactive digital examples that
present us with strong degrees of display variability to such an
extent that we might re-classify the work’s genre depending upon the
outcomes. For example, one playthrough might end in a tragedy but,
given a player’s different choices, end in a non-tragedy at
another time, to list just one example. Under a Prestonian view of
display types, these sorts of works consist of both multiple display
types and multiple displays, which means users will generate one of the
possible display types each time they repeat the work. While this
concept is mostly applicable to videogames, one could imagine
interactive digital installations or net art with similar degrees of
variability.
 It is important to reiterate that the strong interactivity just
described is not distinctively digital. Whilst interactivity is a
standard feature of many contemporary digital works, and the
responsiveness of such works is remarkable, non-digital appreciative
categories can also exploit a similar degree of display
variability. For example, literature, theater, and tabletop role
playing games can be strongly interactive similarly to many digital
artworks. What is unique about all such works are the ways in which
things like immersion, agency, identity, and fictions, to list a few,
are impacted by the interactivity, due to the user’s role in the
work (for more, see Robinson & Tavinor 2018; Patridge 2017; Meskin
& Robson 2016).
Although they have only begun to scratch the surface, philosophers of
art have done a good deal to stress the significance of both digital
media and interactivity in the arts, as well as their ongoing
influence in changing philosophical conceptions of art and artistic
practices. However, further investigation is needed on topics such as
forms of realism distinctive of digital image-based art, digital
conceptual art, art categories and media distinctions in relation to
digital art, and the impact of digital technology on practices of
making, displaying, and appreciating art. Given that digital media
connect physical locations to virtual ones, it is also worth exploring
the ways in which the connectivity and mobility of digital art
challenge our traditional notions of site-specificity and
location-specific art. On a related note are the social (and perhaps
political) implications of digital art, which are also of growing
interest.