I think, therefore, that it is not possible to set
theoretical limits to the power of the State to legislate against
immorality. It is not possible to settle in advance exceptions to the
general rule or to define inflexibly areas of morality into which the
law is in no circumstances to be allowed to enter.
Law has limits. That is obvious. Legal officials at various times
and in various places have objectives and they need to find the best
way of achieving them. Some might seek to end casual street violence,
so impose stiff legal penalties on anyone caught engaging in such
conduct. Some might seek to end demonstrable harms caused by alcohol or
drugs through prohibiting their sale and consumption. Others might seek
to meet housing needs by imposing minimum standards for accommodation
on those who rent out their properties. Though they seek the best means
of reaching their goals, they might fail and the failure could be
dramatic.
In all the examples mentioned above the aims sought may not
materialize. The stiff legal penalties imposed by those seeking to
curtail street violence may lead only to an increase in violence as
perpetrators reason they may as well be hung for a sheep as a
lamb. The prohibition of alcohol consumption may merely drive
consumption underground, failing in its purpose and succeeding only in
adding to the stock of societal harms as further criminality incident
on the prohibition grows. Property owners, rather than forking out for
legally mandated improvements to their rental property, may simply
take their properties off the market, resulting in fewer affordable
properties available for rental and fewer needs met. In each case the
law has overreached itself. Having observed the results of their
efforts, the legal officials may conclude that it would have been
better to have used other means or maybe even to have done nothing, to
have tolerated the former level of harm, since their means of putting
it to an end did not solve the problem aimed at, but exacerbated
it. In pursuing the best result as they see it, they have achieved
only the third-best and now the problem might be the embarrassing one
of getting back to second-best.
These are familiar stories in skeletal form and illustrate the
commonplace that the methods the law might use can simply misfire.
There are limits to what the law can achieve because some of its tools
are blunt. Some tools do not work, others are counter-productive; some
exacerbate the problem they were supposed to resolve. Knowing what
works and what does not and what will be counterproductive is
important knowledge indeed. Again, enforcement of a desired policy may
be prohibitively expensive and divert resources away from still more
important goals a state may wish to pursue. A state may also need to
consider in some contexts the psychology of its citizens. Perhaps
there is something in the Freudian notion of ‘pale
criminality’: ‘the condition of one who commits a crime
because of, rather than in spite of, its forbidden status’
(Scheffler 1992,
 pp. 70-71).[1]
 There may also be what David Lewis calls a ‘mixture
problem.’ Lewis had in mind in particular John Stuart Mill's
point that truth and error may be found combined in one package deal,
so that there is no way of suppressing the error without suppressing
truth as well (Lewis 2000, p. 164). But the point can be made more
general: there may be no way for a state to suppress a greatly
undesired activity without also disturbing a greatly desired
 activity.[2]
 The law in short is limited by the tools it has at its disposal and
the effects that these tools will have. We might call these
‘means-ends limits’ or ‘practical limits’. Law
can coerce, it can make rules, it can adjudicate, but one can only go
so far with these tools (Fuller 1978). Law must seek to do the best
possible with the tools available.
Law does have limits. It has at least the means-ends or practical
limits that have just been discussed. But this is too uncontroversial
to be a particularly interesting claim and it gives nothing of the
flavour of what has made this topic such a controversial one. We turn
to that in a moment. It is important to bear such practical limits in
mind nevertheless, since one possible way to delineate the limits of
the law is that such practical limits are the only limits
that States must negotiate in its legislative and more broadly legal
behaviour, beyond the platitude that it must act in a morally
acceptable way. In this sense the immorality of an action or value of
the goal to be achieved are none of them sufficient of themselves for
state coercion. The controversy begins when the question of
principled limits is raised. Means-ends or practical limits
apply just as much to evil and unjustified regimes as they do to
legitimate ones, albeit in different ways. If we assume that through
the instruments of its law a state has or ought to have the formal aim
of legitimate government, we should ask whether there are any
principled limits to the law? Lord Devlin in the quotation at the
start of the essay denies that there are any such limits. As we shall
see, answering the challenge to articulate principled limits is a far
from straightforward task.
Much of the debate has revolved around the place of moral reasoning in
justifying state action, most commonly in justifying the use of
coercion. Everyone agrees that the immorality of an action is not a
sufficient reason for state coercion since as we have seen there are
means-ends limits and practical limits. But there is little more
common ground. Must the state abstain from considering and acting upon
certain kinds of consideration in order to rise above the sectarian
adherence or invocation of one controversial understanding of what
makes for a good life? I shall suggest that the central tension is
over the recourse that a state should have to moral premises for which
truth is claimed. If one denies that there is anything in principle to
restrain a state's recourse to moral truth in the passing of the law,
there is the problem of disagreement. Disagreement can be widespread
and intractable. So what should a state do in the here-and-now where
there is no consensus, even among reasonable people, about what ought
to be done? Can it simply enforce what it takes, controversially, to
be the right solution? On the other hand if one tries to restrain in
principle the State's recourse to moral argument, ruling out of
consideration certain kinds of argument based on moral truth, the
challenge is to do this on a satisfying basis that is not merely
ad hoc.
Far and away the best known proposal for a principled limit to the
law is the ‘harm principle’ of John Stuart Mill:
Mill thought that the principle was ultimately based upon
 utility[3]—in
 the ‘largest sense, grounded on the permanent interests of man
as a progressive being.’ (Mill 1993, p. 79; Gray 1996, p. 6). He
did not think the principle applied to persons living in communities
that had not yet progressed to the point of ‘civilisation’
(Mill 1993, p.79). In communities in which there had been sufficient
progress towards civilisation, it is of great importance to protect
and promote liberty of action for all. States in general should
acknowledge the importance of such liberty of action and should limit
their law accordingly. Interference with liberty of action, especially
by the use of power or coercion, required a special sort of
justification: that it was needed to prevent harm to
others. To coerce on the basis that one wishes to avoid harm to others
is of course to coerce on a moral ground. Mill thought that no other
moral ground would be good enough.
This view has been highly influential. There does indeed seem on the
face of it to be something special about harm. The point of describing
an outcome as harmful, it has been thought by many, is to say that
‘it is deleterious from the point of view of a very wide range
of conceptions of the good’ (Barry 1995, pp. 87-88; Scanlon
1975, pp. 655-659). For Mill, harm is uniquely powerful and to many
subsequent proponents of ‘the harm principle,’ as we shall
see, it has been considered especially powerful if not quite unique.
Harm to others, for Mill, is to be contrasted with
offence to others, with harm to the person to be coerced
herself, who normally consents to the harm, and with the
bare (harmless) immorality of the conduct she would
otherwise seek to engage in. Mill had in mind in particular the
security interests and autonomy interests of persons. The State may
legitimately stop A from beating up B, even though this limits his
freedom of action, because this prevents harm to B, it protects his
interest in security. And it may stop A from stealing from B, as it
protects inter alia B's freedom to dispose of his property as
he wishes. But the State oversteps its proper limits on this view if
it purports to stop A smashing up his own property; or to protect C
from the offence she will take knowing that A is doing this.
In more recent times Joel Feinberg has sought to vindicate a broadly
Millian understanding of the limits of the law. He proposes a
different version of the harm principle, thus:
In comparison with Mill's principle this seems rather weak.  Harm to
others, Mill booms, is the ‘only purpose’ that
could license State coercion; while Feinberg's formulation claims more
gently that it gives the State ‘a good reason’ to
coerce. His claim that harm to others merely furnishes ‘a good
reason’ allows him to invoke another ‘good reason’
for state coercion—‘the offence principle.’
Despite the fact that Mill claimed his Harm Principle was ‘one
very simple principle’ which excludes offence from its purview,
Feinberg in fact thinks there is support to be found for his own
‘Offense Principle’ in Mill's text, though, whether or not
that is true, his deeper claim is that his principle is worthy of
support. So if ‘harm to others’ and ‘offence to
others’ can each constitute ‘a good reason’ for
state coercion, how many more ‘good reasons’ are there, in
Feinberg's view, for state coercion? He proposes a broad answer over
the course of his four volume study of the limits of the law, albeit
with some trepidation: it is, quite simply, none—there are no
other good reasons for State coercion. The ‘liberal
position’ he suggests demands of the State that it should
recognize as legitimate only the two grounds for coercion just
mentioned. If there is no harm to others and no offence to others to
counter, there must be no coercion. Many other ‘good
reasons’ have been proposed for state coercion, he acknowledges,
but though they are reasons for coercion, they are not good enough or
legitimate reasons. In this way Feinberg professes his fidelity to the
animating spirit of Mill's On Liberty.
Feinberg to some extent echoes Mill in his understanding of harm in
relation to the ‘interests’ of persons. He does not, to be
sure, adopt Mill's emphasis on ‘the permanent interests of man
as a progressive being.’ He understands a harmed
condition as one in which there is a ‘set-back to
interests;’ and there is a good reason for coercion if the
set-back is wrongful, not simply a setback of the order of
losing a professional tennis competition or being driven out of
business by a rival's superior product. The two sorts of reason that
Feinberg is keenest to exclude, on the other hand, are ‘Legal
Paternalism’ and ‘Legal Moralism’. The former he
describes thus:
Important as ‘Legal Paternalism’ is to the question of the
limits of the law, I shall say very little about it as it has an entry
of its own elsewhere in this Encyclopaedia (G Dworkin, 2002).  Suffice
it to say here that Feinberg is not equally hostile to all forms of
legal paternalism. He distinguishes ‘soft paternalism’
from ‘hard paternalism’. In many cases the forcible
implementation of a person's will can accord with his personal
autonomy. Feinberg describes such cases as involving ‘soft
paternalism’ and contrasts them with those involving ‘hard
paternalism’ (Feinberg 1986, p. 26). It is the
‘hard’ variety that Feinberg sets himself against, the
forcible coercion of a person against her will for her own good. This
he rules out on grounds of legitimacy. In fact he does not believe
that ‘soft’ paternalism is really paternalism at all,
properly called and so stops short of adding it to his list of
potentially legitimating reasons for legal coercion.
Feinberg is as keen to deny the legitimacy of ‘Legal
Moralism’ as a legitimating ground as he is (hard)
paternalism.
In the next section we will be centrally concerned with this as a
rival to the Harm Principle.
The introduction of ‘Offence’ and certain kinds of
paternalism as potentially legitimating grounds, makes it a little
misleading to speak of the ‘Harm Principle’ as one
principle shared by all the leading thinkers associated with the
principle. I shall continue to do so merely as shorthand. The table
below illustrates some divergence in the views of the leading thinkers
associated with the Harm Principle as to the proper limits of the legal
coercion. No one of them has an account with exactly the same
conclusions as any of the others.
I will later come to another strand of thinking about the limits of
the law: that the law must remain neutral between different
understandings of the nature of the good. It must coerce, when it
coerces, neutrally between such understandings.
H.L.A Hart began his essay entitled ‘Social Solidarity and the
Enforcement of Morality’ in this way:
Having gone to the trouble to state the thesis in question—that
the State should see to it that people live good lives—and to
cite two heavyweights in its support, Hart's final sentence comes as
something of a surprise. He took the view, it would seem, that there
was little to be said for a view of morality according to which it
awaited discovery by reason or disclosure through revelation. So much
so that it was not worthy of serious discussion. It is contrasted with
‘man-made’ morality which Hart does consider worth
discussing in the present context.
The reason-based, revelation-based and the man-made versions of the
view all tend to arouse suspicion. The moralist has been branded a
kill-joy and, more darkly, an inquisitor. Shakespeare's Sir Toby Belch
makes the first sort of complaint: ‘Dost thou think that because
thou art virtuous there shall be no more cakes and ale?’
(Twelfth Night Act II, Scene III). Harmless activities which
give pleasure or are otherwise valued by some are thought fair game by
the moralist because immoral or vice-ridden. Arthur Miller's image of
the crucible is an apt characterisation of the second sort of
suspicion: a crucible is ‘a vessel in which metals are heated to
extreme temperatures, melted down, and purified’ (Miller 1952,
Singer and Singer 2005, p. 568). The moralist, on this view, is the
inquisitor apt to see those who fail to conform to the ‘right
ideas’ as impure and prepared to go to great lengths—to
heat to extreme temperatures—in order to ‘purify’
such persons.
The specific version of Legal Moralism that Hart was opposing was that
of Lord Devlin. Lord Devlin, at the time an English High Court judge,
was reacting to a government report recommending the legalisation of
homosexual behaviour between consenting adults in private. The report,
known as the ‘Wolfendon Report’, concluded that there
‘must remain a realm of private morality and immorality which
is, in brief and crude terms, not the law's business’
(‘Wolfendon Report’ 1957, para 61).  Devlin's main point
was to argue that this specific theoretical conclusion did not stand
up. Mill of course believed that harmless behaviour was not the law's
business, whether or not it could be styled immoral, and Hart's
purpose in challenging Devlin was to reassert a modified version of
Mill's view.
Mill's canonical formulation of his Harm Principle begins as we have
seen with the following words: ‘the sole end for which mankind
are warranted, individually or collectively, in interfering with the
liberty of action of any of their number is self-protection.’
Devlin, while of course implacably opposed to how Mill was to continue
the passage, seems to agree. ‘Self protection,’ for him,
stretches to the idea of self-protection on the part of the state. In
Devlin's view a society is in part constituted by its morality and it
therefore has a right to defend itself against any attack on that
morality.
A society needs its morality as it needs a government and it is
therefore, for the sake of self protection, entitled to ‘use the
law to preserve morality in the same way as it uses it to safeguard
anything else that is essential to its existence’ (Devlin 1965,
p. 11). For Devlin, then, to say, as the Wolfendon Committee does,
that there is an area of the morality and immorality that is not the
law's business is not just ‘crude’ and
‘brief’; it is downright mistaken. The law must do what it
has to do to exact the price of society, which is the protection of
the morality of that society.
It was said earlier that Devlin's moralism is in Hart's terms of the
‘man-made’ variety. He believed that the invisible bonds
of common thought in a given society are not the same in different
societies. Some societies abhor polygamy for example and others find
it a worthy form of social organisation. In different ways both
monogamy and polygamy can partly constitute the invisible bonds of
common thought in different societies. For Devlin, it follows that in
one society the law can be used to enforce monogamy against polygamy
and in the other it can be used to enforce polygamy against monogamy,
should the latter threaten the former in either case.  In
industrialized societies, Devlin tells us, it is generally true that
monogamy ‘is built into the house in which we live and could not
be removed without bringing it down’ (Devlin, 1965, p. 10). But
this is merely a contingent truth and if our houses were built
differently the content of the law to be enforced could legitimately
be the opposite of what it is. Morality is, for Devlin,
conventional.
The relevant sense of morality for Devlin is relative. One is to
consider the views of the ordinary person living in that society to
determine the content of the morality; in Devlin's English terms, it
is ‘the juryman’ whose views one should ask for, or the
‘man on the Clapham omnibus’. In enforcing the criminal
law ‘there must be toleration of the maximum individual freedom
that is consistent with the integrity of society.’ (Devlin 1965,
p. 16). Devlin famously says that the limits of toleration are reached
not simply when a majority dislikes a practice; ‘no society, he
says, ‘can do without intolerance, indignation and disgust, they
are the forces behind the moral law, and indeed it can be argued that
if they or something like them are not present, the feelings of
society cannot be weighty enough to deprive the individual of freedom
of choice.’ (Devlin 1965, p. 17). In the late 1950s in English
society, it was at least arguable in Devlin's view that there was
enough intolerance, indignation and disgust to justify the criminal
law prohibition against homosexual behaviour between consenting
adults.
There is nothing to be said in favour of Devlin's construal of
homosexuality as ‘addictive’ or a ‘miserable way of
life’ (Devlin 1965, p. v), but he himself does not rest much
theoretical weight on this construal himself: what matters to him
theoretically appears to be the beliefs of a population, backed up by
the emotion of disgust and a degree of cool reflection. Presumably, if
alive today, Devlin would argue on the same premises for the
illegitimacy of the criminalisation of homosexual behaviour
between consenting adults. In English society today none of the
mainstream political parties takes the view of homosexuality Devlin
thought widespread in the 1950s, or, more pertinently in Devlinite
terms, believes that there are votes to be gained from advocating such
a view.
But it is this very aspect of his thought which makes his view
untenable. Bernard Williams has shown that the tempting line of
thought of the sort adopted by Devlin is often underlain by an
unstable amalgam of relative and non-relative views.
But the conclusion does not follow. It may be true that if certain
steps are not taken, the society will disintegrate. Apartheid in South
Africa disintegrated. What if by a more sustained enforcement of its
central racist elements it had managed to persist longer? Would this
continued existence be underwritten by a moral right? Does anyone now
owe the society the duty to restore the system or did such a duty lie
for a period after its disintegration? The suggestions are absurd. The
point of course is that some societies are so lacking in legitimacy
that it may be emphatically for the best that they
disintegrate. Devlin is in error when he says ‘What is important
is not the quality of the creed but the strength of the belief in
it. (Devlin 1965, p.  114)’
According to Ronald Dworkin what is wrong with the Devlin thesis is
that it misidentifies what a moral argument is. We do not argue
morally, he says, when we prejudge, when we parrot, when we
rationalize and when we merely emote. Certainly one will occasionally
overhear exchanges with genuine moral content, some of them robust, if
one takes Devlin's advice and catches the Clapham omnibus, but one
will also get served up as much prejudgment, as many rationalizations
and parrotings, and as much mere emotion. Devlin gives us nothing to
help us discriminate: it all counts equally for him. Not everybody
accepts in turn Dworkin's claim that emotional responses cannot be
moral responses; but Devlin has nevertheless picked on an
emotion—disgust—that is particularly susceptible to
distortion (cf. Nussbaum 2004). It is clear that in arguing for
‘the enforcement of morality’ Devlin has not focussed on
moral argument at all.
Devlin's account unacceptably implies that a corrupt and immoral
society has as much right to perpetuate itself as a decent society,
provided it is able to integrate the society. He also as we have just
seen operates with an unsatisfactory understanding of what morality
is. This leaves the possibility of another account of legal moralism
that does not make these errors and sees morality aright as
reason-based, but which also holds to Devlin's claim quoted right at
the beginning of the paper that ‘there is no area of morality
into which the law is under no circumstances allowed to
enter.’ His own account fails to give any clear route, but his
challenge to those who propose the harm principle and similar
limitation principles is to show an adequate basis for insulating
certain domains of morality from the state in the passing of its
law.
The most influential recent defence of the ‘harm
principle’—from a theorist with a reason-sensitive account
of morality—is that of Joseph Raz (Raz,
 1986).[5]
 I shall come in a moment to Raz's proposed basis for the harm
principle. But first a word about Mill's original grounding of the
principle. Mill declared utility to be the ultimate appeal on all
ethical questions. But given some other things that Mill says about
it, it is initially puzzling why he should think that utility gives
any support to the harm principle.  For he also held of the principle
of utility that ‘actions are right in proportion as they tend to
promote happiness, wrong as they tend to produce the reverse of
happiness’(Mill 1993 p.7). This last formulation seems to
counsel states to keep their options open in their
lawmaking. ‘Do what you can to reverse unhappiness,’ the
advice seems to be, ‘and do what you can to promote
happiness.’ ‘Coerce to prevent harm to others if that will
reverse unhappiness; coerce for some other end if that will equally do
the trick.’ But as we have just seen, coercion to prevent
harmless wrongdoing is ruled out by Mill, irrespective of whether such
an action is the State's best bet for reversing unhappiness.  Never
mind if that harmless wrong makes everyone miserable; never mind if
coercing those who perpetuate it would take away the misery: the State
must not coerce and the misery must remain. Has confusion here wrought
Mill's masterpiece?
Not on certain accounts. For all this tension points to is the need
for more care in stating the correct basis of Mill's
utilitarianism. John Gray argues, with great subtlety that cannot be
reproduced here, that what is needed is a form of indirect
utilitarianism or indirect consequentialism (Gray 1996). Acting always
to promote happiness can be self-defeating and although Mill does say,
as we have seen, ‘actions are right in proportion as
they tend to promote happiness,’ this remark cannot be taken
literally, according to Gray, when read with the remainder of the
Millian corpus. What Mill recommends, in Gray's interpretation, is
that the successful maximization of happiness must proceed with a ban
in certain contexts on its direct pursuit: in particular the state
must respect the harm principle instead of appealing directly to the
principle of utility (Gray 1996 p. 136). That way happiness, which in
substance turns out to require a considerable measure of liberty for
persons, will be maximized the better. Gray himself, however, in the
second edition of his book, comes to the conclusion that the
reconciliation cannot succeed. He gives many arguments. One of them
claims that the proposed reconciliation cannot give liberty strong
enough priority:
In general and in a variety of ways, the principle of liberty sailing
under the protection of the harm principle and the principle of
utility end up after all at war with one another, and Utility simply
cannot be guaranteed to underwrite as strong a principle of liberty as
the harm principle.
Raz does not follow Mill's utilitarian path to the defence of the harm
principle. Adopting a value-pluralist notion of morality, he argues in
short that even though:
On this argument even if the seemingly very strong concession in (1)
is made to the legal moralist, the issue is very far from concluded.
For principled limits can be generated out of the means that the law
proposes to achieve its aims. (2), not (1), leads Raz to endorse the
Harm Principle. At first sight it seems strange that a proponent of
the claim in (1) can also be a proponent of the harm principle. For is
not the principle precisely aimed at imposing principled
limits on the law, ruling out justifications based on the goodness or
worthiness of options? How can this be reconciled with the claim that
there are no principled limits to the pursuit of moral goals
on the part of the state?
Before addressing this, a few more words are in order about the deep
structure of Raz's ‘perfectionism.’ To reiterate as far as
(1) is concerned, Raz's view of morality is light years from that of
Lord Devlin: it is emphatically reason-based. There is no hint of
Devlin's idea that morality is constituted simply by the moral
beliefs, feelings of disgust etc of a given society. Morality is
reason-based, but Raz's concern is limited to states with
‘autonomy-respecting cultures’ and with what it is to live
a good life in such societies. The key, as the phrase
‘autonomy-respecting culture’ would suggest, is autonomy.
It is a state's primary duty in the relevant kind of society to
promote, protect and foster the autonomy of all citizens. This
requires furnishing all with an ‘adequate range of valuable
options.’ But the qualification ‘valuable’ is of
fundamental importance to the account. The state need not lift a
finger in defence of worthless options; it has no duty of, say,
neutrality to keep itself above the fray between the options that
people desire to pursue. Raz is clear, moreover, that the autonomy
principle ‘permits and even requires governments to create
morally valuable opportunities, and to eliminate repugnant
ones’ (Raz 1986, p. 417).
This account, to my mind, is highly plausible. But in the light of it,
how does the harm principle get a look in? Why should coercion not be
used to eliminate repugnant options? There are certainly bound to be
what we earlier called ‘means-ends’ or
‘practical’ problems in using coercion to eliminate a
repugnant option. The use of coercion may be prohibitively expensive,
for example, denting seriously the resources a state might otherwise
use to promote other valuable options. There is likely to be a
formidable ‘mixture’ problem: eliminating what is
worthless by coercive means may increase the chance that what is of
genuine value will be dragged down along with it. Repugnant options
are unlikely to subsist in society entirely isolated from other
options that are not worthless. But let us imagine that this has all
been taken into account and whatever price has to be paid is not
adjudged excessively high. Is there an argument to show why a state
may still not use coercion to suppress the worthless option that goes
beyond arguments from ‘practical’ or
‘means-ends’ limits? Let us look in detail at Raz's
argument. His central claim is that the harm principle is defensible
on the basis of the principle of autonomy for one simple reason:
‘the means used, coercive interference, violates the autonomy of
the victim.’ He explains:
Both of these points require some attention. I will begin with the
second point for this way around the first point will emerge more
clearly. Is, then, the use of coercion a ‘global and
indiscriminate invasion of autonomy? There is no doubt whatsoever that
sometimes it is. ‘Depriving a person of opportunities or of the
ability to use them is’, as Raz says, ‘a way of causing
him harm.’ Again ‘frustrating [a person's] pursuit of
projects and relationships he has set upon’ can cause harm (Raz
1986, p. 413). The most common context for the invocation of the harm
principle is the criminal law. Much behaviour that is criminalized is
done under the threat of imprisonment and imprisonment can cut off a
very large range of options; or it can reduce them
considerably by various forms of disruption or destruction: of family
life, deep personal relations, work opportunities, pursuit of valuable
outdoor activities, political participation and so on.
This is correct and important to stress. However, it is also clear
there are many more forms of coercion in regular use to back up
criminal proscriptions than simple imprisonment: fines, community
service orders and electronic tagging orders are three examples. Even
if one restricts oneself to the criminal law, there are many methods
short of imprisonment which can affect options, but which may not
leave the convicted criminal short of an adequate range of
valuable options. The methods may well be to varying degrees coercive,
but the assault on autonomy will not in most be total or
near-total.
Take the last mentioned example of the previous paragraph: the
mandatory wearing of electronic tagging devices. Jermaine Pennant, an
England Under-21 soccer international, was included in Birmingham's
starting line-up to face Spurs in a game in the top division of the
English football league: the stuff that most English lads' dreams are
made of! Only while Pennant was playing he was in the process of
serving a sentence following his conviction for a drink-driving
offence. Part of his sentence required him to wear an electronic
tag. The referee decided the tagging device was safe so long as it was
suitably padded under his sock. ‘He just wants to get on with
his life again and go out and play football’ his manager Steve
Bruce announced. By all appearances he was doing an excellent job of
it, notwithstanding the cloud he was under. As he was running around
the pitch, we clearly would not say that he had an inadequate range of
valuable options, while he was at the same time serving out a criminal
 sentence.[6]
Similarly, fining is an extremely common form of criminal penalty.
Robert Adams in developing a view of the limits of the law stressing,
like Raz, the evils of coercion cites the following case:
I believe it would be wrong to subject the possession and use of
tobacco (where it does not foul the air for others) to serious
criminal penalties, because of the evils of coercion and
punishment. Other governmental action to discourage smoking or make it
more difficult, without coercion, perhaps by raising taxes on tobacco
products, seems entirely appropriate’ (Adams 1999, p. 327).
A number of arguments could be made in support of Adams' view
for the specific conclusion that one should not criminalize the
possession of tobacco by those who choose to smoke it, despite the
demonstrable harm to which smoking leads. But the threat to the
adequacy of such a person's valuable options seems not to be one of
them. Imagine a state that taxes smoking heavily—an entirely
appropriate course of action in Adams' view that discourages
something of little value without a heavy coercive bludgeon. Imagine
next that it changes tack and criminalizes possession and use of
tobacco. It will therefore stop taxing tobacco. One could also
imagine, finally, that the fines imposed add up to much less money to
be paid per annum, even by the most recalcitrant of offenders, than
was paid formerly by anyone in taxes. The stigma attaching to such a
crime is unlikely to be much higher than for a parking offence, so
again the conclusion seems to be that much can be criminalized without
any serious assault on the adequacy of a person's options. In fact
sometimes criminal penalties might affect options less than taxation
(cf. Alexander 2003).
Perhaps what this shows is that one of the key functions of the harm
principle needs to be restricted in scope. Perhaps it should be
thought of in this context not as a principle of criminalization or
even of fixing the law's limits in general, but as a principle
governing the appropriate use of
 imprisonment?[7]
 Such a principle could be coupled with a principle of precaution in
relation to the less coercive sanctions mentioned above, which would
require serious scrutiny in the use of these sanctions precisely due
to the presence to some extent of coercion in them. This would,
however, be to cut down severely the job description of the sort of
limitation principle that has been sought by means of the harm
principle. Not only would it no longer be a general principle limiting
the scope of the law; it would be dramatically curtailed in relation
to the criminal law as well.
But such a conclusion would be premature. Raz is well aware that
coercion will not always impinge seriously on a person's
autonomy. This is where his other argument comes in, based on the
condition of independence. We should now consider whether this
argument can make up the slack. We have already stated that for Raz
autonomy is to be understood as an adequate range of valuable
options. That one has such a range of options is not yet sufficient,
in his view, to establish that one is autonomous: one must also
satisfy the condition of independence. This is best explained with the
conceivable, if practically unlikely, possibility of the willing
slave: a slave who engages in valuable activity and would choose to do
whatever he actually does under the command of the slave-owner, even
if not so commanded. Such a person is not independent and so is not
autonomous, irrespective of the adequacy of his valuable options.
Coercion, the second argument runs, violates the condition of
independence and expresses a relation of domination and an attitude of
disrespect for the coerced individual. I will suggest that the claim
turns on an argument about social meanings and the argument may be
difficult to contain in a way that would be necessary to support the
harm principle. In detail the argument is this:
For present purposes the essential steps of the argument seem to be
these:
Not all coercion is a global assault on autonomy—it is
true—but there is ample support for a principled limit to the
law based on coercion, because a social convention takes up the slack
in cases in which coercion is not a serious threat to autonomy. This,
then, is the argument. Less serious forms of coercion disrespect
persons and express contempt for them. Presumably, to return to the
criminalization of smoking example, it would not be enough, on this
argument, to point to the fact that there may be no diminution in the
adequacy of valuable options available to the smoker if the conclusion
is to be that criminal fines should legitimately be imposed.
Criminalizing the smoking would express disrespect or contempt for the
smoker, not because his options are in fact left inadequate, but
because a convention has formed giving coercion this sort of
 meaning.[8]
One worry with this argument is that it may be difficult to determine
what the authority of such a convention would be, especially as it may
not prove easy to determine the difference in a given case between an
exception to the convention and an application of it. In a given
context, the question that needs to be answered is: are we confronted
with a case in which the meaning of the convention condemns a token
action that does not contain the original consequence that
gave meaning to the convention, viz. the reduction of the adequacy of
valuable options, or simply with an exception to the convention.
Another problem, on which I will focus more, is what I will call the
problem of discrimination. If there exist such conventions based on
natural facts that invest acts of coercion with such meaning, what
will guarantee that such conventions only countenance coercion when
used against harmful behaviour, not when used against
(harmless) immoral or worthless behaviour? Can the
coercion-based account be discriminating enough to do the job for
which it is intended? After considering whether the convention-based
argument just sketched can deal satisfactorily with the discrimination
problem, I go on to consider whether a different argument, which I
will call ‘the asymmetry’ argument, can also help to
deflect the discrimination problem away from the perfectionist defence
of the harm principle.
To explore the first, convention-based argument, let us consider a
thesis of Meir Dan-Cohen's, with a similar structure to that of Raz,
but with a very different, indeed inconsistent, conclusion.
Dan-Cohen's focus is on the criminal law rather than the law in
general, but his concern is to argue for a replacement of the harm
principle with the dignity principle. The main goal of the
criminal law, he proposes, ‘is to defend the unique moral worth
of every human being’ (Dan-Cohen 2002, p. 150). Dignity demands
‘that our actions, practices, and institutions convey an
attitude of respect to people.’ (Dan-Cohen 2002, p. 161). He
also alludes to the ‘happy slave’ thought-experiment,
arguing that it makes compelling a strong notion of dignity that is
independent of autonomy and welfare and prior to
both. ‘If,’ he argues, ‘two people can enjoy in fact
the same level of welfare and exercise the same degree of choice, yet
one of them be a slave while the other is not,’ the evil of
slavery must ultimately not lie in the ideas of autonomy or welfare
(Dan-Cohen 2002, pp. 156-157).  Slavery is evil even in such a case
because of its violation of dignity. The lesson of the happy slave
hypothetical for Raz is that independence is part and parcel of
autonomy; for Dan-Cohen its lesson is different: it points to a
dignity principle altogether independent of autonomy.
After citing with approval the Kantian imperative that persons must be
treated as ends and not merely as means, Dan-Cohen continues:
The argument has a similar structure to Raz's second argument
above. Slavery tends to inflict suffering, harm and
disregard’ and this fact has become the basis of a social
convention which loads slavery with symbolic meaning expressing
indignity, even (sometimes) where there is no suffering, harm
or disregard. As Dan-Cohen summarizes his point: ‘Once an
action-type has acquired a symbolic significance by virtue of the
disrespect it typically displays, its tokens will possess that
significance and communicate the same content even if the reason does
not apply to them.’ (Dan-Cohen 2002, p. 162).
In State v Brown for example, the assumed facts were that the
defendant beat his wife when she drank alcohol, doing so at her prior
request, as she thought this would be the most effective way to cure
her severe alcoholism. The defendant was convicted of an assault
offence and rightly so, suggests Dan-Cohen. But the (assumed) justice
of the conviction can be explained satisfactorily neither by recourse
to the principle of autonomy (as the victim consented to the
beatings), nor to the principle of welfare (if this really was the
best way to end the blight that alcoholism had become on Mrs Brown's
life it would arguably enhance her welfare). There is legitimate
coercion here, Dan-Cohen argues; the harm principle cannot explain
why, and so much the worse for the harm principle.
Raz and Dan-Cohen's arguments are similar in structure. If they are
combined we can claim that coercion, violence and slavery are very
commonly associated with severe setbacks to the autonomy and welfare
of persons, but not invariably so. Where they are not, their
condemnation is still secure on the basis of the conventional
understanding of the nature of those ideas. Perhaps neither argument
is correct—as we have already mentioned, it may not be clear how
such conventions gain moral authority for one thing. Or perhaps
Dan-Cohen's argument is wrong and Raz's is correct: their similarity,
perhaps, more apparent than real. The matter cannot be settled
here. But on the face of it, if there is plausibility in both
arguments, then the law may legitimately coerce to prevent harm
and it may legitimately coerce to prevent, in some cases,
(harmless) indignity. If so, the perfectionist argument does not
succeed in restricting the limits of the law to harm-based
considerations.
What, then, of the second way of negotiating the discrimination
problem, of explaining why the evil of coercion itself rules out
coercion on the basis of (harmless) immoralities, but not on the basis
of harm? According to the asymmetry argument: coercing to prevent harm
leads to autonomy-gain, coercing to prevent (harmless) immorality
leads to autonomy-loss; and that explains why legal coercion should be
limited by harm-based considerations. It is for the sake of
autonomy.
The argument depends on a particular understanding of harm as
autonomy. One often voiced complaint against the harm principle is
that the idea of harm is something of a black box into which anything
one objects to could potentially be placed. Seeing harm in terms of
autonomy, as Raz does, gives the idea content and does so on the basis
of an obviously highly significant moral concept. The argument is
this.  Coercing persons out of harmful behaviour,
viz. autonomy-damaging, is at least for the sake of autonomy in the
end. But coercing persons out of behaviour that is (harmlessly)
worthless gives one no autonomy-gain.  There is no autonomy-loss to be
sure, in doing away with worthless behaviour, but that is not the
point: one must factor in the autonomy-loss involved in the coercion
itself. So coercing against harmful behaviour, if done properly,
leaves one with an autonomy-gain on balance. But coercing against
(harmless) immorality gives one an autonomy-loss, due to the coercion
itself, which puts the account in debit, with no positive gain in
autonomy to counterbalance the loss.  Unlike coercion against harmful
behaviour, autonomy simply loses. In Raz's words:
But is there such an asymmetry? It might be true that ‘the
availability of repugnant options, and even their free pursuit by
individuals, does not detract from their autonomy,’ but this is
largely an empirical matter. Prior to looking and seeing it is not
clear that this is so. Could it not be that the availability of some
repugnant options does detract from the autonomy of some
people? The image of the tree surgeon comes to mind. Some branches are
lopped off by the tree surgeon for the health of the tree. Taking off
a branch gives the tree a better chance to flourish. Could there not
be some worthless options in society that are like one of the branches
on the tree? If one assumes for the sake of argument that gambling for
non-trivial amounts is a worthless option and that some who pursue
this option will do so to the detriment of what is valuable and what
they care about most, their families, jobs and long-term
hobbies. Might it not be that the existence of the option detracts
from the chances of many to achieve success in these valuable
pursuits? I actually suspect, to be sure, that any attempt to coerce
gambling along these lines would have many negative side-effects and
for this reason should not be pursued in practice, but this would
largely be due to practical and means-ends limits rather than any
matter of principle. Serious gambling probably does get in the way of
valuable options of many and does not enhance the value of the life of
anyone. Perhaps this judgement is wrong. But it would in any case be a
surprising empirical result to discover that autonomy could never be
enhanced by the societal equivalent of tree surgery in this case or in
any other. It is not implausible to think that the availability of
some repugnant options just makes the autonomous life
 harder.[9]
 If this is the case, the asymmetry argument seems not to
work. Perhaps coercion to prevent harmless immorality may lead to an
autonomy gain, just as it does, all going correctly, when the aim is
to prevent harm.
Raz's account I think succeeds in establishing the very great
significance of autonomy in political morality. As far as the limits
of the law is concerned, it establishes that very great caution is in
order in the use of imprisonment, given what this can do to the
adequacy of the prisoner's valuable options. Caution, too is important
over lesser degrees of coercion. It does not, however, seem able to
support the harm principle for the coercion based considerations do
not neatly settle only on harm-based considerations.
The perfectionist, as we have seen, denies there is anything in the
nature of morality itself that should impose principled limits on the
law's pursuit of moral goals: such limits are thought rather to get in
via the back door, through reflection on the nature of coercion.  It
was the purpose of the last section to examine the latter view.  Many,
however, challenge the former view and assert there is something in
the nature of human morality itself that should lead us to conclude
that principled limits to the law do exist. Most notably, it is said,
the fact of persistent moral disagreement should push us in this
direction. As Rawls has argued, it is not reasonable to think that
moral disagreement will disappear in the medium- or even the
long-term.  And much of this disagreement cannot simply be blamed on
the bloody-mindedness of some or on those biased in favour of
themselves, their families or groups. If it could, perhaps their views
might be safely ignored. Some of the disagreement is based, rather, on
differences over what evidence is appropriate, how much weight should
be given to the evidence where it can be agreed upon, how priorities
and choices should be made among the vast range of possible values and
so on. Rawls describes factors such as these as ‘the burdens of
judgment’ (Rawls 1993, 56-57). This sort of disagreement is not
unreasonable and perhaps morality itself may mandate a self-denying
ordinance against coercing persons out of their (possibly mistaken)
reasonable views.
Earlier another strand of thinking about the limits of the law, that
the law must remain neutral between different understandings of the
nature of the good, was briefly noted. The state, according to this
view, may coerce only if it does so neutrally between such
understandings. The broad intuition is that the right is prior to the
good. The state need not be neutral as between matters of the right,
on the one hand, and the good, on the other, between murderers and
charity workers (Mulhall and Swift 1996, pp. 29-30). It must be
neutral between different views of what makes life good or worthwhile,
between, say, charity workers and opera lovers.
In general the kind of neutrality most often supported by the
proponents of this view is neutrality of justification,
rather than neutrality of effect. Neutrality of justification
implies that the justification for laws must not involve reference to
judgements about the relative merits of those different ways of life
(Mulhall and Swift 1996, p. 30). For example, imagine one group who
love the outdoors and another who love television. Assume the
establishment of national parks would make the outdoor life easier to
enjoy and a life of television watching more difficult, since the
beautiful trees would mess up the broadcasts. According to neutrality
of effect, the state must not establish the parks unless it can find a
way of improving the broadcasts to the appropriate degree as well. To
help the hearty outdoor types, the neutrality-of-effect lawmaker must
help the couch potatoes too. According to neutrality of justification,
on the other hand, it would not matter in itself that television
watching would get less enjoyable. Provided the justification for this
is not to favour the outdoor enthusiasts or shake up the lazy
television watchers a bit, but is instead, say, to provide for clean
air, it would be perfectly legitimate. Setting up the national parks
is no violation of the principles held dear by the
neutrality-of-justification lawmaker (Brighouse 2000, p. 7). This can
make state support for high art such as opera difficult to justify, a
problem not faced by the perfectionist (Dworkin 1985; Mulhall and
Swift 1996, pp. 302-308).
In Thomas Nagel's view a state's law has to do better than just tell
those with certain conceptions of the good that they are mistaken;
something more must be offered them relating, he argues, to the point
of view of such persons. According to him we must support:
This argument is slightly different from the argument of neutrality,
though they are close
 cousins.[10]
 If we assume:
Nevertheless:
There can in Nagel's view be values that, while true or valid, are
inadmissible from the point of view of the coercee. He has produced a
number of arguments for this position (Nagel
 1987)[11].
 Recently he has stressed the Kantian imperative against treating
people as a means only (Nagel 1991). Can a principled limit to the law
emerge from such considerations?
It has been pointed out many times by Kantians that treating someone
as a means only is not the same as treating someone as a means. One
can take a taxi even though that involves treating the taxi-driver as
a means to one's ends, but the driver must not be treated as a
means only. However:
Nagel is not here appealing in any straightforward way to the consent
of the coercee. For one cannot simply allow that the withholding by
someone of their actual consent should block legal enforcement, no
matter what the basis of the view is in reason. On his view it might
be permissible to force someone to serve an end if that person can be
given adequate reason to share the end, even if he does not
accept it. Giving someone adequate reason then is not a matter of
simply deferring to the views of others.
A major worry here is that this has not advanced us at all. The idea
is that the law should not use controversial premises about the good
in order to make law. Take for example a lawmaker, perhaps religious,
who adopts the view of a small minority that personhood begins from
the moment of conception and makes a law declaring abortion illegal on
this basis. This is precisely the sort of move that Nagel and Rawls
want to rule out. A controversial view such as this one has, for them,
no place in making law for the public backed up by
coercion. Irrespective of whether or not it is true metaphysically
that personhood begins from the moment of conception, a view of this
sort should be firmly locked out.
Rawls thus argues for a ‘duly qualified right’ on the part
of a woman ‘to decide whether or not to end her pregnancy during
the first trimester.’(Rawls 1993, p. 243). In his view
‘any comprehensive doctrine that leads to a balance of political
values excluding that duly qualified right in the first trimester is
to that extent unreasonable.’ The lawmaker in our example would
therefore, on this argument, be acting illegitimately and overstepping
the proper limits of the law. But why is this? What sorts of argument
could possibly be raised against the lawmaker? First, one might say
his legislation is inadmissible because it is not based on public
reason.  Secondly, one might say it is illegitimate because it
concerns the good and not the right. Third, one might say the argument
is inadequate because it is a highly controversial view, believed only
by a small number and rejected by most. Finally—and this clearly
is the line that Rawls and Nagel wish to avoid—one might simply
say that it is untrue to say that personhood begins at conception. Let
us take these considerations in turn.
As for the first, there does not seem to be any basis for thinking
that reasons cannot be adduced for this rule that could be presented
publicly, combined with the claim that they are reasons all should
share. Robert George for one spends some time arguing this, claiming
that from the point of conception there is ‘a genetically
complete organism directed towards its own functioning.’ (George
1999, pp. 209-213). As for the second point, the argument about
abortion also shows the difficulty of trying to separate out arguments
about ‘the good’ from arguments about ‘the
right.’ For if George is right that abortion is murder,
it cannot be relegated to a question of the right and excluded from
political justification. As we saw when discussing neutrality, no
neutralist argues the law need be neutral about what is right. A
group, call them the ‘evolutionary exterminators,’ could
not be heard by the neutralist to argue that their desire to kill all
homeless people should be treated in the same way as the desires of
bird-watchers. Bird watchers, the neutralist would say, do not violate
rights; ‘evolutionary exterminators’ do, or would if
allowed their way. This still leaves open the question of what counts
as a rights violation. If abortion is murder that
would.
The third point is no help either. It would no doubt be tempting to
say to our imagined lawmaker: ‘You might call abortion murder
and you might think you've based your view on good reasons. But
look around you; virtually everyone thinks you are wrong. So you must
restrict your views only to those others who share your views, not
impose them on everyone else.’ The lawmaker would have an easy
response to this, namely that the argument amounts to little more than
head-counting. It seems to be drifting back into Lord Devlin's
territory, assimilating legal morality to moral beliefs and gut
reactions. This, as we have seen, will not do: if most people believed
slavery permissible, that would not make it
 so.[12]
 None of these arguments do anything to show that our imaginary
legislator is acting illegitimately. George's argument is perfectly
public, it can be placed in terms of the right rather than the good;
qua argument against homicide, it violates no neutrality
constraint. And it is no objection to say that the view is a minority
one. It is only the fourth argument that would show the illegitimacy
of the imaginary legislator's actions. For what it is worth I believe
George's arguments are unconvincing and could be shown to be mistaken
simply on the basis of substantive counter-arguments to his own. But,
of course, even if that is right, it is the very kind of argument that
Rawls and Nagel want excluded from the debate, so could not help them,
on their premises, to establish the conclusion of illegitimacy they
seek to establish. The best arguments against George's position would
be ruled out of court.
Nagel's argument claims that one treats a person as a means only if
one does not give him adequate reason to share the end you are
coercing him into. One starts to wonder if any work is being
done by anything other than the idea of ‘adequate
reason’. Coerce where you have adequate reason! If the idea of
‘a reason he can share’ becomes a reason he
ought to share, then there may be nothing to this latter idea
other than a useful heuristic device. The idea of ‘sharing
reasons’ simply drops out of the picture. John Finnis, like
Robert George a well known proponent of Natural Law theory, rather
disarmingly announces that ‘Natural Law theory is nothing other
than the account of all the reasons-for-action which people ought to
be able to accept, precisely because these are good, valid and sound
as reasons.’ (Finnis 1996, pp. 10-11). Now clearly if a
comprehensive doctrine such as natural law theory with its robust
conception of the good life can pass the test, the test is likely to
be a blunt instrument. It will need to show it can avoid ruling out
too little to become a live option.
For all the fatal deficiencies of Lord Devlin's own view of the limits
of the law, his challenge is extremely difficult to meet.  Principled
limits beyond means-ends or practical limits are elusive and hard to
justify. The central dilemma revolves around the question of recourse
on the part of law-makers to moral truth. Should this be unlimited
except by practical and means-ends limits and the considerable
internal limits that a genuine sensitivity to the truth brings? In
this case it will be difficult to dispel the notion that law-makers
are being cut too much slack and that some persons are being specially
blessed by the law in comparison to others: for disagreement on
matters of what is genuinely demanded by truth and morality is showing
no sign of going away. This may merely be a facet of the human
condition and in fighting it we may be tilting at
 windmills.[13]
On the other hand, is the better view that law-makers should, as a
matter of principle, be denied recourse to certain moral premises
based on the good life, not because the premises are false, but in an
attempt to dissipate the feeling that partisan conceptions of the
good, held by some only, are being especially favoured? Here one soon
runs into the problem that in eschewing full recourse to the truth in
political argument, one is apt to come up against some awkward
opponents, espousing sometimes unpalatable views, who are happy to
render their arguments public, happy to make them subject to
‘reasonable rejectability’ and happiest of all to assert
that their principles cannot be reasonably rejected. The
debate is set to continue for some time yet.