A tort suit enables the victim of a wrong to seek a remedy from the
person who injured her. Unlike a criminal case, which is initiated and
managed by the state, a tort suit is prosecuted by the victim or the
victim's estate (or survivors). Moreover, a successful tort suit
results in a judgment of liability, rather than a sentence of
punishment. Such a judgment normally requires the defendant to
compensate the plaintiff financially. In principle, an award
of compensatory damages shifts all of the plaintiff's legally
cognizable costs to the defendant. (It is controversial whether tort
really lives up to this principle in practice.) On rare occasions, a
plaintiff may also be awarded punitive damages, which go
beyond what it necessary for compensation. In other cases, a plaintiff
may obtain an injunction: a court order preventing the
defendant from injuring her or from invading her rights (perhaps
harmlessly). An example of the former would be awarding a
plaintiff (or a class of plaintiffs) an injunction against a polluting
manufacturer. An example of the latter would be awarding a plaintiff
an injunction against a harmless trespass.
“Tort” means “wrong” and it is natural to
think that wrongs are the domain of tort law. But tort law does not
concern itself with all the wrongs that people do. Some wrongs are
addressed by the criminal law, not private law (some are addressed by
both). And not every wrong that falls within the province of private
law falls within tort law. A breach of contract, for example, is not
traditionally regarded as a tort.  More generally, tort law does not
provide a remedy for every wrong that a victim might suffer. Rather,
tort law offers relief for a canonical set of wrongs, or torts. These
include assault, battery, defamation, and trespass, among many
others.
Rather than focusing on categories of torts, it is more fruitful to
begin by conceptualizing torts in terms of the elements that a
plaintiff must prove in order to obtain a remedy. For example, a
defendant commits battery if she acts, intending to cause harmful or
offensive contact with the plaintiff, and such contact in fact results
from her act. If a plaintiff meets the burden of establishing these
elements, then he or she has established a prima facie case
for battery. A defendant who commits a battery so defined might
nevertheless escape liability by asserting a defense. For example, a
defendant in a battery action might avoid liability by showing that
she acted in self-defense or that the plaintiff consented to the
otherwise unlawful touching.
Many think of battery and trespass as the paradigmatic private
wrongs and thus as paradigmatic torts. Conceiving of torts in terms of
the paradigmatic case invites the thought that tort law proceeds by
identifying wrongs that share some important normative characteristics
with either trespass or battery—for example, that a tort
involves an intention to disregard certain protected rights of others;
and perhaps that the fundamental rights protected by torts are those
pertaining to the security of person and property. It also invites the
thought that the aim or purpose of tort law is to redress those
wrongs. In such a view, the core concepts of tort law appear to be
“rights”, “wrongs” and “redress”
and the dual goals of tort theory are to identify the principle that
connects the category of wrongs that torts addresses and to justify
the distinctive mode(s) of redress for wrongs that tort law adopts. We
will explore this approach to tort law in some detail in what
follows.
While not denying or downplaying the significance of the concept of
wrong to understanding tort law, other theorists are inclined to
express the centrality of it in torts in terms of a more generic
formulation: namely, the duty each us has in undertaking various
activities not to injure those our undertakings put at risk. On this
view, the core duty in torts is not to injure others (either full stop
or unjustifiably).
Such a general approach to conceptualizing tort law has many
appealing features, not the least of which is the fact that in the
modern context tort suits typically begin with the plaintiff’s
allegation that the defendant wronged her by breaching a duty not to
injure her. In addition, this alternative view captures the centrality
of the notion of a wrong without inviting the idea that the wrongs
that fall within the domain of tort law must exhibit some of the
normatively significant features of battery or trespass. Beyond that,
the alternative view introduces the notion of injury and invites the
idea that the concern of tort law is to address injuries in some way
or other; either, for example, by addressing their costs or the
suffering that normally attends them. Thus, while the notion of a
wrong remains important to our understanding of tort law, the
alternative view invites the thought that the underlying concern of
tort law is to address the costs, suffering, or more generally, the
losses that victims suffer as a result.
As helpful as the focus on injuries is, it is important to see that
the concept of an injury cannot, by itself, play the foundational role
in a theory of tort law. After all, the law does not recognize just
any injury as the basis of a claim in tort. If you beat me in tennis
or in competition for the affections of another, I may well be
injured. Yet I have no claim in tort to repair my bruised ego or
broken heart. Since you lack a legal duty not to beat me in
tennis or in competition for the affections of another, you do not act
tortiously when you succeed at my expense. Thus, even if we take tort
to be an institution that addresses injuries, will still stand in need
of an account of just which injuries it is wrong to cause.
Tort law distinguishes between two general classes of duties not to
injure: (i) duties not to injure “full stop” and (ii)
duties not to injure negligently. When you engage in an activity the
law regards as extremely hazardous (e.g., blasting with dynamite), you
are subject to a duty of the first sort—a duty not to injure
“full stop”. When you engage in more common activities
(e.g., driving), you are subject to a duty of the second sort—a
duty not to injure negligently. Your conduct is governed by strict
liability when you are subject to a duty not to injure
“full stop”. Your conduct is governed by fault
liability when you are subject to a duty not to injure
negligently or carelessly.
It is worth exploring the difference between strict liability and
fault liability in greater detail, since the development of both tort
law and tort theory is in part a story about the choice between
them.
Strict liability. Suppose I make a mess on my property and
present you with the bill for cleaning it up. Absent some prior
agreement, this would seem rather odd. It is my mess, after all, not
yours. Now suppose that instead of making a mess on my property and
presenting you with the bill, I make a mess on your property and walk
away, claiming that the mess is your problem. If it was inappropriate
of me to present you with the bill for the mess I made on my property,
it hardly seems that I have improved matters making my mess on your
property. I have a duty to clean up my messes and the existence of
this duty does not appear to depend on how hard I have tried not to
make a mess in the first place. In other words, it does not depend on
whether I made the mess absentmindedly or carelessly. All that matters
is that it is my mess; that is to say, I made it. And if I make it, it is
mine to clean. This is a helpful way of capturing the underlying
intuition expressed by the rule of strict liability.
Fault liability. Unless we stay home all day, we are each
bound to make the occasional mess in one another's life. This being
so, it would be unreasonable of me to demand that you never make any
kind of mess in my life. What I can reasonably demand is that you take
my interests into account and moderate your behavior accordingly. In
particular, I can reasonably demand that you take ordinary care (i.e.,
the care that a reasonable person would take) not to injure me. In
other words, I can reasonably demand that you refrain from negligently
injuring me. This is a useful way of capturing the underlying
intuition expressed by the rule of fault liability.
People sometimes misunderstand the nature of fault liability in
tort because they misunderstand the nature of strict liability in
tort. And they misunderstand the nature of strict liability in tort
because their inclination is to model it on the notion of strict
liability in the criminal law, with which many theorists and
laypersons alike are more familiar. Strict liability in the criminal
law is a form of responsibility without culpability. If you are
strictly liable for a criminal offense, you are punishable for the
offense even if your conduct is not morally blameworthy. The standard
way to express this is to say that strict liability in criminal law is
not defeasible by the kind of excuse one would offer in order to
defeat an attribution of culpability or blameworthy (e.g.,
duress).
If we conceived similarly of strict liability in tort, we would
then understand fault liability, incorrectly, as liability
that is defeasible by excuses that establish the absence of
culpability, in other words, as liability (only) for one's culpable
conduct. But you can be at fault in tort even if your conduct is not
morally blameworthy. Under a regime of fault liability, you are liable
for injuries you cause while failing to comport yourself as
a reasonable person would in the circumstances. It won't get
you off the hook that you are not a reasonable person, or that could
not come up to that standard in this case. Nor will it matter that
your failure to come up to that standard is a failure for which you
are utterly blameless. Fault liability is not defeasible by excuses
that establish the absence of culpability.
This raises the question of how to distinguish fault liability from
strict liability in tort law, since neither is defeasible by a showing
of blamelessness. The difference between the two regimes of liability
is that only under fault can you avoid liability if you comport
yourself as a reasonable person—in other words, if you act
reasonably or justifiably—whereas you remain subject to strict
liability even if you had sufficient reason for what you did.  Thus,
fault liability, but not strict liability, can be undermined
by justification.
Some find it helpful to distinguish between strict liability and
fault liability in terms of the content of the underlying
legal duty. In the case of blasting—an activity traditionally
governed by strict liability—the blaster has a
duty not-to-injure-by-blasting. In the case of
driving—an activity traditionally governed by fault
liability—the driver has a
duty not-to-injure-by-driving-negligently. No matter how much
care he takes, the blaster fails to discharge his duty whenever his
blasting is causally connected in the right way to another’s
injury or damage to someone’s property. In contrast, the driver
fails to discharge his duty only when he injures someone
negligently.
Analytical theories seek to interpret and explain
tort law. More specifically, they aim (i) to identify the concepts
that figure centrally in tort's substantive norms and structural
features (the latter being the procedures and mechanisms by which the
institution of tort law enforces its substantive norms) and (ii) to
explain how tort's substantive norms and structural features are
related. Key substantive norms include the wrongs that tort recognizes
and the remedies that it provides for those wrongs. Key structural
features include the fact that tort suits are brought by the victim
rather than by the state and the fact that such suits are
“bilateral”: victims (plaintiffs) sue their putative
injurers instead of drawing on a common pool of resources, as in New
Zealand’s accident compensation scheme (which was adopted as a
substitute for tort law).
Normative theories seek to justify or reform tort
law.  Justificatory theories aim to provide tort with a normative
grounding, often by defending the values tort embodies or the goals it
aims to achieve. Reformist theories seek to improve tort law,
say, by recommending changes that would bring the institution closer
in line with its core values or would help it do a better job of
achieving its goals.
The distinction between analytical and normative theories is not
exclusive. On the contrary, few analytical theories are altogether
devoid of normative elements and no normative theory is ever devoid of
analytical elements. Analytical theories frequently invoke concepts
that are fundamentally normative, since such theories (following
Dworkin) often seek to portray tort's substantive norms and structural
features in their “best light”. All the more so, normative
theories are always at least partly analytical, since such theories
must either provide or presuppose some account of the institution they
seek to justify or reform.
Along another axis, we can distinguish between theories of tort
based on whether they are instrumental or non-instrumental. (This
distinction cuts across the distinction between the analytical and the
normative.) Instrumental theories regard tort's essential features as
explicable in terms of an overarching purpose, typically, the
remediation of some social problem, such as the problem of allocating
the costs of life's misfortunes. These theories do not always agree on
the specific principles that govern (or ought to govern) the
allocation of costs. This is in part because they disagree about
the further purposes that tort serves (or ought to serve) in
allocating costs. Some theorists believe that tort aims (or ought to
aim) at allocating costs efficiently. Others believe that
tort aims (or ought to aim) at allocating costs fairly. Both
sorts of theorist treat tort instrumentally, as a tool for solving a
social problem. In contrast, non-instrumental theorists do not see
tort primarily as responding to a social problem. They believe that
tort is better understood as a way of giving expression to certain
moral or political principles.
For many decades now, an economic analysis of tort law has been
ascendant, especially (but not only) in American law schools. Rather
than surveying the range of economic theories, this entry focuses in
depth on what is arguably the dominant strain of economic analysis:
optimal deterrence theory. Proponents of this approach, like economic
analysts more generally, see tort liability primarily as a mode of
allocating the costs of accidents (though an economic analysis can be
extended to cover intentional torts, like assault and battery, too).
Their principal claim is that tort should be understood as aiming to
minimize the sum of the costs of accidents and the costs of avoiding
them. Since shifting costs is itself costly, economic analysis begins
with the following question: when is it worth incurring costs in order
to shift costs? The obvious answer is that it makes sense to incur
costs in order to reduce costs only when doing so is itself cost
justified: that is, when the cost incurred are less than the costs
avoided. This leads to the well known economic view that the goal of
tort law is to minimize the sum of the costs of accidents and the
costs of avoiding them—so-called, optimal deterrence.
Taking the relevant social problem to be the problem of costly
accidents, economic analysts deem the paradigmatic tort to be that
of negligence. The law holds a person to be negligent when
she imposes an unreasonable risk of injury on another. Imposing an
unreasonable risk of injury is in turn a matter of failing to take
precautions that a reasonable person would take. But which precautions
would a reasonable person take?
Economists offer the following answer: a precaution is reasonable
when it is rational; a precaution is rational when it
is cost-justified; and a precaution is cost-justified when
the cost of the precaution is less than the expected injury (the
latter being the cost of the anticipated injury discounted by the
probability of the injury's occurrence). Imagine that you are engaged
in an activity that carries a benefit of $100 and an expected injury
of $90. Now suppose that the only way to prevent the injury is to stop
the activity. Other things being equal, you would be irrational to
forego a benefit of $100 in order to avoid a cost of $90. Foregoing
the benefit would not be a cost-justified precaution; you’d
rather incur the injury and keep the $10 profit from the activity. Now
imagine that things are the other way around: the benefit is $90 and
the expected injury is $100. Under these circumstances, foregoing the
benefit would be a cost-justified precaution. You would be
irrational not to forego the benefit, since you would have to
incur a $10 loss to engage in the activity. This is the calculation
that a rational agent would make when the costs and benefits are his
alone.
As economists see things, the same standard of rationality should
apply when the benefit and the injury accrue to different
parties. That is because the rationality of an action depends of the
expected costs and benefits and not on their distribution. If I can
spare you some injury by taking precautions less costly than your
expected injury, my failure to take such precautions would be
irrational, hence, unreasonable and thus negligent. Should you be
injured as a result of my failure to take those precautions, then I
would be at fault for your loss; and under the rule of fault
liability, I would be required to make good your costs. By the same
token, if I can spare you some injury only by taking precautions
costlier than your expected injury, my failure to take these
precautions is not irrational, hence, not negligent. If the injury is
governed by the rule of fault liability, its costs will be yours, not
mine, to bear.
The rule of fault liability has much to recommend it from an
economic point of view. In particular, it induces all rational
persons—injurers and victims alike—to take all and only
cost-justified precautions. If all potential injurers behave
rationally, losses will always lie where they fall: with victims.
Rational victims will therefore approach all accidents assuming that
they will have to bear the costs. But then they, too, will take all
and only cost-justified precautions. So the rule of fault liability is
economically efficient: it produces an optimal level of
risk-taking.
If fault liability is efficient, what are we to make of strict
liability? Can it be efficient as well? Since someone facing strict
liability will bear the costs of his conduct whether or not he is at
fault, one might think that a potential defendant under a regime of
strict liability will have no incentive to invest in precautions. This
is wrong. Suppose that I am strictly liable for some costs that I
impose on you—costs of $100. Suppose further that by taking $90
worth of precautions I can eliminate the chance of my imposing these
costs on you. What is it rational for me to do? The answer is obvious.
It is rational for me to invest in $90 worth of precautions, since I
come out $10 ahead if I prevent the injury and thereby avoid liability
for it. So even under a regime of strict liability, potential
defendants have an incentive to take cost-justified precautions. And
they won’t take any precautions that are not cost-justified. If
it would cost $110 to take a precaution that would eliminate the
chance that you would suffer an injury with an expected cost of $100,
I would prefer to pay for your injury than take the precaution. So
strict liability does not induce extra care. Under a regime of strict
liability, potential defendants have an incentive to take all
cost-justified precautions—just as they do under fault
liability.
In a crucial respect, the plight of the defendant (injurer) under
strict liability is identical to that of the plaintiff (victim) under
fault liability. If we assume that the injurer is rational, we can
infer that under fault liability he will take all cost-justified
precautions. As a result, any losses that his conduct turns out to
cause will lie where they fall: with the victim. This means that we
can characterize the victim as herself facing a sort of strict
liability, namely, strict liability for losses not caused by another's
fault.  (Strictly speaking, this is a misnomer, since one cannot be
liable to oneself, but the analogy is nevertheless helpful.) The
victim cannot shift these losses to the injurer because the injurer
has insulated himself from liability by taking cost-justified
precautions. So the rational victim will ask herself the following
question: which is lower—the cost of taking precautions or the
expected cost of incurring an injury? She will take precautions when
(and only when) taking precautions is cheaper than remaining
vulnerable to injury. The upshot is that strict liability and fault liability both induce
rational persons to take all and only cost-justified precautions. If
efficiency requires that individuals take all and only cost-justified
precautions, then strict and fault liability can both be
efficient.
If both rules can be efficient, why might we prefer one to the
other? Strict liability and fault liability have different
distributional consequences. A rule of strict liability makes the
costs of the defendant's conduct higher than a rule of fault liability
would; he pays for the injuries he causes whether or not he has taken
reasonable care to avoid them. A rule of fault liability raises the
costs of those who are injured relative to strict liability, since
they are compensated for fewer accidents. So if we have an independent
reason to privilege the plaintiff's activity over the defendant's (or
vice versa)—maybe we want less of the first activity to occur or
we feel that people should have to pay a steeper price for engaging in
it—then we have an independent reason to prefer strict liability
to fault liability (or vice versa).
There is no doubt that economic analysis offers valuable insight
into tort law's capacity to increase overall safety and reduce the
costs of misfortune or bad luck. For all its insight, however,
economic analysis is vulnerable to difficult objections. These
objections speak both to tort's substantive norms and to its
structural features. We discuss some of the most significant
objections here.
Many theorists believe that economic analysis offers a questionable
interpretation of the legal duty to behave reasonably. In
characterizing negligence as the failure to take cost-justified
precautions, economic analysis identifies reasonable
risk-taking with rational risk taking. Economic analysis
effectively invites us to determine what risks it would be acceptable
for a potential defendant to take on the assumption that he owns both
the resultant benefits and the resultant injuries. This way of
articulating the fault standard treats an activity's costs and
benefits as being of the same importance regardless of where they
fall. But what I owe you may not be the same as what I owe
myself. Indeed, it might be reasonable for me to be more solicitous of
your well-being than my own, since we might think me entitled to make
tradeoffs with respect to my own well-being that I am not entitled to
make with respect to yours.
Besides offering a questionable interpretation of the legal duty to
behave reasonably, economic analysis arguably fails to make good sense
of the concept of legal duty more generally. The norms of tort law
impose duties not to injure. There are two questions we can ask about
these duties: What do they require of us? And to whom do we owe them?
Tort consequently distinguishes between a duty's content and its
scope.  This is a distinction much emphasized by Judge Cardozo
in Palsgraf v. Long Island Rail Road, the most famous
American tort case. In Cardozo's view, I have a duty to guard against
injuring those who fall within the ambit of foreseeable risk
associated with my conduct. Others might be injured by what I do, and
what I do might be lamentable or mischievous, but those who fall
outside the ambit of foreseeable risk have no claim against me in
tort. This is not because my careless behavior does not injure
them. Ex hypothesi, it does. They have no claim against me
because I have no legal duty to take their interests into account. The
only individuals who can have a claim against me in tort are those to
whom I have a legal duty. The problem for economic analysis is that
the duty restriction on liability is arguably incompatible with the
goal of inducing individuals to take appropriate precautions. In order
for injurers to have an incentive to take appropriate precautions,
each must face the costs of his activity in full. But the duty
requirement allows injurers to displace at least some of these costs
on their victims. Economic analysts have responded to this problem
alternately by (i) offering an efficiency rationale for the
foreseeability limitation and (ii) arguing that the duty requirement
is an imperfection in tort law.
Economic analysis cares about the relationship between a particular
injurer and victim only to the extent that the nature of this
relationship provides evidence of the ability of either party to
reduce accident costs. As far as economic analysis is concerned, there
is no intrinsic reason why a victim should sue the person who injured
him.  Nor is there any intrinsic reason why a plaintiff should argue
in court that the defendant wronged him, rather than that the
defendant was in a better position to reduce overall costs.
The most basic relationship in our actual institution of tort law
is the relationship between an injurer and his victim—not the
relationship between each litigant, taken separately, and the goal of
minimizing the sum of the costs of accidents and the costs of avoiding
them. If the victim of another's mischief brings an action in tort, he
brings it against the person he believes has injured him, not against
the person best situated to reduce overall costs.
We will learn the most from economic analysis if we view it as a
reformist, normative theory, a theory that asks questions of the
following sort: What substantive liability rules have the greatest
impact on reducing the incidence of accidents at the lowest cost? What
procedural rules at a trial will induce those with relevant
information to reveal it? What substantive and procedural rules will
lead to optimal investments in safety? These are the questions of a
reformer less interested in the actual state of tort law than in how
tort law can be improved. Economic analysis is less convincing if its
aim is to illuminate the law from the perspective of a judge or a
litigant.
Corrective justice theory—the most influential non-economic
perspective on tort law—understands tort law as embodying a
system of first- and second-order duties. First order duties prohibit
conduct (e.g., assault, battery, and defamation) or inflicting an
injury (either full stop or negligently). (Some theorists believe that
corrective justice has nothing to say about the character of these
norms; others think that it helps define their scope and content.)
Second order duties in torts are duties of repair. These
duties arise upon the breach of first-order duties. That second-order
duties so arise follows from the principle of corrective
justice, which (in its most influential form) says that an
individual has a duty to repair the wrongful losses that his conduct
causes. For a loss to be wrongful in the relevant sense, it need not
be one for which the wrongdoer is morally to blame. It need only be a
loss incident to the violation of the victim's right— a right
correlative to the wrongdoer's first-order duty.
So understood, corrective justice neatly accounts for the central
features of tort law. It explains why tort law links victim and
injurer, since it takes the injurer to have the duty to repair the
wrongful losses that he causes. And it explains why tort law presents
itself as a law of wrongs, rather than as a tool for inducing
efficient behavior.
We can bring out what is distinctive about the corrective justice
approach to tort law by contrasting it with various alternatives.
From the standpoint of economic analysis, all legal liabilities are
just costs of one sort or another. From an economic perspective, there
are no significant normative differences among such things as
licensing fees, tort liability, and taxes: normative differences that
would in any event make a difference in how the law should approach
them.  From an economic perspective, the choice among them is based on
their relative comparative advantages in securing the goals the law
seeks to reach. All are tools for achieving social goals, and in some
cases, taxes are better tools than licenses are. In other cases, tort
liability is better than both. In many cases a mix of tools will prove
optimal. The important point is that within the economic analysis, the
“fit”or “aptness” of a response to wrongdoing
is determined by its effectiveness in securing the aim in question;
and in tort law, that aim is optimal deterrence. Tort liability is a
tool that achieves that aim by shifting costs.
In contrast, corrective justice theory maintains that tort
liability is not simply a mechanism for shifting costs. A licensing
fee imposes a cost, as does a tax, but we would not say that in
levying fees or taxes we are holding people responsible or accountable
for their wrongdoing.  In contrast, when we hold a defendant liable in
tort, we say that he committed a wrong—assault, battery,
negligence, or the like—and it is in respect of that wrong that
he must be made to pay. For this reason, corrective justice theory
insists that different legal liabilities are not simply
interchangeable cost-shifting implements in the legal tool box, as
they can have radically different expressive consequences, and some
are appropriate, apt, or fitting responses to the wrongdoing in
question while others are not.
Many theorists believe that a principle of retributive
justice—say, that the blameworthy deserve to
suffer—does a good job of interpreting and justifying criminal
law.  Yet most theorists think that such a principle does a rather
poor job of interpreting and justifying tort law (except, perhaps, for
the part of tort law concerned with punitive damages). First, tort
liability does not communicate condemnation, since (as explained
above) a defendant can be liable in tort even though he did nothing
blameworthy. Second, the duty of repair in tort is treated as a debt
of repayment, in that it can be paid by third parties—and not
just when the creditor (the plaintiff) has authorized repayment. By
contrast, “debts” incurred as a result of criminal
mischief can never be paid by third parties. You cannot serve my
prison sentence. Third, a person cannot guard against liability to
criminal sanction by purchasing insurance. Yet it is common to
purchase insurance to guard against the burdens of tort
liability. Indeed, in some areas of life (e.g., driving), purchasing
third-party insurance is mandatory.
Some theorists are skeptical of the idea that corrective justice is
really an independent principle of justice. Their concern is twofold:
considerations that make corrective justice seem like a genuine
principle of justice also seem to undermine its independence
from distributive justice (justice in the distribution of
resources); at the same time, considerations that support the
principle's independence from distributive justice also seem to
undermine its status as a genuine principle of justice. This twofold
concern stems from the fact that corrective justice requires the
reversal of wrongful changes to an initial distribution of
resources. If, on the one hand, some initial distribution of resources
is just, then corrective justice seemingly does no more than require
that we return individuals to the position to which they are
entitled merely as a matter of distributive justice.  This
suggests that corrective justice is but distributive justice from
an ex post perspective rather than an independent principle
of justice. If, on the other hand, an initial distribution of
resources is unjust, then corrective justice seemingly requires that
we sustain, enforce, or entrench what is ex hypothesi an
injustice. This suggests that corrective justice is not really a
matter of justice at all: independent, yes; a genuine principle of
justice, no.
First Response: Corrective Justice as Transactional
Justice. Some theorists respond by suggesting that we understand
corrective justice as a kind of transactional justice.  These
theorists identify the domain of distributive justice with the initial
distribution of holdings and take corrective justice to be concerned
exclusively with norms of transfer, norms that govern whether
departures from an initial distribution are legitimate.  Whatever the
underlying pattern of holdings, we can distinguish legitimate modes of
transfer from illegitimate ones. If agreement or gift moves resources
from one person to another, then the mode of transfer is
legitimate. Never mind whether the resultant allocation of resources
is unequal or unfair: that is a concern of distributive, not
transactional, justice. If fraud or force moves resources from one
person to another, then the mode of transfer is illegitimate. Even if
an illegitimate transfer gives rise to an equitable distribution, the
transaction is unjust and must therefore be annulled.
Second Response: Justice versus Legitimacy. Other
theorists respond by distinguishing between a
distribution's justness and its legitimacy. These
theorists allow that a legitimate distribution of resources may fall
short of being a fully just distribution. But they insist that a
(merely) legitimate distribution can suffice to generate duties of
repair.
Civil recourse theory agrees with corrective justice theory that
tort's normative structure involves a variety of first-order duties,
duties that establish norms of conduct. Yet civil recourse theory
takes a different view of the legal consequence of a first-order
duty's breach. Whereas corrective justice theory holds that such a
breach saddles the would-be defendant with a second-order
duty—in particular, a duty of repair—civil recourse theory
holds that no such second-order duty results directly from the
breach. Rather, the breach of a first-order duty endows the victim
with a right of action: a legal power to seek redress from
her injurer. That this power so arises follows from what proponents
regard as a deeply embedded legal principle—the principle of
civil recourse—which says that one who has been wronged is
legally entitled to an avenue of recourse against the perpetrator.
Civil recourse theory has substantial explanatory power. Perhaps
most obvious, it explains why tort suits have a bilateral
structure—why the victim of a tortious wrong seeks redress from
the wrongdoer herself instead of drawing on a common pool of
resources. It also explains why tort suits are privately
prosecuted—why the state does not act of its own accord to
impose liability on those who breach first-order duties. According to
civil recourse theory, the breach of a first-order duty gives rise not
to a legal duty but to a legal power, a power the victim can choose
not to exercise.
Furthermore, civil recourse theory accommodates a number of tort's
central substantive features, features that arguably elude corrective
justice theory. Prominent among these are (i) the fact that tort
offers a variety of different remedies, only some of which are
designed to restore the plaintiff's antecedent holdings, and (ii) the
fact that the defendant incurs a legal duty to pay damages only upon a
lawsuit's successful conclusion (either by settlement or by the final
judgment of a court), rather than immediately upon the breach of a
first-order duty.
Despite its explanatory power, civil recourse theory is vulnerable
to a potentially serious objection—or else it seems to leave
tort law vulnerable to such an objection. Because civil recourse
theory offers little guidance as to what sort of redress is
appropriate, the theory depicts tort law primarily as an institution
that enables one person to harm another with the aid of the state's
coercive power. Tort law may well be such an institution, of
course. But if it is, it may be deeply flawed—indeed, it may be
unjust. This problem can be posed in the form of a dilemma. Either the
principle of civil recourse is grounded in a principle of justice or
it is not. If the principle of civil recourse is grounded in a
principle of justice, then civil recourse theory threatens to collapse
into a kind of a justice-based theory. If the principle of civil
recourse is not so grounded, then the principle apparently does no
more than license one party to inflict an evil on another. If that is
what the principle does, we might reasonably wonder whether it can
justify or even make coherent sense of an entire body of law.
One way to rescue civil recourse theory from this objection is to
see it as a kind of corrective justice theory, though doing so
requires adjusting the picture of corrective justice presented
above. Earlier, we said that corrective justice requires that a
wrongdoer repair the wrongful losses that she causes. But some think
this an inadequate account of corrective justice, since all too often,
it is not possible for a wrongdoer to repair the injury that she
inflicted on her victim.  When a victim suffers a serious bodily
injury, for example, it may be possible for the wrongdoer to pay her
medical bills or compensate her for lost wages, but the physical
damage the victim suffered is probably beyond repair. And the problem
is all the more striking when the wrong involves a serious affront to
the victim’s dignity. For example, it is doubtful that a rapist
could repair the “loss” suffered by his victim. In cases
such as these, we must find a way to respond to the wrongdoing that
does not require repair, since repair is not possible. With this in
mind, some have suggested that what corrective justice corrects is not
a disturbance in the prevailing distribution of goods brought about by
the wrong, but rather the expressive significance of the wrong. We do
corrective justice, on this picture, by responding to the wrongdoing
in a way that reasserts the victim’s right. We cannot restore
the victim of a rape to the position she was in before the wrong, but
we can treat her rape as a wrong, and thereby reassert her right not
to be raped.
This picture of corrective justice can be used to ground the
principle of civil recourse. If a person has a right not to be
assaulted, for example, then we must treat an assault against her as
wrong, so as to reassert that right. One way to do that is to maintain
a system of civil recourse, which entitles her to demand a remedy from
anyone who assaults her. Oftentimes, repair will be a sensible form of
recourse, since ensuring that the plaintiff does not suffer the
consequences of the wrong will be one way of communicating that she
had a right not to be wronged in that fashion. But this approach can
also explain why tort allows victims to demand compensation even when
their injuries are irreparable. The payment of damages in respect of
the wrong reinforces the victim’s right even if it does not
repair her injury.