Almost nothing is known about the life of Thomas of Erfurt except
that he was active as a teacher and philosopher in the first quarter of
the fourteenth
 century.[1]
 Presumably, he came from the city of Erfurt
in present-day Germany. His work shows the influence of the Paris
Arts Masters Radulphus Brito (ca. 1270–1320) and Siger of Courtrai (ca.
1280–1341), which suggests that he was educated and perhaps also taught
at the University of
 Paris.[2]
 Later documents associate him with the
school of St. Severus and the Schottenkloster of St. Jacob at
 Erfurt.[3]
 His most famous grammatical text, De
modis significandi (On the Modes of Signifying) was known by 1310
and was already being commented upon by 1324. It is possible that he
returned to Paris a number of times over the course of his academic
career, although there are no records attesting to this.
Some copies of De modis significandi attribute the work to
an early fourteenth-century English cleric named Thomas of Occam,
but scholars have been skeptical about this because it occurs in just a
handful fifteenth-century
 manuscripts.[4]
 The vast majority of the manuscript evidence, and all of the earliest
witnesses, refer to its author as Thomas of Erfurt.
Six works have been attributed to Thomas of Erfurt. In addition to
the aforementioned grammatical treatise, whose full title is
Tractatus de modis significandi seu Grammatica speculativa
(ed. Bursill-Hall
 1972),[5]
 there are four short expositiones,
or literal commentaries: on Porphyry's Isagoge, Aristotle's
Categories, Aristotle's De interpretatione, and the
anonymous Liber sex principiorum (Book of Six Principles).
Finally, there is a very brief work of mnemonic verses for teaching
grammar to schoolboys, Commentarius in carmen ‘Fundamentum
puerorum’ (ed. Gansiniec 1960), although its editor believes
that it is actually an anonymous abridgement of De modis
significandi. In any case, Thomas's entire reputation derives from
De modis significandi, which remains his only work to
have been studied in any detail.
De modis significandi proved to be so popular that it
became the standard (and later, the representative) text for the Modist
tradition (see next section), surviving in over 40 fourteenth-
and fifteenth-century manuscripts. A printed edition appeared in
the late fifteenth century that was reprinted a remarkable 11
times before its ‘definitive’ reprinting in Luke Wadding's
1639 edition of the complete works of Duns
 Scotus.[6]
Thomas of Erfurt belonged to an interesting though somewhat obscure
group of late thirteenth- and early fourteenth-century philosophers
known as the speculative grammarians or Modistae.  The term
‘speculative grammarian’ is ambiguous because it is also
used by historians of medieval philosophy to refer to twelfth-century
Parisian grammar masters such as William of Conches, Peter Helias, and
Ralph of Beauvais, who systematically revised the ancient grammars of
Donatus and Priscian — textbooks used to teach Latin to schoolboys 
— to produce a universal
 semantics.[7]
 The two groups are related, as it turns out, since these latter-day
grammarians adopted many of the theories as well as the universalizing
tendencies of their twelfth-century predecessors.  Foremost among them
was the theory of the modi significandi, or modes of
signifying. The term ‘Modistae’ or
‘Modist’ properly refers to the later group.
There was already a grammatical concept of the modi
significandi by the time the first Modistae, Martin of
Dacia and Boethius of Dacia, appeared in Paris sometime before
 1270.[8]
 Originally, the idea referred to the different ways in which a word
or expression (dictio) is able to signify something. Words
themselves are the product of a primary act of imposition by which a
particular utterance is connected to some thing or property of a
thing, the utterance providing the matter, which is said to be
‘informed’ by the act of imposition.  The word acquires
its modi significandi through a second act of imposition
encoding all of the general syntactic roles it can play in connection
with other words and expressions, such as the various parts of speech it
can fulfill (e.g., noun, verb, adverb) and the grammatical forms of
these parts (e.g., the gender, number, and case of nouns; the tense
and mood of verbs). These modes are said to cause the various lexical
forms exhibited by the word in spoken and written languages.  Thus,
Latin uses the word ‘canis’ to signify what English
speakers mean by ‘dog’, but the same modes of signifying
determine their function as singular and as
 nouns.[9]
 We might think of modi significandi metaphorically as hooks
or fasteners on a word because they reflect its potential for
combination with other words in propositions and other grammatically
well-formed constructions.
It is easy to see how such an account of meaning could lead to a
bona fide theory of grammar, what Jan Pinborg called
“the first systematic syntax developed in western
 linguistics”.[10]
 Indeed, speculative grammarians of both
periods have attracted the attention of linguists and philosophers
alike.[11]
 But the stakes were higher for the
Modistae because the influx of Aristotle's writings on
metaphysics and natural philosophy in the late twelfth and
early thirteenth centuries forced everyone to think in terms of a
new paradigm of knowledge. Could grammar be reconceived as the science of
language (scientia sermocinalis)? The question here was
whether grammar could count as an Aristotelian speculative science,
i.e., whether it is demonstrative in the sense of being a
knowledge-producing activity ordained by a single subject whose
principles are universal and
 necessary.[12]
 Concerns of this sort clearly underlie Boethius of Dacia's appraisal
of traditional grammar:
Thomas of Erfurt indicates in the opening lines of De modis
significativis that he aims to be one of these teachers:
For Modistae such as Boethius of Dacia and Thomas of
Erfurt, the proper subject of grammar is well-formed, significant
speech (sermo congrue significativus), the principles of which
are expressed in the modi significandi.
But this is where things get interesting, for the Modistae
also understood the theory of the modi significandi to involve
claims about the nature of thought and reality. The problem with
Priscian, as twelfth-century grammarians had pointed out, is
that he said nothing about what causes the different parts of speech.
Hence the need for a theory of the modi significandi. But the
Modistae saw that this could only be part of the answer, for
grammar is a linguistic phenomenon, and linguistic phenomena must have
a cause within the natural order of things. Therefore, to complete the
explanation, they argued that the formal structure of the modi
significandi owes its existence to modi intelligendi, or
modes of understanding, which in turn are caused by modi
essendi, or the modes of being a thing can exhibit outside the
mind.
The heart of the Modist project is the assumption that there is a
triadic or parallel relationship between word, concept, and thing.
Meaning is based proximately on understanding but ultimately on being.
According to Thomas of Erfurt:
Note the phrase, “since such notions or modes of signifying
are not fictions.” The modi significandi could not play
any causal role in determining the parts of speech, nor the
corresponding modi intelligendi in determining the modi
significandi, nor the modi essendi in determining the
modi intelligendi, unless they all actually exist. Here the
Modistae drew on the Aristotelian idea that although spoken
sounds and written marks differ from language to language, “what
these are in the first place signs of — affections of the soul — are
the same for all; and what these affections are likenesses of — actual
things — are also the same” (De interpretatione
 1.16a3–9).[14]
 Likewise, the ordering of modes was
intended to replicate the ordering of disciplines in an Aristotelian
speculative science: just as psychology, the study of moving things
qua animate, is subordinate to physics, the study of things
qua moving, and physics is subordinate to metaphysics, the
study of things qua existing, so the principles of grammar
(modi significandi) are derived from mental acts of signifying
(modi intelligendi), which reflect the way things really are
(modi essendi).
Tidy conceptual schemes tend to become less so when confronted with
the facts, and the Modistae spent a great deal of time trying
to explain recalcitrant linguistic data. After sketching the origins
of the modi significandi in the first chapters of his
treatise, Thomas immediately considers a few objections: how can
‘goddess [dea]’ be signified with a feminine
noun, which connotes passivity? Answer: a mode of signifying need not
always be drawn from the thing signified, for sometimes it “can
be taken from the property of the thing of another utterance;”
thus, when we say ‘in God’, we do not mean to attribute
passivity to God, who suffers not, but only to “imagine him as
if being affected by our prayers.” When we use a passive or
feminine mode of signifying in relation to God, what we are really
doing is signifying our own passive or feminine conception of some
other thing that is a genuine recipient, i.e.,
something that does correspond to a determinate mode of being
qua recipient, and then imposing the same word to signify
God.  In the same way, we impose names on things we cannot sense via
the properties of sensible things, thereby attributing “active
modes of signifying to their names” (DMS 2.5;
Bursill-Hall: 4).
But what about words signifying fictions, such as
‘chimera’, or privations, such as ‘blindness’?
These do not correspond to any mode of being, active or passive, since
they signify nothing (i.e., no thing). According to Thomas, the active
modes of signifying chimeras “are taken from the parts from which
we imagine a chimera to be composed, which [fiction] we imagine from
the head of a lion, the tail of a dragon, etc” (DMS
2.5; Bursill-Hall: 4). Names of privations, on the other hand,
“designate the modes of understanding of privations, which are
their modes of being, through their own active modes of signifying
about privations”. The idea here is that ‘blindness’
corresponds to our positive concept of sight qua absent, which
enjoys a positive modus essendi in our intellects. Thus,
“although privations are not positive beings outside the soul,
they are nevertheless positive beings in the soul … and since the
understanding of them is their being, therefore, their mode of
understanding would be their mode of being” (DMS 2.6;
Bursill-Hall: 4). Blindness outside the soul cannot cause any
conception of itself per se, since blindness per se
does not exist, and what does not exist cannot be the cause of
anything. Accordingly, when we say, ‘Homer was a blind
man,’ the word ‘blind’ actively signifies the passive
mode of understanding something as being without sight, and owes its
semantic function to the way its corresponding concept is understood.
In the case of concepts that are neither fictions nor privations, these
modes of understanding are further determined by their corresponding
modes of being, i.e., by actual substances and properties outside the
soul.
For the Modistae, then, the words ‘chimera’ and
‘horse’ differ, but only in terms of the complexity of
their underlying modes. Thomas follows Siger of Courtrai in
distinguishing between active and passive modi
significandi/modi intelligendi to explain the difference
between the act of signifying/understanding (materially construed as a
property of the utterance/concept) and the object signified/understood
(materially construed as a property of the thing signified/understood).
The fact that nothing answers to the name ‘chimera’ simply
does not matter. Modism was a theory about meaning
(significatio) of a word as opposed to its reference
(suppositio), and reference was regarded as something
determined by logicians. Besides, if grammatical truths are
universal and necessary — i.e., if there really is a science of
grammar — then they cannot be altered by the fact that there are no
chimeras. It is the assumption that some palpable phenomenon must
underlie every grammatical truth, causing it to be the way it is, which
guides Thomas's discussion in the remainder of the treatise, which soon
moves on to more practical matters such as the different parts of
speech (‘Etymologia’) and their syntax
(‘Diasynthetica’). Included in the latter are the
concepts of constructio (the syntactic joining of one word to
another), congruitas (the proper formation of such
constructions), and perfectio (the proper formation of
complete expressions).
Modist explanations of semantic phenomena tended to be extremely
complicated. Indeed, if we consider the manifold ways in which a word
can be a signifier together with its potential for combination with
other words in expressions, there could be infinitely many modi
significandi — a proliferation of modes repeated all over again
at the level of modi intelligendi. Philosophers today think of
Meinong's theory of objects as a paradigm of ontological
incontinence. These philosophers have never met the Modistae,
who would make even Meinong seem parsimonious. But in a way this is
unfair, of course, since the Modistae were not ontologists and
had no interest in the metaphysical consequences of their theories.
They were first and foremost concerned with the phenomenon of
linguistic meaning, and invoked whatever entities they felt could best
explain what they observed.
Thomas's De modis significandi was the last work to develop
Modist doctrine to any significant
 degree.[15]
 Its clarity and relative brevity led to its adoption as the standard
Modist text in medieval universities, replacing the earlier Modi
significandi of Martin of Dacia. But by 1330 and for reasons that
remain unclear, Modism had completely disappeared from Paris, pushed
aside by the more powerful and comprehensive approach of the
Summulae de dialectica of John Buridan
(ca.
 1300–1361).[16]
 Modism was never able to overcome certain difficulties, such as its
refusal to recognize extra-linguistic context, as a result of which it
could not explain how meaning can be communicated via incongruous or
imperfect
 expressions.[17]
 But the most likely reason for its demise
was that it no longer provided satisfying explanations of the phenomena
it was supposed to explain. The one thing it could do, provide an
account of the syntax of Latin grammar, could be achieved more
economically by other means. In addition, the theory became absurdly
complicated in order to save the phenomena of the modi
significandi, suggesting that the modi finally collapsed
under their own weight, like so many Ptolemaic epicycles.
Thomas of Erfurt's De modis significandi has enjoyed more
attention than it might otherwise have received thanks to its early
misidentification as a work of Duns
 Scotus.[18]
 As a result, it was printed along with authentic works on logic in
volume 1 of Luke Wadding's seventeenth-century edition of the
Opera Omnia of Duns Scotus (Lyons 1639), and again in the
nineteenth-century reprint of Wadding by Juan-Luis Vivès (Paris
 1891).[19]
 Until recently, the Wadding-Vivès edition was the
definitive source for the works of Scotus, so anyone consulting
it would have associated De modis significandi with
 him.[20]
Complicating the story somewhat is the fact that Scotus was
influenced by Modism early in his career, though this was probably due
to his exposure to Modist authors such as Simon of Faversham and Andrew
of Cornwall.[21]
 It is unlikely that he was influenced by Thomas of Erfurt, because De modis significandi did not circulate widely until after Scotus's death.
One of the many later figures to have unwittingly admired Thomas was
the American philosopher, Charles Sanders Peirce (1839–1914), who
regarded Duns Scotus as a fellow traveler in metaphysics and whose own
semiotic theory resembles the Modist program in certain
 respects.[22]
 Peirce quotes verbatim the first
six chapters of De modis significandis in an 1869 lecture
comparing the views of (what he took to be) Duns Scotus and William of
Ockham on names and signification. But the lecture is introductory in
character, leaving it uncertain whether Peirce fully appreciated what
was at stake in Modistic grammar, rather than viewing it, say, as some
sort of linguistic addendum to Scotus's
 metaphysics.[23]
Another figure so influenced was Martin Heidegger, whose
Habilitationsschrift was published in 1916 under the title,
Die Kategorien- und Bedeutungslehre des Duns Scotus. This
book has not been much studied by Heidegger scholars, which is a pity
because it is really about Heidegger's own project of advancing the
Husserlian notion of a priori grammar.  A work of historical
scholarship it is not. In what now seems a classic understatement, the
historian of medieval philosophy Martin Grabmann wrote of this book in
1926, “Martin Heidegger has demonstrated the continuity of the
Grammatica speculativa hitherto attributed to Duns Scotus
with the terminology and overall intellectual outlook of Husserl, so
that the structure and distinctiveness of the medieval original is
somewhat
 obscured”.[24]
 In his defense, Heidegger never pretends
to be doing history of philosophy in Die Kategorien- und
Bedeutungslehre des Duns Scotus. On the contrary, he states at the
beginning of Part II that he is mostly interested in exploring the
implications of De modis significandi for the broader theory
of meaning, and that he is following scholarly consensus in attributing
it to Duns
 Scotus.[25]
In 1922, however, Grabmann conclusively demonstrated that it was
Thomas of Erfurt who wrote De modis significandi, not Duns
 Scotus.[26]
 So the claim that Heidegger wrote his Habilitationsschrift
on Duns Scotus is only partly true. The first half, die
Kategorienlehre, is correctly addressed to Scotus's theory
of the categories as developed in his authentic commentaries on
Porphyry's Isagoge, and Aristotle's Categories and
De sophisticis elenchis. But the second half, die
Bedeutungslehre, is based almost entirely on Thomas of
 Erfurt.[27]
For more recent influence, we need look no further than Jacques
Derrida, who mentions Thomas of Erfurt (this time dressed as himself) in
connection with the old Peircean idea that logic is a branch of
semiotics: “As in Husserl (but the analogy, although it is most
thought-provoking, would stop there and one must apply it carefully),
the lowest level, the foundation of the possibility of logic (or
semiotics) corresponds to the project of the Grammatica
speculativa of Thomas d'Erfurt, falsely attributed to Duns
 Scotus”.[28]
 What impresses Derrida is not so much the reduction of logic to
grammar as the deconstructive potential of Husserl's phenomenology of
signs. The idea of deconstructing the science of language would have
struck Thomas as absurd, of course, though he probably would have felt
some affinity with the highly variegated notion of the sign in modern
semiotics. 