On the title-page of Utopia Thomas More identifies himself as
a citizen of the renowned city of London. The city, with its
privileges and corporate procedures, was central to his formation and
to the style of his political thought. Born in Milk Street,
Cripplegate, in February 1478, he was the son of a successful
barrister, John More. Thomas began his education at St Anthony's, the
outstanding grammar school in the city, but around 1490 he was placed
as a page in the household of Cardinal John Morton, Archbishop of
Canterbury and Lord Chancellor. Morton was evidently struck by More's
talents since after two years he was sent on to Oxford, perhaps to
Canterbury College. It was probably never intended that he should take
a degree, but he must have received some grounding in the subjects of
the trivium (grammar, dialectic, rhetoric).  Morton, who died
in 1500, would remain a figure of personal significance to More,
appearing both in Richard III (in his earlier office as
bishop of Ely) and in Utopia, where he serves as the figure
of a wise and flexible statesman.
An important source for More's biography is the letter that Erasmus
wrote to Ulrich von Hutten in 1519 (CWE 7: Ep. 999), but it needs to
be treated with caution. Erasmus had his own agenda, and he is largely
responsible for the idea that John More dragged his reluctant son into
a legal career. In fact, there is a marked consistency about Thomas's
early career, and it seems that he successfully balanced his humanist
interests with commitment to the law. After two years at Oxford, he
returned to London, initially studying at New Inn, before he was
admitted to Lincoln's Inn in 1496. When Erasmus arrived on his first
visit to England in 1499, he reacted with enthusiasm to the
intellectual atmosphere he encountered and lists four new
acquaintances, John Colet, William Grocyn, Thomas Linacre, and Thomas
More (CWE 1: Ep. 118). A common feature of this group is their
interest in Greek studies; moreover, all of them, apart from More, had
travelled in Italy. It is possible that More had picked up some Greek
in Oxford: Grocyn returned there in 1491 after a period of study in
Florence and had given the first Greek lectures in the university, but
he moved in 1496 to London, where More would have had easy access to
his teaching.  In any case, Thomas Linacre, who had shared Grocyn's
studies in Florence, returned to England in 1499, and More mentions
reading Aristotle's Meteorologica under his guidance. The
acquisition of competence in Greek was of profound importance in
More's intellectual development, and it provided the basis for his
collaboration with Erasmus. It was in the course of the latter's visit
to England in 1505 that they agreed to translate works by the Greek
satirist Lucian of Samosata into Latin, and their combined efforts
were printed at Paris in the following year. More was an instinctive
ironist and clearly responded to Lucian's exposure of human
self-deception; this works not only on the level of private delusion
but also on the broader level of cultural convention. More even
invokes Lucian as an antidote to the superstitious fables which so
easily distort Christian belief and might even mislead such an
authoritative figure as St Augustine (CWM 3:1,5).
In 1501 More completed his legal studies and qualified as a
barrister. It was also the year in which he delivered a course of
lectures on Augustine's City of God in Grocyn's church of St
Lawrence Jewry. We have no record of what these contained, though
Thomas Stapleton in Tres Thomae (1588) claims that he treated
the work more from the standpoint of history and philosophy than
theology. Augustine would remain central to More's thinking, yet, in
his 1515 letter to Martin Dorp, he takes the opportunity to criticize
the saint's view on the corporeality of demons:
 Being a man, he could make a mistake. I take his word
as seriously as anyone's, but I take no man's word
unconditionally. (CWM 15: 69)
Such an approach to religious authority is evidence of More's
adherence to the critical standards of humanism. His ability to
combine an interest in the academic study of law (he was acting as
Lent Reader at Lincoln's Inn as late as 1514), together with Greek and
patristic studies, while pursuing an increasingly busy legal career,
is remarkable. In his prefatory letter to Utopia, he gives a
humorous account of the pressures that have hindered completion of the
work, but it seems that this demanding routine must have been his
normal pattern of life. Prior to his marriage in 1505, More reportedly
lived in the Charterhouse, presumably in the guest lodgings, an
association that has led to conjectures about his attraction to the
monastic life, or at least to the priesthood. Erasmus has not helped
here since he uses More as an example of one who, having tested
himself for a religious vocation, could not shake off the idea of
marriage: “And so he chose to be a god-fearing husband rather
than an immoral priest” (CWE 7: Ep. 999, p. 21). Modern
scholarship has sometimes seen More as a “spoiled monk”,
yet there is a striking unity of purpose about More's early life; he
could find a rationale for the combination of private study and prayer
with public business in the ideal presented in the Epistle on
Mixed Life by the Augustinian canon Walter Hilton (d. 1396),
whose writings he recommends.  Describing a life which balances
spiritual culture with action in the world, Hilton applies it to those
laymen who possess both material wealth and authority over others,
“to govern and sustain them”. The New Building which More
would later erect on his Chelsea estate contained a chapel, a library
and a gallery and, according to William Roper, More's son-in-law, he
would withdraw to it regularly, “to be solitary, and sequester
himself from worldly company” (Roper 1935: 25). This sounds more
like Hilton's ideal than some form of monastic nostalgia.
Meanwhile, More's legal career in the city flourished, and in 1504 he
was returned as a Member of Parliament. It was in the course of this
Parliament that Henry VII's demand for a retrospective subsidy to
cover the expenses of his daughter's marriage to James IV of Scotland
was rejected, and Roper attributes this substantially to More's
intervention. It is unlikely that the affair reached quite the pitch
of drama that Roper suggests, but it does fit with the hostile view of
Henry VII's fiscal policies which More reveals both in his Latin poem
celebrating Henry VIII's coronation (CWM 3:2, no. 19), and implicitly
in Utopia. Early in the following year, he married Jane Colt
and moved into the Old Barge, Bucklersbury, a residence large enough
to permit a flow of guests; among them was Erasmus, who arrived in
August 1509, full of anticipation of patronage under the new king and
carrying in his head the initial idea for The Praise of
Folly. Under its Latin title Encomium Moriae, this
punned on More's name, “which is as close in form to
Moria (Folly) as you are in fact remote from folly
itself” (CWE 2: Ep. 222, p. 161); and once Erasmus had completed
it under More's roof, he dedicated it to his friend, whom he compares
to Democritus, the laughing philosopher. Certainly More's sardonic
laughter found its way into his Latin epigrams, many of which must
date from these years; but a more solemn undertaking was the
translation of the biography of the syncretist philosopher Giovanni
Pico della Mirandola (1463–1494) by his nephew Gianfrancesco,
which would seem to date from about this time. Stapleton suggests that
More settled on Pico as a model of the lay intellectual, though Pico's
retired life might seem the obverse of More's public
engagement. More's aim in the Life of Pico was not simply to
provide an English translation of Gianfrancesco's text but to modify
it for his own ends; so a substantial part of the original is cut,
most notably the parts dealing with Pico's more exotic intellectual
interests and controversies, and out of forty-seven letters printed by
Gianfrancesco only three are retained. Rather than justifying Pico's
highly individual career, More is concerned to sketch the outline of
an edifying life: in effect, Pico's conversion from the early
arrogance with which he had proposed to defend his nine hundred
Conclusiones against all comers to a career of selfless
scholarship, dedicated to “the love of God and the profit of his
church”. To this end Pico disposed of his patrimony and lands to
his nephew so cheaply that “it seemed rather a gift than a
sale”, and also distanced himself from the distractions of
public life in order to preserve his independence (CWM 1,
63–4). These are the very characteristics that will later
reappear in the figure of Raphael, the wandering philosopher who is
our guide to the island of Utopia. Of the three letters which More
translates, that to Andrea Corneo is the most important, dealing as it
does with the social role of philosophy. Corneo has urged Pico to put
his studies to use in “the civil and active life”, but to
Pico this compromises the integrity of the philosopher; he is prepared
to tolerate something tantamount to the mixed life in which
contemplation and action are reconciled, but he maintains the
superiority of a life free of any dependence on external recognition.
Philosophers, he concludes, cannot serve: “They dwell with them
self, and be content with the tranquillity of their own mind”
(CWM 1, 87). We can see More here putting down markers that will later
shape the dispute about philosophy and the public sphere which
surfaces in Utopia. 
However the year 1510, which saw the Life of Pico in print,
offered More little scope for tranquil retirement. He was heavily
engaged in London affairs, representing the city in Henry VIII's first
Parliament, and in September he became one of its two Undersheriffs,
the office by which he identifies himself on the title-page of
Utopia. As Undersheriff, he was responsible for providing
legal advice to senior officers of the corporation, but in particular
for presiding over the Sheriff's court; it was, in fact, a key post
that placed him at the heart of the city's life and at the same time
gave him a vivid sense of the social problems played out before the
courts. The urgency of his obligations may well explain the haste of
his remarriage: his wife Jane, who had borne him four children, died
in June 1511, and allegedly within a month he had married Alice Middleton, the
widow of a fellow member of the Mercers' Company. More had to consider
not only his children but also the management of his substantial
household: among its occasional lodgers were counted Erasmus and also
Andrea Ammonio, who became Latin secretary to the king in 1511. The
evidence points to some intellectual intimacy between these friends,
and this takes on special interest in light of the new king's warlike
conduct. Fired by the example of his illustrious predecessor Henry V,
the victor of Agincourt, Henry VIII had entered into the Holy League,
instigated by Pope Julius II against France, and prepared to attack
England's traditional enemy. When Henry invaded France in 1513 Ammonio
accompanied him and sent back accounts of the campaign which are
echoed in Erasmus's own exposure of martial glory in the adage
“Dulce bellum inexpertis”, one of the most widely
circulated anti-war tracts ever written (CWE 35:
399–440). More's immediate response was limited to a handful of
epigrams, the most effective being a cluster (CWM 3:2,
nos. 188–195) which ridicule the Chordigera, a
pretentious mini-epic by the French humanist Germain de Brie that
celebrates the deeds of a French naval commander. More objects to the
way epic convention is used to mask the brutal realities of war (the
commander was incinerated in his burning ship); like Erasmus, he aims
to discredit those cultural idols which promote militarism. The full
impact of his response to the events of 1513 only emerges later in the
war practices of the Utopians, whose objective approach to conflict
leaves no room for spurious concepts of glory. When Erasmus left
England in July 1514, he took with him the thoughts, and probably the
drafts, that would provide major additions to the 1515
Adagia, the so-called “Utopian edition”. These
dealt not only with war but equally with the dangers of absolute rule:
the Lucianic discussions at the Old Barge had stimulated a radical
critique of established social forms.
Ironically, it was in that year of 1515 that More was first drawn into
the service of the Crown. According to Roper, his talents had been
spotted, probably by Cardinal Wolsey, when he appeared in Star Chamber
as counsel for the papal ambassador in a case of an impounded
cargo. In May he was dispatched to Bruges, along with Cuthbert
Tunstall and others, to renegotiate English trading agreements with
the Netherlands, then under threat. More would have been included not
only for his competence in mercantile law but also as a representative
of London interests. It was to prove an extended visit, and he did not
return to England until the end of October. Since the negotiations
were temporarily suspended in July, this gave him ample leisure to
travel and to embark on two of his most important writings, the
Utopia and the letter addressed to Martin Dorp in defence
of literary studies. His travels took him to Mechelen, where he
enjoyed the hospitality of Jerôme de Busleyden and wrote complimentary
epigrams on his house and his collection of antique coins, and also to
Tournai, then under English occupation; but the most significant
encounter was with Pieter Gillis at Antwerp. Gillis (c.
1486–1533), a valued friend of Erasmus, was secretary to the
corporation of Antwerp: as a lawyer-humanist holding office in a
largely independent mercantile city, he had a natural affinity with
More, and it was while visiting him that More's most famous work
began. Utopia, or to give it its full title De optimo
reipublicae statu deque nova insula Utopia (“On the Best
State of a Commonwealth and on the New Island of Utopia”),
begins with a chance encounter after divine service in the cathedral,
a device that may be intended to recall the opening of Plato's
Republic. More and Gillis, together with the wandering
philosopher, Raphael Hythlodaeus, agree to retire to the garden of
More's lodging in order to pursue their conversation. While this is
initially concerned with Raphael's travels, it soon switches to the
issue of political engagement. Raphael justifies his refusal to enter
the service of a prince by a scathing exposure of European
institutions and customs. In justifying this stance, he appeals to the
wise and effective institutions of the Utopians, grounded as these are
on community of possessions. Pressed by his companions, Raphael then
provides a detailed description of the island and its social
arrangements, concluding with a withering attack on the injustices of
Europe and its money-driven society. As the book ends and the
fictional More leads his guests into supper, he shares with the reader
a mixed response to the challenging features of Utopian life. 
Erasmus, in his letter to von Hutten, asserts that More wrote
Utopia in two stages: “The second book he had written
earlier, when at leisure; at a later opportunity he added the first in
the heat of the moment.” Quite what prompted the genesis of the
book is unknown, but the fact that Gillis appears as one of the
fictional speakers suggests that it may have been initiated by
conversations at his house. It also makes sense to suppose that the
actual description of an imaginary island came first, when More had
leisure to explore the possibilities of a society exempt from the
inherited pressures and distortions of the European world. This
accounts for Raphael's extensive description of Utopian life which
takes up most of Book 2, and yet this solo performance is set within
the context of conversational exchange in an Antwerp garden. It seems
likely that this containing dialogue, which forms Book 1 and the
closing paragraphs of Book 2, was written later, probably after More's
return to London. J. H. Hexter, who has offered the most persuasive
account of the composition of the work, even argues for two distinct
intentions within it: the original intention of projecting a society
based on community of goods; and a secondary one concerned with the
reception of philosophical ideals within the political community. The
latter issue had been raised by Plato, notably at Republic
592A–B where a crucial distinction is drawn between the
city of the philosopher's birth and that other city “whose home
is in words, for I think it can be found nowhere on earth”. Up
until its actual publication, More referred to his book as
Nusquama, the Latin for “nowhere”; the Greek
title Utopia, “no place”, was a late
intervention, perhaps by Erasmus, who saw the book through the
press.
More returned to England at the end of October, but not before writing
his lengthy epistle to the Louvain theologian Martin Dorp.  Ostensibly
a defence of Erasmus and his philological approach to the biblical
text, this offers an important statement of humanist ideals, highly
critical of the artificial linguistic universe generated by scholastic
dialectic and insistent on the priority of Greek, “since it is
from Greek that the rest of mankind has received every variety of
knowledge”. Evidently the months More spent in the Netherlands
had been stimulating and productive: he had established his
credentials among the Northern humanists and, as he departed for
England, he took with him the draft description of Utopia. Yet, as his
prefatory letter to Gillis indicates, he had little leisure in which
to continue with it: while heavily engaged with city commitments he
was also drawn into court business—as Andrea Ammonio reported:
“None bids my lord of York [Wolsey] good morrow earlier than
he” (CWE 3: Ep. 389, p.239). This makes it all the more
significant that the opening book of Utopia is concerned with
issues of political practice within the identifiable world of Europe.
The whole framework which encloses Raphael's account of the
extraordinary island, the conversation of friends in an Antwerp
garden, is focused on the tension between the received order and
political idealism. Should one stand aloof like Raphael, rejecting the
city of one's birth, or try to modify it in light of the ideal as
More's fictional-self attempts to argue? In the late summer of 1516
Erasmus visited London, and this may well have prompted More to
complete the book; in any case, More sent the final text to him in the
autumn, and it was printed at Louvain in December, with minor
additions by Erasmus and Gillis.
The one other work of a specifically political character which More
wrote was The History of King Richard the Third,
alternatively the Historia Richardi Tertii since it was
written in both English and Latin versions. Indeed, More appears to
have worked on the two concurrently, and neither is a simple
translation of the other.  The Historia concludes with the
coronation of the usurper Richard, while the History
continues with the murder of his nephews and breaks off in mid-flight
as Bishop Morton, later More's own mentor, tries to turn the Duke of
Buckingham against the king. No part of the work was published in
More's lifetime, and even the period of its composition is obscure. It
seems likely that More worked at it, on and off, over a period of
years, conceivably between 1513 and 1520, when his humanist interests
were dominant. While he had access to first-hand informants, it is
clear that the intention is rather to enact a moral point than to
provide an exact chronicle, and this gives it a certain affinity with
Utopia. Both works show a concern with social pathology: by
what means can a state be corrupted? Although the period of
Richard III covers the years of More's early childhood, the
most important influences on his writing are the Roman historians
Tacitus and Sallust. The latter, in particular, would have interested
More, not least because Augustine in the City of God praises
his analysis of the moral collapse of the Roman Republic. Sallusts's
account of the conduct of the Roman patriciate reveals a comparable
process of institutional subversion to that described in More's
history, where the driving forces are divisive faction and the
“pestilent serpent ambition”. In the Latin text the words
used, “execrabilis belua superbia”, match those
of Raphael in the Utopia: as he concludes his catalogue of
the injustices of European society, it is pride, superbia,
“the origin and begetter of all plagues”, which Raphael
sees as the ultimate obstacle to social justice. Flattery and
deception pervade the action and erode all forms of social trust. At
the end of the English text, even Morton, in so many ways More's model
prelate, shows moral ambivalence as he incites the Duke of Buckingham
to rebel against Richard. Various explanations have been proffered as
to why More left the work unfinished—it seems unlikely that
pressure of work would have been the sole cause. Clearly such a recent
history would be liable to offend certain of his contemporaries, and
its negative exposure of public affairs would jar with his own
increasing involvement in government business. It offers little scope
for the kind of ameliorative participation in the political order that
More's fictional self tries to defend in Utopia. 
Nonetheless, More was drawn into the royal service, and his membership
of the Council was confirmed by March 1518. Apart from his practical
abilities, he seems to have appealed to the king as a prestigious
figure, a court intellectual: even as he entered the Council, the
third edition of Utopia was printed by Johann Froben at
Basel, along with his Epigrams, in a volume which confirmed
More's continental reputation. At the same time, he made a series of
interventions in favour of Greek and of Erasmus's educational
innovations. The “Letter to the University of Oxford” is
addressed from Abingdon, where the itinerant court was resident; its
aim is to discredit the self-styled Trojans who are resisting the
introduction of liberal studies (CWM 15, 133). The “Letter to
Edward Lee” was part of a wider, and unsuccessful, effort to
persuade Lee, who later became archbishop of York, from publishing his
hostile criticisms of Erasmus' New Testament, and it contains More's
most vehement endorsement of his friend's efforts which, he asserts,
have done more for secular and sacred learning “than virtually
anyone else's exertions for the last several centuries” (CWM 15,
161). The most vitriolic of the letters is that addressed “to a
monk”, tentatively identified by modern scholarship as John
Batmanson, later prior of the London Charterhouse. In it More comes
close to the spirit of the Praise of Folly, mocking at the
presumption of cloistered religious who, “perched on a sunbeam,
look down from the heights on the general populace creeping like ants
on the ground…” (CWM 15, 279). It certainly shows him at
his most anti-clerical, but the underlying theme is the importance of
Greek, and consequently of Erasmus' contribution, to the renewal of
theology. As things turned out, it would prove to be his last
statement on the humanist curriculum. 
Predictably, there has been some debate about More's reluctance to
enter the court world—Erasmus insists that he was
“dragged” into it—but there is a forward impetus in
More's career which suggests that, while well aware of the dangers, he
could also see it as an opportunity to realize the active element of
Hilton's “mixed life”. It may have been on just such terms
that he entered a world which he had previously satirized. Once in the
Council, his duties were multifarious. As royal secretary up to 1525,
he was the intermediary between the king and his chief minister
Cardinal Wolsey, with whom he had close, though not cordial,
relations. There were aspects of Wolsey's administration which he
could endorse, among them the cardinal's efforts to improve access to
justice, especially for the poor, and he was heavily engaged in the
judicial functions of the Council, sitting in the Court of Requests
and Star Chamber. Beyond his judicial duties, More was also employed
as an “orator” in both of the current senses, delivering
addresses of welcome to visiting dignitaries and serving as an
ambassador. Given the mocking account of treaties in Utopia
(CU: 197–201), it is unlikely that he was over-optimistic about
their lasting effect, but he played a significant diplomatic role in
the 1520s, participating in a number of important negotiations. He
derived particular satisfaction from his part in the “Ladies'
Peace” of Cambrai in 1529 which restored “a long-desired
peace to the world”, since he mentions it in the inscription he
devised for his own tomb (SL: p.181). His skills as a negotiator were
clearly appreciated, and they found domestic applications as well: in
1523, after his election as Speaker of the Commons, he delivered a
memorable plea to the king for the privilege of free speech in the
House, while during the same session he obtained for the Crown a
subsidy which the Commons had initially resisted. When Wolsey fell
from favour in 1529 and More succeeded him as Lord Chancellor, he had
presided over both Houses of Parliament.
Roper reports a conversation with his father-in-law in which More
declared that he would gladly be thrown into the Thames in a sack if
only three things could realized: that there should be peace between
Christian princes, that turmoil in the church might be settled
“in a perfect uniformity of religion”, and that the matter
of the king's marriage might come to a good conclusion (Roper 1935:
24–5). If the peace of Cambrai might satisfy his first
requirement, the two other issues would prove more problematic. In
1521, as Luther's challenge to the Catholic church gained momentum,
King Henry published his Assertio septem sacramentorum, a
statement of orthodoxy which won him the title Defender of the Faith
from a grateful pope. More appears to have had some editorial role in
this, and it marks the beginning of a new phase in his intellectual
career, as an apologist for the Catholic faith.  Thirteen years later,
writing in his own defence to Thomas Cromwell, More would bitingly
observe that his early doubts about the divine institution of papal
primacy had been put at rest by the king himself (SL: p.212). Luther's
response to the royal book was predictably offensive, and More was put
forward to retaliate in kind; his Responsio ad Lutherum
(1523) is a vigorous presentation of familiar arguments, without much
evidence of engaging with Luther's thought. Basic to his argument is
the appeal to tradition, understood as the unwritten deposit of
teaching which precedes the Gospel texts and provides the matrix
within which they must be interpreted. After his appointment as
Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster in 1525, he was drawn directly
into the campaign against the circulation of heretical books, and in
1528 his old colleague Tunstall, now bishop of London, commissioned
him to respond to heretical books. This resulted in a daunting body of
writings in the vernacular which extends from A Dialogue
Concerning Heresies in 1529 to The Answer to a Poisoned
Book in 1534, and some of its aspects are discussed below. 
More succeeded Wolsey as Chancellor in October 1529, but he took on a
less ambitious portfolio of duties, conceivably because of his
inability in conscience to support the king's efforts to annul his
marriage to Catherine of Aragon. Largely excluded from foreign
affairs, he built instead on his predecessor's policy of legal reform,
aiming for greater reliance on equity in the application of common
law. Roper describes his confrontation with the common law judges in
which he upheld his use of injunctions to modify verdicts in the
common law courts and urged the judges to mitigate the rigid
application of precedent through their own discretion, according to
conscience. Though the judges were unresponsive, More's brief tenure
of office has been described as a “magisterial
performance” (Guy 1980: 93), and it naturally invites comparison
with Utopian legal practice where the most obvious interpretation is
the most equitable one (CU: 197). In addition, he assumed
responsibility for assisting the ecclesiastical authorities in the
suppression of heresy, a direct consequence of the oath imposed on
secular judges, requiring them to investigate and extirpate heresy, a
survival of Henry V's anti-Lollard legislation (CWM 6:1, 409; 8:1,
28). Six heretics were executed during his tenure of office, three
with his personal involvement; in this respect recent scholarship has
concluded that while More acted with severity, in a deliberate counter
to Wolsey's “gentle and courteous” approach which was
evidently failing, he did so within the law. However, his position as
Chancellor swiftly became untenable. Within days of taking office he
had opened the “Reformation” Parliament, which soon
established its anticlerical credentials; and, in view of the growing
unlikelihood of a favourable decision from Rome over the king's
marriage, royal policy shifted towards an alliance with the Commons'
attack on clerical privileges. One irony was that More had ex
officio to convey to Parliament the opinions of various European
universities on the validity of the royal marriage, most of them
favourable to the king. On 15 May 1532, a depleted Convocation enacted
the Submission by which the clerical estate surrendered their
independent power to legislate, effectively bringing spiritual
jurisdiction under secular control. More resigned his office the
following day. While it has been suggested that he acted as leader of
a disaffected faction, there is little evidence for this; it seems
more likely that he withdrew from an alien political landscape and
focused on writing, in particular his dispute with Christopher St
German over the discrepancy between common law practice and the
inquisitorial procedures of church courts. Unwilling to take the oath
to the Act of Succession on account of its anti-papal preamble, he was
sent to the Tower of London on 17 April 1534, where he remained in
confinement, though free to write. In November of that year the Act of
Supremacy made the king Supreme Head of the Church in England, and a
related Act made it treason to deny that title “by writing or
words”. After a series of interrogations, which make it clear
that More did not actively seek martyrdom, he was tried at Westminster
Hall on 1 July 1535, found guilty of treason, and executed five days
later. As his reported words to the court make clear, he considered
himself to be dying for the sake of the unity of Christendom.
One of the best known anecdotes about More concerns a visit paid by
the king to his house at Chelsea: when Roper congratulated him on this
favour, More—ever the realist—remarked that if his head
could win the king a castle in France it would not fail to go (Roper
1935: 21). In Richard III a major theme is this discrepancy
between public performance and hidden motive, and More conveys it
figuratively through the image of the theatre: “these matters be
kings' games, as it were stage plays, and for the more part played
upon scaffolds” (CWM 2, 81). This moderate pessimism can be
associated with his early study of St Augustine, the Church Father
whom he knew most intimately. When preparing his 1501 lectures on the
City of God, he must have been struck by Augustine's words on
the role of the wise judge: given the darkness that surrounds social
life,
 will the wise man take his seat on the judge's bench,
or will he not venture to do so? Clearly, he will take his seat; for
the claims of human society, which he thinks it wicked to abandon,
constrain him and draw him to this duty. (City of God,
19:6)
More's own career can be interpreted as just such a measured response
to the claims of human society; as his fictional self puts it in
Utopia, “what you cannot turn to good, you may at least
make as little bad as possible” (CU: 97). His political
instincts are corporate, something that would have been reinforced by
his involvement in the civic government of London, and he is radically
opposed to any form of absolutism. There are signs of this as early as
his 1505 translation of Lucian's Tyrannicida, and it provides
a major theme in his Epigrams, which were printed with
Utopia in 1518.  Several of the poems deal with the tyrant,
whose character is to exploit his subjects (CWM 3:2, nos. 80, 109,
110, 114, 115, 142), while others define the true king who is
dedicated to their good (nos. 111, 112, 120). In one oddly apposite
example, More compares a courtier who enjoys a prince's favour to
someone playing with tamed lions—“suddenly the fun becomes
fatal” (no. 162).  More's political beliefs are most clearly
shown in an epigram which echoes the title of Utopia:
“What is the best form of the commonwealth” (no. 198);
here his preference for a senate over a king is based on its
restraining power: a senator is chosen by the people, and any erratic
tendencies on his part will be held in check by his fellow
senators. This is not so much a paean for representative government as
a tentative proposal to curb the darker passions which underlie the
political world. It is just these passions which More dramatizes in
Richard III, where the stately narrative is persistently
qualified by the ironic perspective of the narrator. This creates a
world of dissimulation and distrust: the only person to act
“upon the surety of his own conscience” is Lord Rivers,
and it simply precipitates his death (CWM 2, 18).  Underlying the
action is the same “ambition and desire of vainglory” (CWM
2, 12) which More had encountered in the Roman historians and which he
now transferred to the England of living memory; from the political
perspective, Richard III is a work of almost unrelieved
gloom, and this may well explain its unfinished state. In practice,
More's pessimism was qualified by his Augustinian sense of social
obligation. 
Humanism was founded on the philological ambition to recapture the
legacy of classical literature, both by the retrieval of texts and by
the imitation of classical style; but, equally, it implied the
recognition of language as a persuasive medium, the province of
rhetoric. The revival of rhetoric is at the core of humanism: in its
persuasive role, language is directed out to the social community in
the effort to stimulate moral or political response. More's most
direct statements on the cultural issue of the age occur in four
letters which he wrote between 1515 and 1519 to Martin Dorp, to
Oxford, to Edward Lee and “to a monk” (all now in CWM
15). Dorp, a theologian with humanist interests, had expressed
uneasiness with Erasmus's scurrilous treatment of scholastic theology,
as well as his presumption in correcting Jerome's Vulgate New
Testament in light of the Greek text. He also protests at his apparent
subordination of the higher faculties, such as theology, to the rule
of grammarians; for Erasmus, he implies, the worst heresy is
linguistic barbarism. More had seen the exchange of letters between
Dorp and Erasmus during his 1515 stay in the Netherlands and
intervened in defence of his friend.  While Dorp's view of humanism is
essentially cosmetic, a matter of vocabulary and style, More takes the
argument to a deeper level. His complaint is about the way dialectic
has usurped control of the arts course, the trivium, allowing
scant attention to grammar and rhetoric. The later scholastics, in
their quest for a meta-language purified of subjective reference, had
reinvented Latin as a wholly artificial construction closed to
outsiders. It had ceased to be communicative speech. This tendency is
then passed on to theology, where the Scriptures and the Fathers are
fragmented into proof texts: More describes how his clash with an aged
theologian about St Augustine's view on demons arose because he is
citing the original work, while the theologian has picked up scraps of
Augustine second-hand from Peter Lombard's Sentences (CWM 15,
68–9). One work which attracts More's venom is the Parva
logicalia (“Little Logicals”), so-called, More
suggests, because it has so little logic in it. This is the section of
Peter of Spain's Summulae logicales devoted to supposition
theory and, as such, it formed an integral part of most university
courses on dialectic. In Utopia, on the other hand, where
More again refers to it, we learn that the natives, for all their
intelligence, fail to grasp these “elaborate rules about
restrictions, amplifications and suppositions” (CU: 157). This
is because in their reasoning they use customary speech, the language
of the community, and can make no sense of a technical language which
deviates from the order of nature. More is not opposed to dialectic,
and he probably had experience of the trivium during his stay
in Oxford, but he wants a return to the dialectic of Aristotle,
especially as now made available by humanist scholarship. Both grammar
and dialectic have their part in communication, grammar by clarifying
established usage and dialectic by clarifying the structure of nature
(CWM 15, 34–35); they must be integrated with rhetoric in speech
comprehensible to all who participate in the language community. The
quibbles of the logicians, by contrast, exclude those who, like the
Utopians, have not been initiated into their artificial
procedures.
All this has implications for theology. Taken up with their abstruse
questions and writing in a language which More characterizes as
Latino-Gothic, scholastic theologians have increasingly forfeited
their pastoral relevance. Against this he advocates a
“positive” theology founded on study of the Scriptures and
the Church Fathers; it is a typically humanist return to the sources,
and it fits with More's conception of the church as a community
embedded in history and process. As he observes, the church flourished
for more than a thousand years until “the Trojan Horse” of
Peter Lombard's Sentences released its army of arcane
problems, and this he sees as the era of the Fathers (among whom he
would probably wish to include Thomas Aquinas). In his “Letter
to Oxford” he describes the true theologian as one who has
gained a preliminary understanding of human affairs from his study of
poets, orators and historians, and can add to this a proficiency in
Latin, Greek and possibly Hebrew. The letter is an endorsement of
Erasmus' efforts to revive classical eloquence and patristic exegesis
in the service of a theology which can both instruct and inspire. At
the centre of this shift lies the issue of Greek studies, which is
much more than a curricular option. When More introduces Raphael, his
witness to Utopia, he is described as more at home in Greek than
Latin: being primarily interested in philosophy he finds little of
value in Latin apart from some works by Cicero and Seneca. The
Utopians themselves become passionate students of Greek, and for the
very same reason. As More reiterates in his aggressive championing of
the humanist curriculum, Greek is the essential source both for
secular wisdom and for the New Testament.  While he admits translation
as an aid, it cannot equal the impact of reading—say
Aristotle—in the original (CWM 15,101). As for those critics of
Erasmus who allow the Latin Vulgate a sacrosanct status and regard his
corrections from the Greek as unwarranted and even blasphemous, More
counters with a pragmatic view of textual reception. The church, whose
sense of the Gospels precedes any written text, accepts the Greek
original as the true Gospel and may extend its approval to Latin
translations, but never to the extent of ruling out the human
fallibility of the translator. Even one of the Fathers like Jerome can
err (CWM 15, 87, 217), so there is a vital need for philological
engagement with the sources. From More's perspective, Greek is the key
element in a major cultural shift.
 One consequence of More's humanism was his advocacy of female
education. In Utopian schools all children are introduced to literary
studies, and in later life both sexes are free to attend the public
lectures and pursue intellectual interests. Something of this sort was
a feature in his own household: he established a “school”
for his own children and others where the majority may well have been
girls. Writing in 1518 to William Gonnell, a protégé of Erasmus who
was then in charge of the school, More justifies the idea of educating
women on the grounds of a common human rationality which invites
cultivation (SL: no. 20). As in Utopia, the basic aim of education is
not to prepare for some specific activity or profession but to enhance
the possibilities of being human, regardless of gender.  More
envisages a curriculum based on literary studies which will develop
moral awareness, and he further recommends reading of the Church
Fathers and of the Roman historians, specifically Sallust.  Erasmus,
an admiring witness of this novelty, reports that the girls all had
Livy in their hands (CWE 8: Ep. 1233, p. 296), and More's eldest
daughter Margaret has been tentatively identified with the Magdalia
who champions female education in the colloquy “The Abbot and
the Learned Lady” (CWE 39: 499–519).
The opening of Utopia at once raises a fundamental issue: the
relationship between imagination and experience. We encounter real,
that is to say historic, persons such as More (or at least his
fictional self), Tunstall, the Habsburg delegation, and Pieter Gillis;
but then we are introduced to Raphael Hythloday, whose fictional
nature is conveyed by his name (Hythlodaeus, “purveyor of
nonsense”). This merging of worlds, real and imaginary, prepares
the reader for the Platonic tension between two cities—that of
the philosopher's birth and the one which he creates with words
(Republic 592A–B). As Raphael describes his travels,
Gillis is prompted to suggest that he serve some prince. However, this
would entail swapping cities, moving from the ideal to the actual, a
compromise which Raphael rejects. As it is, he can live as he wishes
(CU: 51). There is a deliberate echo here of Cicero's discussion of
the retired life in his De officiis (I.20.70), and, for that
matter, of the argument of Pico della Mirandola which More had earlier
translated. On the one hand, there is the option of intellectual
liberty, free of external constraints and, on the other, the career of
public service, which inevitably demands a degree of accommodation to
the status quo. At this point, “More” intervenes
to urge the latter course: Raphael owes it to himself to use his
talents for public benefit, even at some personal inconvenience. The
stage is set for the debate that follows.
 To make his point
that by participation in the political world the intellectual risks
either irrelevance or contamination, Raphael appeals to a series of
models: first, there is the flashback to Cardinal Morton's household
in 1497, and this is followed by fly-on-the-wall accounts of the
French Council as it debates foreign policy, and of another, which
remains unidentified but is probably the English Council under Henry
VII, as it reviews fiscal policy. The odd one out is the Morton
episode which may well date from the final stage of More's
composition. In essence, it is about value: the setting of human life
against property. Raphael's intervention raises two key issues: one
asks what could be an appropriate penalty for theft, while the other
looks—with astonishing originality—at the unjust
conditions which encourage theft. To steal may be a personal moral
failing, but social pressures which drive the malefactor to crime must
share some of the guilt. More would, in any case, have been familiar
with the tradition in canon law which argued that in dire necessity to
take what was required to support life was not theft.  Raphael lists
various causes for the prevalence of theft, among them discharged
soldiers and cast-off retainers, but his most startling suggestion is
sheep, which now seem to swallow up people and lay the country waste
(CU: 63). More is pointing obliquely at the evil of enclosures by
which peasants are driven from the land to make way for the more
profitable returns of sheep farming, a clear instance of vested
interests acting against the common good. Uprooted and deprived of
work, these people have little choice but to steal and to hang as a
result.
In each of the illustrative episodes which More includes in Book 1,
Raphael appeals to some imaginary land which can provide an
alternative to the established order. In a sense, these episodes
prepare us for his account of Utopia. For the Morton sequence, it is
the land of the Polylerites (CU: 71), whose ingenious system of penal
servitude, which may well owe something to Plato's Laws
(862D), aims to destroy the vices but save the persons, providing in
the process reparation for their crimes. In discussing the French
Council, with its focus on aggressive territorial expansion, Raphael
appeals to the Achorians, who compel their prince to confine himself
to a single kingdom. Similarly, the English Council is taken up with
dubious schemes to help the prince augment his wealth, and the
counter-example is that of the Macarians, who bind their ruler by oath
to restrict the sums held in his treasury to a thousand pounds in
gold, enough to contain rebels or to resist invaders. The two royal
councils are presented with satiric intent, though the policies
proposed are all too real. However, if we take all three episodes
together, one feature they share is the presence of courtiers. The
role of courtiers should be to counsel the prince, but in each episode
they are presented as amoral opportunists whose sole aim is to flatter
him. Raphael, who seems to overlook the fact that Morton had
entertained his proposal for penal reform, declares that there is no
place for philosophy at court, a claim which leads to one of the most
important exchanges in the book (CU: 95–97). While Raphael
simply refers to philosophy, “More” chooses to distinguish
between two modes, scholastica and civilior: the
first, which he associates with Raphael, is best understood as geared
to academic disputation; the second, by contrast, relates to public
affairs and civil life. As “More” observes, the first may
be valid in formal debate but will fall on deaf ears in the public
arena; the point about his civil philosophy is that it is informed by
rhetorical values—adapted to its specific context and designed
to persuade.  Hence, his telling comparison with a stage play: you
cannot mix comedy with tragedy; Raphael, he implies, is confusing his
genres. The counsellor must not abandon ship because he cannot control
the winds; instead, he must work obliquely, “by indirect
means”, to handle matters tactfully and minimize the effects of
unsound policy. It is significant that the case for this rhetorical
approach is linked in with a passing reference to human imperfection:
it is inconceivable that all should turn out well, says
“More”, unless all men become good, “and that I
don't expect to see for quite a few years yet” (CU: 96). In a
perfect world, it seems, rhetoric would be redundant. The argument
from expediency is rejected by Raphael, but his dismissal of all
compromise leads him to make the first allusion to the Utopians and
their holding of property in common, a practice he associates with
Plato. However, his account of the benefits it brings is interrupted
by “More”, who presents the standard
Aristotelian-scholastic case for private property as both an incentive
for productivity and a basis for public authority, an argument which
he raises again at the close of Book 2. Yet, meanwhile, so intriguing
are Raphael's references to the Utopians that he is persuaded to give
a full account of the island.
For much of its reception-history, Utopia has been treated as
if it consisted exclusively of Book 2, and this impression was
supported by some printed versions which omitted the first book. It
was this that gave rise to the misleading adjective
“Utopian” with its negative connotations of unreal and
unattainable aspiration.  In Book 2 More sets out to project a society
which is radically different from European society, and he does this
by drawing on the idea of a state of nature. This idea, sometimes
presented as the Golden Age, was familiar from classical sources, and
it also coloured reports of those who had witnessed the native
cultures of the New World.  Essentially, it imagined a primeval state
of human association, prior to the invention of property and the laws
which protect it, when all could have access to nature's fruits as
their needs dictated.  Cicero, in De officiis (1.16.51),
writes of the bond of rationality which unites humanity and gives a
common right to all that nature has produced. However, confronted by
the Roman reality, he adds rather lamely that everything identified by
statutes and civil law as private property must remain such; it seems
that the primitive rights of the state of nature are now reduced to a
kind of universal benevolence. More was well aware, too, of Plato's
doubts about ownership, and he applies to the whole population of
Utopia the communality of possessions which Plato reserves for his
Guardians (Republic 416D-417B). In the Laws, too,
Plato's “first-best society” attempts to remove all forms
of ownership from life (739C). The novelty of More's account is that
it gives us a society which has evolved from a rough and primitive
manner of life to “a perfection of culture and humanity as makes
them now superior to almost all other mortals” (CU: 111), but it
has done so without developing a system of private ownership and the
inevitable legal safeguards that go with it. It is precisely private
property which defines European society, and along with it goes the
legal code governing ownership, largely inherited from ancient
Rome. By making his Utopians adopt a communality of possessions More liberates them
from the passions generated by acquisition and loss; by the same
token, they are relieved of the whole ideological burden which
distorts European society. 
It seems an obvious corollary that in a society where all is common
money should be redundant, since it opens up a gap between
conventional value, which is socially created, and the worth which
derives from nature. In Europe this leads to the sort of injustice by
which those in essential tasks are cruelly exploited, while those
luxury trades which cater to artificial desires flourish. It is this
divorce of value from worth in Europe which prompts Raphael to condemn
what he sees as “a conspiracy of the rich, who are advancing
their own interests under the name and title of the
commonwealth” (CU: 245). There is a striking contrast between
the oligopoly of those sheep traders who profit from enclosures in
England and the Utopians' belief that they are the cultivators
(agricolae) of their land rather than proprietors
(domini); it echoes the scholastic distinction between
usus, simple use, and dominium, the right of
disposal which underlies European ideas of property. In Utopia all
share in the fruits of the land, and these are distributed freely
through the community; “though no one owns anything, everyone is
rich” (CU: 241). Whatever is gathered or produced is cycled
through the city markets to meet the requirements of each residential
group, or syphograncy, of thirty households. While the household is
the basic unit, each with its own residence, the syphograncy binds
them to the wider community; in its spacious hall, the household
members meet daily to have their meals in common and annually to elect
one of their number as syphogrant. This officer represents their
interests in the wider affairs of the city and participates in the
election of its governor; although the latter may serve for life, the
constitution itself is carefully devised to block any shift towards
tyranny or factional interest. Thus, physical and political needs are
well catered for.
However, the central principle underlying the Utopians' way of life is
that as much time as possible should be reserved for the cultivation
of the mind, as it is in this that they consider true happiness can be
found (CU: 135). This requirement is met by their extraordinary system
of work in which all citizens, of either sex, (and that could amount
to about 60,000 in each city) must labour at some essential trade, but
only for six hours a day; this more than meets their needs, but still
leaves ample leisure for intellectual pursuits.  Every child is
grounded in the liberal arts, and most of the adult population,
“men and women alike”, devote themselves to further study
in their spare time. While there is an elite class of scholars,
carefully selected by the priests and approved by the syphogrants, who
dedicate themselves to full-time study and are available to hold the
higher offices, the lectures provided for them are equally open to all
comers. There is a vital cultural life, a direct consequence of their
economic arrangements. One of the most vivid episodes in
Utopia is the account of the Anemolian ambassadors: these
dignitaries, determined to impress the Utopians, deck themselves out
in conventional finery—cloth of gold, gold chains and rings,
jewelled badges—only to find that the Utopians regard them as
slaves or fools. This is because of the Utopian value system, which
uses such impractical metals for shackles or chamber pots: it is an
essential part of their humanist education to recognize authentic
values, not the pseudo-values imposed by social conspiracy but those
deriving from nature itself. The fact that they need very few laws
comes from the effectiveness of this early formation (CU: 195). 
While the Utopians are baffled by scholastic logic, like good
humanists they are keenly interested in moral philosophy and the
nature of the happy life, which is one reason why they are so
dedicated to learning Greek. Raphael provides an extended account of
their views on pleasure (CU: 159–79), in their view, the most
important ingredient of human happiness. What he describes is, in
effect, a classical synthesis: while their definition of virtue as a
life in accord with nature has Stoic overtones, the emphasis which
they lay on pleasure echoes Epicurean teachings. However, seeing that
the theory of pleasure they adopt is based on the supremacy of
spiritual pleasure, there is little in the discussion which might not
have originated with Plato.  Certainly, the key to their thinking lies
in the soul and its destiny; and to the rational arguments of
philosophy they join certain religious axioms—that the soul is
immortal and that after death it will receive reward for virtues and
punishment for sins (CU: 161).  Suicide is condemned, but their
commitment to pleasure means that euthanasia is practised: there is no
Christian concept of value in suffering, though those strange
religious groups, the Buthrescas, put up with hardship now to win
happiness after death (CU: 229). The psychic focus of their beliefs is
one of the factors which makes the monotheistic religion of the
Utopians into a prisca theologia or primitive anticipation of
Christianity; and we learn that when they have been introduced to
Christ's teachings by Raphael and his companions, many of them embrace
these eagerly. But, as Raphael points out, conversion is made easier
for them by the discovery that Christ had endorsed the communal life
led by his disciples and that this is still observed in monasteries
(CU: 221; cf. Mark 6:8–9). The irony needs no comment.
What is the reader to make of this newly discovered island and its
strange institutions? Raphael's closing peroration places the focus
back on the social injustices of Europe: he concludes that it is pride
or “self-pleasing”, identified by Augustine as the root of
sin (City of God, 14:13), which prevents the adoption of a
fairer system. And, as “More” had implied in Book 1, pride
is unlikely to disappear soon; his conclusion is ambivalent. For a
start, he rejects Utopian communalism, as it subverts the
 nobility, magnificence, splendour and majesty which
(in the popular view) are the true ornaments and glory of any
commonwealth. (CU: 247)
This confronts us again with the Aristotelian-scholastic view of
private property as a resource to be used for public benefit, which is
a legitimate argument, but the reference to popular opinion, with its
echo of Plato's cave, is less reassuring. As he leads his guest into
dinner, “More” does confide that he would be glad to see
some Utopian features in his own society, but he is not
hopeful—his closing verbs, optarim (“I might wish
for”) and sperarim (“I might hope for”),
are subjunctive.  Raphael “s encounter with the ideal has
alienated him from the familiar world, while “More”
remains within it but somehow changed. How far can Utopia be imitated? One
feature which is often overlooked is its foundation: the entire
polity, from social organization and street plans to its benign
religious toleration, is due to one man, Utopus, whose military
conquest of the country enabled him, in Plato's terms, to wipe the
slate clean (CU: 111; Republic 501A). He represents the ideal
philosopher-king who reconciles wisdom with power, and this scarcely
makes his precedent an easy one to follow. In spite of the common
tendency to interpret Utopia as a social blue-print, it seems
more helpful to view it as a “spiritual exercise”: the
imaginative engagement with a model which can modify our attitudes and
even qualify our conduct. This would explain why in his prefatory
letters to Pieter Gillis and elsewhere, the author More plays with the
interface between fiction and reality. It also fits with More's own
practice of political engagement, while preserving his intellectual
independence.
Writing to Erasmus in 1533, More expressed his wish to be grievous to
heretics, “my increasing experience with these men frightens me
with the thought of what the world will suffer at their hands”
(SL: p.180). His writings in defence of Catholic orthodoxy have limited
relevance in a philosophical context, but some observations are in
order. More's efforts to counter heresy, whether by writing or legal
process, were undertaken as a public duty, and he invariably
associates heresy with “malice”, that is with active
proselytising, rather than the holding of a belief. His career as a
polemicist began when he was drafted, probably by the Council, to
answer Luther's assault on Henry's Assertio, and in 1528 he
was enlisted by Tunstall to provide a vernacular response to the
heretical books illegally shipped in from the Continent. The
conventions which he inherited saw the detection of heresy as a means
to restore social unity and inclusion (Forrest 2005: 240), and he
viewed with dismay what he read as signs of social disintegration in
the Peasants' Revolt of 1525 in Germany and the Sack of Rome in 1527
(CWM 6:1, 369–72, 427–28; 8:1, 56). Like many
Catholic apologists, he claimed (misguidedly) that Luther's teaching
of justification by faith alone was a license for immoral conduct. It
is no surprise, then, that the author of Utopia should defend
orthodoxy not as a check-list of doctrines but rather as a culture, an
all-embracing way of life, along with the attitudes and practices
which that generated. It is a constant in his thinking that individual
perceptions must be subject to the constraints of collective
experience—as with the “old holy doctors and saints”
who may err on individual matters but conform themselves, by an act of
will, to the consensus of the church as a whole. 
When writing in Latin, More could assume a sophisticated and informed
readership, able to handle his criticism of contemporary abuses
without drawing false conclusions. However, in an age of expanding
literacy, vernacular readers were more exposed to misunderstanding,
especially when confronted by conflicting voices.  More's concern
about untutored access to controversial texts is made clear in A
Dialogue Concerning Heresies, where he treats the issue of an
English Bible: he is in favour of one, provided that both translation
and circulation are controlled by the bishops and that it is handed
out to those who are “honest, sad and virtuous” and who
will read it for purposes of devotion rather than disputation (CWM
6:1, 341). Like Erasmus, More is unhappy at the thought of letting
unqualified readers loose on thorny theological issues like free will,
or indeed on the biblical texts themselves, “meddling with such
parts as least will agree with their capacities”. In the church,
God “will have some readers and some hearers, some teachers and
some learners”; even Plato, “the great philosopher”,
restricted discussion of the laws to “folk meet therefore and in
place convenient” (CWM 6:1, 334). Most arresting of all is
his declaration in the Confutation of Tyndale that were
anyone to translate his earlier Latin writings and Erasmus's
Folly into English, he would burn the books with his own
hands, “rather than folk should (though through their own fault)
take any harm of them”.  For More, it is an issue of expediency,
and that reference to translation is revealing: in the current state
of affairs, when “men by their own default [incapacity]
misconstrue and take harm of the very scripture of God”, it is
the vulnerability of the vernacular reader that worries him (CWM 8:1,
177–79). If A Dialogue Concerning Heresies is the
most successful of the polemical works, this is because it is not
written as a direct riposte to an opponent but as a dialogue which
enacts the process of persuasion. In this More, again adopting a
fictional persona, wins over the youthful Messenger, his interlocutor,
whose sincerity is never in doubt but whose anti-intellectual bias and
self-reliance makes him representative of an evangelical
readership.
The most interesting strand in the polemical works is More's idea of
the church, since that connects with an important theme in late
medieval thought. Against Luther's sinless church,
“imperceptible and mathematical like Platonic Ideas” (CWM
5:1, 167), More presents the church as a mixed community of saints and
sinners, both “good corn and cockle”, deeply bound up in
historical process. Against Tyndale's “feeling faith”,
inspired by the Spirit in the heart of the individual, More argues
that the Spirit operates through the medium of the church (CWM 8:2,
752–53). Against the reformers generally, he asserts the
material insufficiency of Scripture: before the Gospels were ever
written, the Spirit had inscribed Christ's teaching on the hearts of
the faithful, and it is within this controlling context that the
Gospels must be read. But More's conception of the church is far from
being a static appeal to tradition, since he sees the Spirit as
actively engaged within the church till the end of time as its
founding doctrines evolve and develop (CWM 6:1, 146–47). This
“pneumatic” view of the church has implications for its
organization. More is acutely aware of the church as “the whole
flock of all Christian people”: in a lively image or
“suppose”, he pictures a primitive assembly of all
Christians drawn together on a “fair plain”. Apart from
the effort of getting there, they are running short of food, so it is
arranged for the future that representatives should be chosen from
each part to form a general council, and this council would have the
same credence that “the whole Christian people should have if
they were all present there, man, women and child” (CWM 8:2,
937).  More prefers to locate the operation of the Spirit in this
corporate body rather than in any specified office: in the
Responsio he describes how Christ has breathed his Spirit on
the Holy Doctors of the Church, each of whom—being
human—may be in error at some time, but when there is consensus
over a point of doctrine, “in such great numbers through so many
ages”, this may be taken as the voice of the Spirit, who
“makes those who dwell in a house to be of one mind” (CWM
5:1, 129). He even emphasises the way in which synods and councils are
representative of the church as a whole by direct analogy with
Parliament, which “representeth the whole realm” (CWM 8:1,
146). More might be called a moderate conciliarist; and though his
refusal to swear the oath of succession arose from its implicit
repudiation of the pope's power of dispensation, he saw that power as
deriving from the church as the whole people of God. In his view, the
pope might be admonished and even deposed by a council, and he did not
hesitate to declare this view to Thomas Cromwell (CWM 8:2, 590; SL:
p.214).  Against the more extreme claims of ultra-papal canonists,
More's understanding of the pope's office resembles the restrained
conception of royal authority expressed by English lawyers like Sir
John Fortescue (c. 1395–c. 1477), in which the
institution of the body politic is grounded in the intention of the
people.
More was confined in the Tower of London from April 1534 until his
execution on 6 July 1535, and during this period he wrote several
works, notably A Dialogue of Comfort and the unfinished Latin
meditation De tristitia Christi (“The Sadness of
Christ”). The letters written at this time to his daughter
Margaret Roper offer a direct insight into his thoughts, but of
particular interest is the letter of Margaret to her step-sister Alice
Alington (Corr., Letter 206), in which More's voice is
unmistakeably present. Both the Dialogue and De
tristitia face the issue of suffering, but they transcend private
anxiety and are clearly intended for wider circulation. In the
Dialogue More returns to his preferred fictional form,
setting it in Hungary, as the elderly Antony and his nephew Vincent
anticipate persecution in the aftermath of the Ottoman invasion of
their country.  The parallel with More's situation is clear: should
one accommodate or follow conscience? The older man's serene progress
towards acceptance of temporary suffering for a higher good is set
against the counterpoint of the younger man's hesitation. Unlike any
classical treatment of consolation, More admits the role of grace; but
grace still assumes our synergistic response, and this is his primary
concern: it is necessary to gather comfort and courage, “and let
it sink into the heart” (CWM 12, 296). By right
imagining—a form of internalized rhetoric—an abstract
argument is transformed into “a habitual, fast, and deep-rooted
purpose”. A key motif is that of the prison: in an apparent
allusion to Plato's myth of the cave, More distinguishes between
actual confinement in a cell, rated as a prison in the opinion of the
common people, and the more philosophical view that the whole earth
is, in effect, a prison and all its inhabitants under sentence of
death (CWM 12, 269–70). The wise prisoner, however narrowly
confined, is free as long as he can quiet his mind and is content to
be where he is.  Though More's wife finds his prison claustrophobic,
the only difference between his cell and her chamber is that his lock
is outside, while hers is inside (CWM 12, 277). Given More's
relatively lonely stand against royal policy, conscience is a crucial
term for him, as it touches on the soundness of his own motives,
especially when these are criticized as over-scrupulous; and in the
beast fable of Mother Maud he playfully navigates a course between the
scrupulous conscience and the over-large or elastic conscience (CWM
12, 114–20). In Letter 206 of the Correspondence,
attributed to Margaret but clearly based on More's own words,
“conscience” occurs more than forty times. Margaret, cast
as Eve, conveys the view of Sir Thomas Audley, More's successor as
Chancellor, that he is driven by “a right simple scruple”:
with the exceptions of More and Bishop Fisher, all others have been
content to take the oath. In response, More insists that he acts from
an informed conscience, one shaped by many years of study and
reflection. Above all, he acts on his own conscience, and he carefully
distinguishes his position even from that of Fisher— “I
never intend…to pin my soul to another man's back”. The
responsibility must be his alone. While he notes that some of the most
learned men who have taken the oath had previously affirmed the
contrary, he will not impugn their motives or condemn any other man's
conscience; but for his own part, he is content “to lose goods,
land, and life too, rather than swear against my conscience”. It
was on the basis of this meticulous self-examination that More went to
the scaffold.