Theorizing about thought experiments usually turns on the details or
the patterns of specific cases. Familiarity with a wide range of
examples is crucial for commentators, and the list is very long (see,
e.g., Stuart et al. 2018, pp. 558–560) We will provide a few
here. One of the most beautiful early instances (in Lucretius, De
Rerum Natura 1.951–987; see Bailey 1950, pp. 58–59)
attempts to show that space is infinite: if there is a purported
boundary to the universe, we can toss a spear at it. If the spear
flies through, it isn’t a boundary after all; if the spear bounces
back, then there must be something beyond the supposed edge of space,
a cosmic wall that stopped the spear, a wall that is itself in space.
Either way, there is no edge of the universe; thus, space is infinite.
This example nicely illustrates many of the most common features of
what it means to engage in the conduct of thought experiments: we
visualize some situation that we have set up in the imagination; we
let it run or we carry out an operation; we see what happens; finally,
we draw a conclusion. The example also illustrates the fallibility of
thought experiments. Since the time of Lucretius, we’ve learned how to
conceptualize space so that it could be both finite and unbounded.
Imagine a circle, which is a one dimensional space. As we move around,
there is no edge, but it is nevertheless finite. The universe might be
a three-dimensional version of this topology. It is, therefore, true
that we must try to be mindful of unexpected limitations due to
“physical scale effects,” (see Klee 2008) or other such things when
imagining counterfactual scenarios.
Figure 1. “Welcome to the edge of the
Universe”
Often a real experiment that is the analogue of a thought experiment
is impossible for physical, technological, ethical, or financial
reasons (see, e.g., Sorensen 1992, pp. 200–202); but this
needn’t be a defining condition of thought experiments. The main point
is that we seem able to get a grip on nature just by thinking, and
therein lies the great interest for philosophy. How is it possible
to learn apparently new things about nature without new empirical
data? One possible answer is to claim that we possess a great
store of “instinctive knowledge” picked up from
experience. This is the solution that Ernst Mach offered (see Mach,
1897 and 1905; for most instructive assessments of his views see
Kühne 2006, pp. 165–202, and Sorensen 1992, pp.
51–75). We will get back to his solution further down. It
remains one of the major accounts of how thought experiments work. One
of Mach’s favourite examples is due to Simon Stevin (see Mach, 1883,
pp. 48–58). When a chain is draped over a double frictionless
plane, as in Fig. 2a, how will it move? Add some links as in Fig. 2b.
Now it is obvious. The initial setup must have been in static
equilibrium. Otherwise, we would have a perpetual motion machine; and
according to our experience-based “instinctive knowledge,”
says Mach, this is impossible. We do not have to perform the
experiment in the real world, which we could not do, anyway, since it
would require a perfectly frictionless plane. Nevertheless the outcome
seems compelling.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2. “How will it move?”
Judith Thomson provided one of the most striking and effective thought
experiments in the moral realm (see Thomson 1971). Her example is
aimed at a popular anti-abortion argument that goes something like
this: the fetus is an innocent person. All innocent persons have a
right to life. Abortion results in the death of a fetus. Therefore,
abortion is morally wrong. In her thought experiment we are asked to
imagine a famous violinist falling into a coma. The society of music
lovers determines from medical records that you and you alone can save
the violinist’s life by being hooked up to him for nine months. The
music lovers break into your home while you are asleep and hook the
unconscious (and unknowing, hence innocent) violinist to you. You may
want to unhook him, but you are then faced with this argument put
forward by the music lovers: the violinist is an innocent person. All
innocent persons have a right to life. Unhooking him will result in
his death. Therefore, unhooking him is morally wrong. However, the
argument, even though it has the same structure as the anti-abortion
argument, does not seem convincing in this case. You would be very
generous to remain attached for nine months, but you are not morally
obligated to do so. The parallel with the abortion case is evident.
Thomson’s thought experiment is effective in distinguishing two
concepts that had previously been run together: “right to
life” and “right to what is needed to sustain life.”
The fetus and the violinist might each have the former, but it is not
evident that either has the latter. The upshot is that even if the
fetus has a right to life (which Thomson does not believe but allows
for the sake of the argument), it may still be morally permissible to
abort. Those opposed to Thomson’s view have two options. They can
either dismiss her thought experiment as a useless fiction. In fact,
thought experiments as a method in ethics have their critics (see,
e.g., Dancy 1985). Alternatively, they can provide a different
version of the same scenario to challenge the conclusion. It is a very
intriguing feature of thought experiments that they can be
“rethought” (see Bokulich 2001). Real experiments are
frequently open to reinterpretation, too. In this respect there does
not seem to be a principled difference. 
Like arguments, thought experiments can be criticized in different
ways. Perhaps the set up is faulty; perhaps the conclusions drawn from
the thought experiment are not justified. Similar criticisms can arise
in real experiments. Counter thought experiments are perhaps another
form of criticism. They do not target the premises or conclusions
involved in a particular thought experiment but question the
phenomenon, i.e. the non-propositional heart of an imagined scenario
(see Brown 2007). For example, Daniel Dennett is convinced that
Frank Jackson’s Mary thought experiment is poor evidence to oppose
physicalism in philosophy of mind. In Jackson’s version, Mary, who
knows everything physics and the neurosciences can possibly know about
colours but grew up in a colourless environment (seeing only black,
white and grey things), allegedly learns something new when she sees a
red tomato for the first time. Now she knows what it is like to
experience red. This is an argument for qualia as something over and
above the physical. Instead of a red tomato, Dennett, in his version
of the thought experiment, presents Mary with a bright blue banana. In
his version of the story (which seems just as plausible as Jackson’s),
Mary balks and says she is being tricked, since she knows that bananas
are yellow, and this, says Mary, is a consequence of knowing
everything physical about colour perception. Mary does not learn
anything new when she sees coloured objects for the first time, so
there is no case against physicalism after all. Jackson’s initial
thought experiment was very persuasive, but Dennett’s was equally so,
thus, undermining Jackson’s argument.
Clearly, thought experiments are characterized by an intriguing
plasticity, and this raises the interesting question of what it is
that preserves the identity of a thought experiment. Replacing a red
tomato with a blue banana might still leave us with the same thought
experiment––slightly revised. But, at what point do we get
a new thought experiment? This is not merely a question about
conceptual vagueness. It helps to facilitate a discussion of the
intuitively most plausible view about the cognitive efficacy of
thought experiments, according to which this power depends on their
being arguments, in a fairly strict sense of argument. John D. Norton
holds such a view, which will be discussed below. In light of cases
where the discussion of one and the same thought experiment played an
important role in settling a dispute, the following problem arises:
how can one and the same thought experiment support opposing views
about a particular matter if the arguments that correspond to the
different versions of the thought experiment that were entertained by
the disputing parties are significantly different? The dilemma is: we
could say that if there is more than one argument then there is more
than one thought experiment involved in the dispute. But, if that is
true then the disputing parties simply talked pass each other. One
party presented an argument that the other party ignored while
presenting their own. Alternatively, we can say that one thought
experiment can correspond to many different arguments. But, if that is
true then it becomes unclear in what non-trivial sense thought
experiments are supposed to be identical with arguments (see Bishop
1999, and the response by Norton 2004, 63–64).
The plasticity of thought experiments coheres with another feature of
thought experiments, namely that they seem to have “evidential
significance only historically and locally, i.e., when and where
premises that attribute evidential significance to it […] are
endorsed.” (McAllister 1996, p. 248)
Many taxonomies can be found in the literature. They are not mutually
exclusive. We will present three of them. The first follows the type
of purpose thought experiments serve. A very rudimentary version of it
can be found in (Mach, 1897 and 1905). Such a classification makes
sense, because an “imaginary experiment should be judged on its
specific purpose.” (Krimsky 1973, p. 331) Thought experiments
are conducted for diverse reasons (see, e.g., DeMay 2006; Sorensen
1992, pp. 7–15), and this in a variety of areas, including the
economical (see, e.g., Herfeld 2019; Thoma 2016), educational (Helm
and Gilbert 1985; Helm et al. 1985, Klassen 2006; Sriraman 2006;
Stonier 1990), historical (see, e.g., Maar 2014; Reiss 2009), literary
(see, e.g., Davies 2007; Elgin 2004), mathematical (see, e.g. Brown
1991 [2011], pp. 90–97; Glas 1999), moral (see, e.g., Hauerwas
1996; Wilson 2016), natural (see Krimsky 1973), socio-political realm
(see, e.g. Roberts 1993: Thaler 2016), and theological (see, e.g.,
Gregersen 2014; Fehige 2018). Thought experiments may be used to
entertain. This is probably true of short stories or novels which some
argue qualify as thought experiments if certain conditions apply (see,
e.g., Davenport 1983). Some thought experiments fulfil a specific
function within a theory (see Borsboom et al. 2002). Others are
executed because it is impossible to run the experimental scenario in
the real world (see, e.g., Sorensen 1992,
pp. 200–202). Sometimes thought experiments help to illustrate
and clarify very abstract states of affairs, thereby accelerating the
process of understanding (see Behmel 2001). Again others serve as
examples in conceptual analysis (see Cohnitz 2006). And, then there
are those that matter in the process of theory discovery (Praem and
Steglich–Peterson 2015).  The thought experiments that have
received most of the attention are taken to provide evidence for or
against a theory, putting them on a par with real-world experiments
(see, e.g., Gendler 2004). The different ways to use thought
experiments, of course, do not exclude one another. Most obviously,
for example, a thought experiment can both entertain and make a case
against a theory.
A second taxonomy classifies thought experiments in terms of logical
structure (see Sorensen 1992, pp. 132–166). The idea is to
divide all thought experiments into two types of “alethic
refuters”: “Although there are a number of ways to
classify thought experiments, a refutation format scores the most
points when judged by familiarity, specificity, and simplicity.
According to this scheme, thought experiments aim at overturning
statements by disproving one of their modal consequences. Modalities
are operators that are applied to propositions to yield new
propositions. There are deontic modalities (permissible,
forbidden), epistemic modalities (know, believe), and
alethic modalities (possible, necessary). The alethic
modalities are the best–known and more–basic modality.
Hence, we won’t miss anything by concentrating on them.”
(Sorensen 1992, p. 135) One type of thought experiment “is
designed to refute a statement by showing that something ruled out as
impossible by that statement is really possible after all.”
(Sorensen 1992, p. 135) The most discussed examples in the
metaphilosophical discussion on thought experiments is of such a type,
namely the Gettier scenarios (see Grundmann & Horvarth 2014;
Saint-Germier 2019). They are designed to refute the claim that all
knowledge is justified, true belief. They serve as a “necessity
refuter.” The other type collects examples of “possibility
refuters”. They don’t affirm “the possibility of the
thought experiment’s content”. Instead, they establish
“copossibilities”. A wonderful example is the scenario of
an omnipotent God who faces the task of creating a stone too heavy for
her to lift. It seems God cannot succeed. The notion of divine
omnipotence causes some headaches here.
A third taxonomy (see Brown 1986, pp. 4–11), which has not gone
unchallenged (see Norton 1993b), is more limited than the fist two
insofar as it focuses largely on the class of those thought
experiments that are taken to function in theory choice, which is the
use of thought experiments that has been receiving most of the
attention. According to this taxonomy, the main division is
constructive vs. destructive and resembles Karl Popper’s
distinction between apologetic and critical thought
experiments. Popper actually distinguishes between three types of
thought experiments: heuristic (to illustrate a theory),
critical (against a theory) and apologetic (in
favour of a theory) (see Popper 1959). His case in favour of a
critical and against an apologetic use of thought experiments is very
limited. He focuses exclusively on quantum physics and doesn’t really
say much to address the primary epistemological challenge presented by
the success of critical thought experiments.
Among destructive thought experiments, the following
subtypes can be identified: the simplest of these is to draw out a
contradiction in a theory, thereby refuting it. The first part of
Galileo’s famous falling bodies example does this. It shows that in
Aristotle’s account, a composite body (cannon ball and musket ball
attached) would have to fall both faster and slower than the cannon
ball alone. A second subtype is constituted by those thought
experiments that aim to show that the theory in question is in
conflict with other beliefs that we hold. Schrödinger’s
well-known cat paradox, for instance, does not show that quantum
theory (at least on some interpretations) is internally inconsistent
(see Schrödinger 1935, p. 812; translation: Trimmer 1980, p.
328): “A cat is penned up in a steel chamber, along with the
following diabolical device (which must be secured against direct
interference by the cat): in a Geiger counter there is a tiny bit of
radioactive substance, so small, that perhaps in the course of one
hour one of the atoms decays, but also, with equal probability,
perhaps none; if it happens, the counter tube discharges and through a
relay releases a hammer which shatters a small flask of hydrocyanic
acid. If one has left this entire system to itself for an hour, one
would say that the cat still lives if meanwhile no atom has decayed.
The first atomic decay would have poisoned it. The q-function of the
entire system would express this by having in it the living and the
dead cat (pardon the expression) mixed or smeared out in equal
parts.” This thought experiment shows that quantum theory (as
interpreted by Bohr) is in conflict with some very powerful common
sense beliefs we have about macro-sized objects such as
cats––they cannot be both dead and alive in any sense
whatsoever. The bizarreness of superpositions in the atomic world is
worrisome enough, says Schrödinger, but when it implies that same
bizarreness at an everyday level, it is intolerable. There is a third
subtype of negative thought experiments, namely when, in effect, a
central assumption or premise of the thought experiment itself is
undermined. For example, as we have seen above, Thomson showed with
her thought experiment that “right to life” and
“right to what is needed to sustain life” had been run
together. When distinguished, the argument against abortion is
negatively affected.
A fourth sub-type of negative thought experiments are “counter
thought experiments” (see Brown 2007). Norton very usefully
introduces a related idea:
“thought-experiment/anti-thought-experiment pairs” (see
Norton 2004, pp. 45–49). Above, we have already encountered
this subtype in our discussion of Lucretius’ spear-thought experiment,
and with Dennett’s reply to Jackson’s much discussed Mary the colour
scientist thought experiment. Here we would like to add one more
example, namely Mach’s counter thought experiment against absolute
space. In his Principia Mathematica, Newton offers a pair of
thought experiments as evidence for absolute space. One is the bucket
with water climbing the wall, the other is a pair of spheres joined by
a cord that maintained its tension in otherwise empty space. The
explanation for these phenomena, argues Newton, is absolute space: the
bucket and the joined spheres are rotating with respect to space
itself. In response, Mach modifies the scenario and argues, contra
Newton, that the two spheres would move toward one another thanks to
the tension in the cord, and if we rotated a very thick, massive ring
around a stationary bucket, we would see the water climb the bucket
wall. (For further discussion of Mach’s counter thought experiment to
Newton’s see Kühne 2006, pp. 191–202). In short, the point
of Mach’s counter thought experiments is to describe the phenomena of
the thought experiments’ scenarios differently, that is, to declare
that different things would happen. Mach’s counter thought experiment
undermines our confidence in Newton’s. Absolute space might be a
plausible explanation of the phenomena in Newton’s thought
experiments, but now, in light of Mach’s counter thought experiment,
we’re not so sure of the phenomena itself and thus of the idea of
absolute space.
Figure 3. Stages in the bucket experiment
Figure 4. Two spheres held by a cord in otherwise empty space
To be effective, counter thought experiments needn’t be very plausible
at all. In a court of law a jury would convict provided guilt is
established “beyond a reasonable doubt.” A common defence
strategy is to provide an alternative account of the evidence that has
just enough plausibility to put the prosecution’s case into some
measure of doubt. That is sufficient to undermine it. A counter
thought experiment need only do that much to be effective, and in this
sense it operates like a “necessity refuter” in Sorensen’s
sense. 
In addition to destructive ones, there is a second type, the
constructive thought experiments. Unsurprisingly, there are
many ways they could provide positive support for a theory. One of
these is to provide a kind of illustration that makes a theory’s
claims clear and evident. In such cases thought experiments serve as a
kind of heuristic aid. A result may already be well established, but
the thought experiment can lead to a very satisfying sense of
understanding. In his Principia Mathematica, Newton provides
a wonderful example showing how the moon is kept in its orbit in just
the same way as an object falls to the earth (see Ducheyne 2006, pp.
435–437). He illustrates this by means of a cannon shooting a
cannon ball further and further. In the limit, the earth curves away
as fast as the ball falls, with the eventual result being that the
cannon ball will return to the spot where it was fired, and, if not
impeded, will go around again and again. This is what the moon is
doing. We could arrive at the same conclusion through calculation. But
Newton’s thought experiment provides that elusive sense of
understanding. It’s a wonderful example of the “aha
effect” that is so typical of the many powerful thought
experiments.
Figure 5. “The shot heard around the world”
Thomson’s violinist showed that abortion could be morally permissible
even when the fetus has a right to life. Similarly, Einstein’s
elevator showed that light will bend in a gravitational field, because
according to the principle of equivalence, there is no difference
between such a frame of reference and one that is accelerating in free
space; the laws of physics are the same in all. Suppose then, an
observer is inside an elevator sealed off from the outside so that the
observer cannot tell whether he is in a gravitational field or
accelerating. If it were accelerating, and if a light beam were to
enter one side, then, due to the elevator’s motion, the beam would
appear to drop or curve down as it crossed the elevator. Consequently,
it would have to do the same thing if the elevator was in a
gravitational field. Therefore, gravity ‘bends’ light.
Maxwell’s demon showed that entropy could be decreased: The second law
of thermodynamics implies that heat won’t pass from a cold body to a
hot one. In classical thermodynamics this law is quite strict; but in
Maxwell’s kinetic theory of heat there is a probability, though
extremely small, of such an event happening. Some thought this a
reductio ad absurdum of Maxwell’s theory. To show how it is possible
to violate the second law, Maxwell imagined a tiny creature who
controls a door between two chambers. Fast molecules from the cold box
are let into the hot box, and slow molecules from the hot are allowed
into the cold. Thus, there will be an increase in the average speed in
the hot box and a decrease in the average speed of molecules in the
cold. Since, on Maxwell’s theory, heat is just the average speed of
the molecules, there has been a flow of heat from a cold body to a hot
one. 
Parfit’s splitting persons shows that survival is a more important
notion than identity when considering personhood (for a critical
discussion see Gendler 2002a). We say they “show” such
and such, but, “purport to show” might be better, since
some of these thought experiments are quite contentious. What they
have in common is that they aim to establish something positive.
Unlike destructive thought experiments, they are not trying to
demolish an existing theory, though they may do that in passing. In
principle, given the fact that thought experiments can be rethought
(see Bokulich 2001), and that the evidential significance is
dependent on historical and local accomplishments (see McAllister
1996), it cannot be irrelevant to identify the intention of the
thought experimenter, if one wants to determine the type of a thought
experiment: “An imaginary experiment should be judged on its
specific purpose.” (Krimsky 1973, p. 331)
The practice of thought experiments is not an invention of modern
science, although there can be no doubt that the notion of a thought
experiment didn’t come into existence before the 18th century.
Accordingly, the view is problematic that the Pre-Socratics
“invented thought experimentation as a cognitive procedure and
practiced it with great dedication and versatility.” (Rescher
2005, p. 2) With such a claim one risks underestimating the
entanglement of concepts and corresponding reality. It is probably
much more correct to say something like the following: “There is
no ancient Greek term corresponding to what we nowadays refer to as a
thought experiment, and presumably ancient philosophers did not have
our modern notion of a thought experiment. But there is no doubt that
they did use thought experiments. In fact, they often employed them in
ways similar to those of contemporary philosophers, that is, both for
defending their own theories as well as for refuting the theories of
their opponents.”(Ierodiakonou 2018, p. 31; see also Becker
2018; Diamond 2002, pp. 229–232; Fuhrer 2009; Glas 1999;
Ierodiakonou 2005; Ierodiakonou and Roux (eds.) 2011; Irvine 1991;
Rescher 1991 and 2005, pp. 61–72). The situation is similar
with respect to medieval natural philosophy, although there are
further nuances to be considered (see King 1991). According to Edward
Grant, during the late Middle Ages “the imagination became a
formidable instrument in natural philosophy and theology in ways that
would have astonished ancient Greek natural philosophers, especially
Aristotle.” (Grant 2007, p. 201) But this doesn’t mean that we
have reason to think of Aristotle as an opponent of the conduct of
thought experiments. On the contrary, “Aristotle uses thought
experiments for argumentative persuasion and in places where, due to
the obscure nature of the subject matter or the counterintuitive
nature of the thesis they are meant to support, insight cannot be
readily communicated by appeal to observational facts.”
(Corcilius 2018, p. 73) With a few exceptions that involved problems
of motion, “the scholastics” made no meaningful effort to
transform their hypothetical conclusions into specific knowledge about
the physical world. They did, however, assume that although these
hypothetical conclusions were naturally impossible, God could produce
them supernaturally if he wished. Special attention received also a
class of medieval thought experiments that does not rely on
counterfactuals but also depends on theological assumptions to study
matters non-theological, namely those thought experiments involving
angels, whose existence were affirmed at that time (see Perler 2008).
Angels are gone by now (see Clark 1992), but not thought experiments.
While most thought experiments involving angels have Christianity as
their context, there is evidence of the practice of thought
experiments also in the context of Islam and Judaism (see McGinnis
2018; Fisch 2019). In fact, the case has been made “that Ibn
Sina is the first philosopher in the Aristotelian tradition, and thus
perhaps the first in Western philosophy overall, to try to identify
the psychological processes that go into postulating a hypothetical
scenario. Ibn Sina also exhibits an interest in accounting for why,
and to what extent, such psychological acts are thought to carry
weight in our study of nature.” (Kukkonen 2014, p. 434)
Ernst Mach is commonly credited with introducing the word
“thought experiment” (Gadankenexperiment) and
thereby coining a term for philosophical discussion (most recently
Krauthausen 2015, p. 15). “ This view is incorrect, however!
[…] it can be substantiated that it was used […] already
in 1811.” (Witt-Hansen 1976, p. 48; see also Buzzoni 2008, pp.
14–15; 61–65; Cohnitz 2008; Kühne 2005, pp.
92–224; Moue et al. 2006, p. 63). The conceptual history of
“thought experiment” goes back at least to the Danish
“Tankeexperiment,” as it was used by Hans-Christian
Ørsted. We can go back even further and find in the work of the
German philosopher-scientist Georg Lichtenberg (1742–1799) a
tacit theory of “experiments with thoughts and ideas.”
These experiments help to overcome habits of thought that can inhibit
scientific progress, and make possible an enlightened philosophy (see
Schildknecht 1990, pp. 21; 123–169; Schöne 1982).
Lichtenberg’s “aphoristic experiments” (see Stern 1963,
pp. 112–126) reflect “that Lichtenberg’s scientific
preoccupations are the formal and thematic prolegomena to his work as
a literary artist.” (Stern 1963, p. 126) Lichtenberg’s
reflections on thought experimentation resemble those of Popper and
Thomas S. Kuhn, and it is plausible to think of him as one important
figure of the very first period in the history of philosophical
inquiry into thought experiments (see Fehige and Stuart 2014).
 Accordingly, the modern history of the philosophical investigation
into thought experiments can be divided into four stages: in the 18th
and 19th century the awareness of the importance of thought
experiments in philosophy and science emerges. In addition to
Lichtenberg, special mention should be made of Novalis (see Daiber
2001; Fehige 2013a), and Hans-Christian Ørsted. The topic
reemerges in a more systematic manner at the beginning of the 20th
century with little relation to the attempts made at the first stage.
The stakeholders of the second stage were Pierre Duhem, Mach, and
Alexius Meinong (see Duhem 1913, pp. 304–311; Mach, 1883, pp.
48–58, 1897 and 1905; Meinong 1907). A third stage, probably due
to the rediscovery of the importance of scientific practice for a
proper understanding of science, followed in the first part of the
second half of the 20th century. Again, the contributions of this
stage bear little relation to the two previous stages. While the third
period has seen a number of noteworthy contributions (Cole 1983; Dancy
1985; Dennett 1985; Fodor 1964; Helm; Gilbert 1985; Helm et al. 1985;
Krimsky 1973; McMullin 1985; Myers 1986; Poser 1984; Prudovsky 1989;
Rehder 1980a,b; Yourgrau 1962 and 1967), the protagonists of this
period were Alexandre Koyré, Kuhn and Popper. The ongoing
philosophical exploration of thought experiments began in the 1980s,
and marks the fourth stage. Arguably, it has been the most prolific
one of all four stages. With some very important sign-postings in
place (Horowitz and Massey (eds.) 1991; Sorensen 1992a, b, c; Wilkes
1988) the ongoing discussion took off in light of a debate between
James Robert Brown and John D. Norton (see for a concise statement of
each position Brown 2004; Norton 2004), which many have found useful
to establish a contrast with their own alternative accounts of thought
experiments. These views “represent the extremes of platonic
rationalism and classic empiricism, respectively.” (Moue et
al. 2006, p. 69) They will be described below.
We want to emphasize at this point that not all of the numerous
contributions to the discussion about thought experiments target
primarily the epistemological challenge to which advocates of the
accounts respond that this section is going to feature in some detail.
But, of course, the challenge sits at the centre of the discussion,
and this explains to a great deal what every contributor remarks about
it. Our aim in this section is to demonstrate the variety of accounts
that have been proposed to makes sense of the cognitive power many
thought experiments are credited with. We cannot discuss here all the
authors who are representative for each type of view which we will
identify, including: (A) the “skeptical objection”, (B)
the “intuition–based account”, (C) the
“argument view”, (D) “conceptual
constructivism”, (E) “experimentalism”, and (F) the
“mental–model account”.
(A) The Sceptical Objection 
Of course, particular thought experiments have been contested. But for
the most part, the practice of thought experiments in the sciences has
been cheerfully accepted. Pierre Duhem, the great historian of
physics, is almost alone in what has been understood as an outright
condemnation of scientific thought experiments (see Duhem 1913, pp.
304–311). A thought experiment is no substitute for a real
experiment, he claimed, and should be forbidden in science, including
science education. However, in view of the important role of actual
thought experiments in the history of physics — from Galileo’s
falling bodies, to Newton’s bucket, to Einstein’s elevator — it
is unlikely that anyone will feel or should feel much sympathy for
Duhem’s strictures. We hasten to add that Buzzoni (2018) questions the
validity of this reading of Duhem, and argues that already Mach’s
reception of Duhem’s views suggests a more nuanced reading of Duhem’s
position.
Philosophers can be as critical as Duhem when it comes to thought
experimenting in their own field (see Cohnitz 2006b; Peijnenburg;
Atkinson 2003; Thagard 2014; Sorensen 1992a, pp. 7–50;
Stuart 2014; Wilson 2016). At least thought experiments in science,
the skeptic claims, can be tested by physical experiment. However,
this is clearly false, since frictionless planes and universes empty
of all material bodies cannot be produced in any laboratory. True, the
results of philosophical thought experiments cannot be even
approximately tested. But, skeptics say little about why thought
experiments enjoy such popularity in philosophy. We are inclined to
say that skeptics underestimate the importance of thought experiments
for the creative mind in any field.
Few are outright skeptics, however. Many take a more ambiguous stance.
Sören Häggqvist, for example, has developed a normative
model for philosophical thought experiments (see Häggqvist 1996
and 2009). Surprisingly, none of the commonly accepted philosophical
thought experiments satisfies his model. And the process of
identifying successful thought experiments is only the first step in
addressing the central epistemological challenge posed by thought
experiments. It gets much messier once we begin to ask exactly how
reliable “successful” thought experiments are. Granted,
there is some justice in worrying about the reliability of
philosophical thought experiments (see, e.g., Klee 2008). This might
be true for ethics (see Dancy 1985, Jackson 1992; Wilson 2016),
conceptual analysis (see Fodor 1964), and philosophy of mind:
“A popular strategy in philosophy is to construct a certain sort
of thought experiment I call intuition pump. […] Intuition
pumps are often abused, though seldom deliberately.” (Dennett
1985, p. 12) The claim by Dennett and others is that thought
experiments too often rest on prejudice and faulty common sense; they
are inherently conservative, while real science will likely result in
highly-counterintuitive outcomes. Dennett believes that thought
experiments rest on naive “folk concepts,” which is why they can
be so misguided. It is far from clear that this is a fair charge.
Everything involved in Galileo’s thought experiment that produced
the principle of relativity could be called “folk concepts.” If we
are inside a ship and perform a number of experiments, such as walking
about, tossing a ball, watching birds fly about, we could not tell
whether we are at rest in port or sailing over a smooth sea. The
upshot is that nature behaves the same either way; the laws of nature
are the same in any inertial frame. This result is profound and is
still with us in Einstein’s relativity, whether it is folk physics
or not. 
Frequently discussed is the skeptical challenge raised by Kathleen
Wilkes. She expresses a deep suspicion of scenarios such as Derek
Parfit’s people splitting like an amoeba (see Parfit 1987; Gendler
2002a). Wilkes wants philosophy “to use science fact rather than
science fiction or fantasy” (Wilkes 1988, p. 1), and therefore
to refrain from using thought experiments because they are “both
problematic and positively misleading.” (Wilkes 1988, p. 2) She
claims that thought experiments about personal identity in particular
often fail to provide the background conditions against which the
experiment is set (see Wilkes 1988, p. 7). She thinks we would not
know what to say if we encountered someone who split like an amoeba.
She insists that a legitimate thought experiment must not violate the
known laws of nature. We do agree with Wilkes that underdetermination
can be a problem. But instead of dismissing thought experiments in
philosophy we should consider it a crucial factor in assessing the
quality of a thought experiment (see Rescher 2005, pp. 9–14).
The more detailed the imaginary scenario in the relevant aspects, the
better the thought experiment (see Brendel 2004, pp. 97–99;
Häggqvist 1996, p. 28).
We also agree that the inferences drawn in thought experimenting are
highly problematic if the hypothetical scenario “is inadequately
described.” (Wilkes 1988, p. 8) But Wilkes seems to think that
the lack of description is unavoidable, which supposedly amounts to a
reason against philosophical thought experiments on personal identity
because persons are not natural kinds. This makes it impossible to
fill in necessary information to make the thought experiment work
given its unavoidable underdetermination. Wilkes thinks that
“whenever we are examining the ranges of concepts that do not
pick on natural kinds, the problem of deciding what is or what is not
‘relevant’ to the success of the thought experiment is yet
more problematic than the same question as it arises in science; and,
unlike the scientific problem, it may not even have an answer in
principle.” (Wilkes 1988, p. 15) She adds that scientific laws
— especially those describing biological kinds like human beings
— “are not disjoint and independent, detachable from one
another […]. They are interrelated, to varying degrees of
course.” (Wilkes 1988, p. 29) This implies, for example, that
“a full psychophysiological account of the processes of human
perception must at some stage link up with part at least of linguistic
ability; for we typically see things under a certain description, and
that description may be a very sophisticated one.” (Wilkes
1988, p. 29) These considerations have her rule out experiments that
challenge the human monopoly of personhood. No thought experiment,
claims Wilkes, is well conceived if it involves non-human animals or
computers as persons. But also those thought experiments can be ruled
out which involve the “fission or fusion of humans”
because it is not theoretically possible. “The total impact of
the sum of laws that group us together as human beings (a natural kind
category) precludes our splitting into two […] or fusing with
someone else.” (Wilkes 1988, p. 36)
One can ascertain here all too well the inherent difficulties in
thinking about personal identity and the limited benefit some thought
experiments might have for what is deemed the proper metaphysics of
personal identity. Nevertheless, good reasons have been given in
favour of the use of thought experiments about personal identity (see
Beck 2006; Kolak 1993; Hershenov 2008). We also feel that the
problems about thought experiments on personal identity reveal more
about the intricate nature of the subject than about the usefulness of
philosophical thought experiments. And, disregarding other
shortcomings in Wilkes’ skepticism (for further discussion of Wilkes’
views see Beck 1992; Brooks 1994; Focquaert 2003; Häggqvist
1996, pp. 27–34), her suggestion that thought experimental
scenarios would have to satisfy current scientific knowledge about the
relevant entities featured in a thought experiment is highly
implausible. We learn a great deal about the world and our theories
when we wonder, for instance, what would have happened after the big
bang if the law of gravity had been an inverse cube law instead of an
inverse square. Would stars have failed to form? Reasoning about such
a scenario is perfectly coherent and very instructive, even though it
violates a law of nature.
To some extent we should share Wilkes’s concern that thought
experimenting seems to be constrained only by relevant logical
impossibilities and what seems intuitively acceptable. This is indeed
problematic because intuitions can be highly misleading and relevant
logical impossibilities are fairly ungrounded if they cannot be
supplemented by relevant theoretical impossibilities based on current
science in order to avoid the jump into futile fantasy. But in order
to dismiss thought experimenting as a useful philosophical tool one
has to show that intuition cannot be a source of knowledge and that an
epistemic tool should be useless because there is a serious chance it
can fail. Timothy Williamson has argued that we should forget about
intuition as a cushion in the philosophical armchair (see Williamson
2004a,b, 2008, pp. 179–207, and 2009; see also Schaffer 2017).
The importance of intuitions in philosophy has been neglected in the
past (see Williamson 2004b, p. 109–110), and for too long
intuition didn’t receive the attention it deserves (see, e.g., DePaul
and Ramsey (eds.) 1998). Besides the traditional divide between
empiricists, rationalists and skeptics, it is not only a very
non-uniform use of the word “intuition” that makes it
difficult to assess the progress of the last years of philosophical
inquiry about intuitions. The situation has been complicated by the
contributions of experimental philosophers on intuitions who add
different reasons to question their reliability (see for a careful
critique of those reasons: Ludwig 2007; see also Ludwig 2018).
Generally speaking, the reliability of intuitions has been challenged
on two grounds. One stems from an evolutionary explanation of the
capacity to intuit; another is due to experiments which supposedly
show the cultural relativity or racial and gender sensitivity of
intuitions (see, e.g., Buckwalter and Stich 2010): “…a
substantial list of philosophical intuitions vary across demographic
groups and…they are influenced by a number of prima
facies irrelevant factors…Some writers…have urged
that these findings justify a thoroughgoing skepticism about the use
of intuitions as evidence in philosophy…But we think this
conclusion is much too strong…” (Stich & Toba 2018, p.
379) After all, knowledge without intuitions (if only common sense assumptions) seems  impossible. 
The recent discussion of intuitions in epistemology has barely made an
impact on philosophical reflections about thought experiments. As far
as philosophical thought experiments are concerned, this is as it
should be, according to Williamson. In this respect George Bealer can
be cited in support of Williamson, because for Bealer the talk about
philosophical thought experiments reveals a conceptual confusion.
Philosophy, he claims, is about “rational intuitions” and
thought experiments can be only about “physical
intuitions” (see Bealer 1998, pp. 207–208, and 2002, p.
74). To many, this is an implausible claim based on a deeply
problematic “phenomenology of intuitions” resulting in a
strict separation of “rational intuitions” from
“physical intuitions”, on such grounds as an alleged
immutability of “rational intuitions”. There are good
reasons to believe that thought experiments appeal to intuitions in
order to give us new insights about different realms of investigation,
including philosophy. This kind of positive connection is what
Williamson has in mind when addressing the role of intuitions in
philosophical thought experiments like the famous Gettier cases, which
overnight found acceptance by the philosophical community in their aim
to refute the view that knowledge is justified true belief. While
Williamson expects “armchair methods to play legitimately a more
dominant role in future philosophy” (Williamson 2009, p. 126),
he thinks that “we should stop talking about intuition.”
(Williamson 2004b, p. 152). This does not impress proponents of what
we call an intuition-based account of thought experiments, and
probably for good reasons, given the problems in Williamson’s approach
(see, e.g., Dohrn 2016; Ichikawa and Jarvis 2009; Schaffer 2017),
and the empirical evidence in favour of the positive role that
intuitions can play in human cognition.
(B) The Intuition–Based Account 
What we term the “intuition–based account” of
thought experiments comes in a naturalistic version (see Brendel 2004;
Gendler 2007), and in a Platonic version (see Brown 1991a [2011]). We
begin with a discussion of the latter. Brown holds that in a few
special cases we do go well beyond the old empirical data to acquire a
priori knowledge of nature (see also Koyré 1968). Galileo
showed that all bodies fall at the same speed with a brilliant thought
experiment that started by destroying the then reigning Aristotelian
account. The latter holds that heavy bodies fall faster than light
ones (H > L). But consider Figure 6, in which a
heavy cannon ball (H) and light musket ball (L) are
attached together to form a compound object (H+L);
the latter must fall faster than the cannon ball alone. Yet the
compound object must also fall slower, since the light part will act
as a drag on the heavy part. Now we have a
contradiction: H+L >
H and H > H+L. That’s the end
of Aristotle’s theory. But there is a bonus, since the right account
is now obvious: they all fall at the same speed (H =
L = H+L).
Figure 6. Galileo: “I don’t even have to look”
Brown claims this is a priori (though still fallible) knowledge of
nature, since there are no new data involved, nor is the conclusion
derived from old data. Moreover, is it some sort of logical truth (for
the latest and most technical challenge of this claim see Urbaniak
2012). This account of thought experiments can be further developed by
linking the a priori epistemology to accounts of laws of nature that
hold that laws are relations among objectively existing abstract
entities. It is thus a form of Platonism, not unlike Platonic accounts
of mathematics such as that urged by Kurt Gödel. 
The two most often repeated arguments against this sort of Platonism are:
it does not identify criteria to distinguish good from bad thought
experiments, and it violates the principle of ontological parsimony.
He would consider these weak objections.  Perhaps they find widespread acceptance
because Platonism seems to be unfashionable these days (see Grundmann
2018), given the general popularity of various forms of naturalism. If
intuitions really do the job in a thought experiment, the first
objection is weak because neither rationalists nor empiricists have a
theory about the reliability of intuitions. So the objection should be
that intuitions probably just do not matter in human cognition.
However, there are good reasons to question the truth of this claim
(see Myers 2004). This is not to marginalize the problems that arise
when admitting intuitions as a source of knowledge and justification,
especially in philosophy (see Hitchcock 2012). 
As for the second objection, the appeal to Occam’s razor is in general
problematic when it is employed to rule out a theory. Whatever we
eliminate by employing the principle of parsimony we can easily
reintroduce it by an inference to the best explanation (see Meixner
2000). And this is exactly what a Platonist contends his or her
Platonism about thought experimenting to be, while conceding that the
Platonic intuition appears miraculous. But are they really more
miraculous than sense perception, which seems similar in many respects
to Platonic intuition? One might want to say yes, because supposedly
we have no clue at all how Platonic intuition works but we do have
some idea about the nature of sense perception. We know that if an
object is far away it appears smaller in vision, and under certain
light conditions the same object can look quite different. However, is
it really impossible to state similar rules to capture the nature of
Platonic intuition? If you are drunk or lack attention you most
probably will not be very successful in intuiting anything of
philosophical value. 
A review of the relevant psychological literature will reveal further
criteria that could be employed to identify good and bad conditions
for Platonic intuition while thought experimenting. Yet, proponents of
the naturalistic version of the intuition–based account wonder
how necessary Platonism is once this move is entertained in defence of
the reliability of intuitions (see Miščević 2004).
Elke Brendel defines intuitions as mental propositional attitudes
accompanied with a strong feeling of certainty. In her view, we can
tell two stories to make sense of their cognitive power and
plasticity. One story relates to our biological constitution and
evolutionary past. The other is about membership in specialized
communities. Brendel’s account raises many questions, but it is
difficult to resist its appeal. A universal set is appealing to anyone
not trained in logic because most things we are familiar with can come
in sets, such as books, tables, and philosophers. A set of all sets
seems intuitively plausible. The intuition disappears once you worked
yourself through the problems arising from the idea of a set of all
sets. Brendel is quick to insist that such relativity of our
intuitions doesn’t imply that they are cognitively useless. Without
intuitions, we probably wouldn’t have knowledge, and thought
experiments are sometimes the only way to access the intuitions that
guide us in our cognitive lives. (see Brendel 2004)
(C) The Argument View 
John D. Norton is the most influential advocate of what we call
“the argument view” of thought experiments (see Norton
1991, 1993, 1996, 2004a,b, 2008). Even though the argument view seems
to be a natural option for empiricists, it seems that most empiricists
find Norton’s argument view too strong. For this reason, many
participants in the debate about thought experiments place themselves
between the extremes of Norton and Brown, who function as useful foils
for apparently more moderate outlooks. Perhaps (with tongue in cheek) they could 
agree with Bernard Shaw on the virtues of
moderation, when Shaw said of the typical member of the middle class
that he is moderately honest, moderately intelligent, and moderately
faithful to his spouse. Norton claims that any thought experiment is
really a (possibly disguised) argument; it starts with premises
grounded in experience and follows deductive or inductive rules of
inference in arriving at its conclusion. The picturesque features of
any thought experiment which give it an experimental flavour might be
psychologically helpful, but are strictly redundant. Thus, says
Norton, we never go beyond the empirical premises in a way to which
any empiricist would object. 
There are three objections that might be offered against Norton.
First, his notion of argument is too vague. However, this might not be
the best objection: arguments can be deductive (which are perfectly
clear) or inductive. If the latter are unclear, the fault is with
induction, not with Norton’s argument view. Second, it is argued that
Norton simply begs the question: every real world experiment can be
rephrased as an argument, but nobody would say that real world
experiences are dispensable. The account does not address the question:
where do the premises come from? A thought experiment might be an
essential step in making the Norton-style reconstruction. Third, a
thought experiment that is presented in argument form loses its
typical force. The soft-point in Brown’s Platonism is linked to the
strength of Norton’s account because Norton claims that any other view
implies a commitment to “asking the oracle.”
“Imagine an oracle that claims mysterious powers but never
delivers predictions that could not be learned by simple inferences
from ordinary experience. We would not believe that the oracle had any
mysterious powers. I propose the same verdict for thought experiments
in science.” (Norton 1996, pp. 1142–1143) Defenders of
empiricist alternatives deny this dispensability thesis. Brendel
(2018) offers a most comprehensive review of merits and perils of the
argument view. 
(D) Conceptual Constructivism 
“Conceptual constructivism”, as we could call it, is among
the empiricist alternatives to the argument view. The position has
been taken up by Van Dyck (2003) to account especially for
Heisenberg’s ɣ-ray microscope; but also by Gendler (1998) to
makes sense of Galileo’s falling body thought experiment. Gendler’s
proposal was advanced in more general terms by Camilleri (2014) in
order to establish a firm middle ground between the views of Norton
and Brown. Conceptual constructivism was first proposed by Thomas Kuhn
(1964). He employs many of the concepts (but not the terminology) of
his well-known Structure of Scientific Revolutions. On his
view a well-conceived thought experiment can bring on a crisis or at
least create an anomaly in the reigning theory and so contribute to
paradigm change. Thought experiments can teach us something new about
the world, even though we have no new empirical data, by helping us to
re-conceptualize the world in a new way. Accordingly, Fehige (2013b)
entertains the option of conceptual constructivism in form of a
Neo-Kantian reading of Einstein’s famous clock in the box thought
experiment. This proposal is inspired by Michael Friedman’s proposal
to conceive of scientific revolutions as times when a Kantian kind of
natural philosophy plays a major role in guiding scientists from one
paradigm to another. The work of Kuhn left us with a puzzle: if
scientific rationality is absolutely dependent on a paradigm, and if
during scientific revolutions one paradigm replaces another, not in
degrees but like a Gestalt switch, then this transition from one
paradigm to the next cannot be a matter of scientific rationality. Are
scientific revolutions irrational periods in the history of science?
Not necessarily, some kind of natural philosophy may guide the
process. Friedman has a Kantian natural philosophy in mind; his
proposal did not earn wide acceptance, but the problem remains (see
Fisch 2017).
(E) Experimentalism 
What we might term “experimentalism” encompasses a wide
range of different approaches which all assume that thought
experiments are a “limiting case” of ordinary experiments.
Experimentalism was proposed first by Ernst Mach (1897 and 1905). He
defines experimenting in terms of its basic method of variation and
its capacity to destroy prejudices about nature. According to Mach,
experimenting is innate to higher animals, including humans. The
thought experiment just happens on a higher intellectual level but is
basically still an experiment. At the centre of thought experimenting
is a “Gedankenerfahrung”, an experience in thought. Such
an experience is possible because thought experiments draw from
“unwillkürliche Abbildungen von Tatsachen”
(non-arbitrary images of facts) acquired in past experiences of
the world. Some thought experiments are so convincing in their results
that an execution seems unnecessary; others could be conducted in a
real-world experiment, which is the most natural trajectory of a
scientific thought experiment. In any case thought experiments can
result in a revision of belief, thereby demonstrating their
significance for scientific progress. Mach also appreciates the
didactic value of thought experiments: they help us to realize what
can be accomplished in thinking and what cannot.
In the spirit of Mach, Roy A. Sorensen has offered an aspiring version
of experimentalism that accounts for thought experiments in science
and philosophy, and tackles many of the central issues of the topic.
Sorensen claims thought experiments are “a subset of unexecuted
experiments” (1992, p. 213). By their logical nature they are
paradoxes that aim to test modal consequences of propositions. The
origin of our capacity of thought experimentation is explained in
terms of Darwinian evolution (as in Genz 1999, pp. 25–29),
though the explanation has been criticized to be only little more than
a ‘just so story’ that fails, on a posteriori grounds, to
epistemically underwrite that capacity (see Maffie 1997). Others are
more optimistic (see Shepard 2008). 
Experimentalism does not have to take a naturalistic turn as it does
in Sorensen’s case. In a number of contributions Marco Buzzoni has
defended a Neo-Kantian version of experimentalism (see Buzzoni 2004,
2007, 2008, 2011, 2011b, 2013, 2013b). Buzzoni (2008) argues for the
dialectical unity of thought experiments and real-world experiments.
Thought experiments and real-world experiments are claimed to be
identical on the “technological-operational” level, and at
least in science, one is impossible without the other: without thought
experiments there wouldn’t be real-world experiments because we would
not know how to put questions to nature; without real-world
experiments there wouldn’t be answers to these questions or experience
from which they could draw. Given the many scientific thought
experiments that cannot be realized in the real-world, Buzzoni might
be conflating thought experiments with imagined experiments to be
carried out in the real-world (see Fehige 2012, 2013b; and Buzzoni
2013b). 
(F) The Mental–Model Account 
The last of the many accounts that emerged in the discussion about
thought experiments is what could be called the
“mental–model account”. It attracts the most
followers (see Andreas 2011; Bishop 1998; Cooper 2005; Gendler
2004; Palmieri 2003; Nersessian 1992, 1993, 2007; McMullin 1985;
Miščević 1992 and 2007). When we conduct a thought
experiment, according to champions of this view, we manipulate a
mental model instead of a physical model: “The general claim is
that in certain problem-solving tasks people reason by constructing a
mental model of the situations, events, and processes that in dynamic
cases can be manipulated through simulation.” (Nersessian 2018,
p. 319) Like physical models, mental models are non-propositional in
nature. This means first of all “that the carefully crafted
thought–experimental narrative focuses on the construction of a
model of a kind of situation and manipulating that model
through simulation affords epistemic access to certain features of
current representations in a way that manipulating propositional
representations using logical rules cannot.” (Nersessian 2018,
p. 319–320) A narrative functions as a kind of user-manual for
building the model, but it isn’t identical to a thought
experiment.
The mental–model approach is one of the most promising of all
the accounts the literature on thought experiments has to offer, and
this for several reasons. First, it does not seem to be much of a
stretch to draw connections to the intuition–based account. In
fact, intuitions maybe the missing link to connect the essentially
non-propositional activities surrounding mental models, on the one
hand, and the propositional aspects of thought experiments, on the
other. After all, thought experiments involve propositional reasoning,
and somehow the non-propositional and propositional aspects of thought
experiments must be linked in any account of thought experiments. This
is urgent insofar as thought experiments are credited with a
meaningful role in theory discovery and theory choice. Second, the
mental–model approach also allows for inclusion of important
elements of experimentalism and the argument–view. Thought
experiments are realized in the mind on mental models, and the method
of variation is employed such that the results of the experiment may
be subject to a careful reconstruction of propositional lines of
reasoning to submit it for careful assessment and critique. Fourth,
the mental–model approach enables us to bring an aspect into
focus that has been widely neglected in the discussion so far: the
bodily component of (thought) experiments. The exception is the work
of the late David Gooding (1992, 1993, 1994, and 1999). Fifth, in
critical engagement with such naturalistic proposals, those theories
of the body may be put to work that the philosophical school of
phenomenology has produced (see Fehige and Wiltsche 2013). To be
welcomed, therefore, is the entry of phenomenology into the discussion
on thought experiments (see Hopp 2014; Wiltsche 2018). Sixth, the
mental–model account also relates naturally to the most
intriguing discussions about the role of literary fiction in thought
experiments. 
Some have placed “literary fiction on the level of thought
experiments.” (Swirski 2007, p. 6) There are two readings of
such a claim. According to the first, some literary fiction may be of
cognitive power due to the fact that they are thought experiments. In
other words, we shouldn’t outright reject the idea that literature can
be of cognitive value. Dystopian novels such as Orwell’s 1984
and Huxley’s Brave New World are obvious examples. According
to the second reading, the power of thought experiments is partially a
function of the narrative that conveys it. The work of Novalis remains
relevant for the exploration of this link between narrative
development and thought experiment: experimental writing and
experiments on imagined scenarios go hand in hand; words and thoughts
coincide; mind and matter are entangled (see, e.g., Fehige 2013a)
According to the mental–model approach, both readings have a
valid point. Literary fiction and narratives of thought experiments
can be powerful in establishing mental models in such a way that we
can even learn new things about the world at times from the fictional
elements of them. The common denominator is the work on mental models
each may facilitate. It is in this context that an appreciation can
grow for Catherine Elgin’s theory of exemplification to argue against
the “valorization of truth in epistemology” (2004, p.
113). This is also the place to consider Andras Kertesz (2015) work on
conceptual metaphor research in its relevance to the epistemological
puzzle that thought experiments pose.
Finally, eighth, mention could be made of visual reasoning in
mathematics, which often seems closely related to thought experiments.
The standard view of mathematics is that the one and only source of
evidence is a proof, and a proof is a derivation from axioms or first
principles. Let’s overlook the problem of where the first principles
come from. A simple example such as the following casts doubt on the
standard view.
Theorem: 1 + 2 + 3 + … + n = n2/2 + n/2
Proof: See Figure 7.
Figure 7. Picture proof.
The proof works like this: Start at the top and work down, letting the
little squares represent numbers, 1 + 2 + 3 + 4 + 5. The
total number of squares in the picture is equal to this sum. Notice
also that the numbers of squares is equal to a large square with sides
of length 5 that is cut in half along the diagonal, i.e.,
52/2, plus the shaded bits that were cut off by
the diagonal cut, i.e., 5/2. It is plausible to claim that
the diagram is a perfectly good proof of the theorem. One can
“see” complete generality in the picture. Even though it only
illustrates the theorem for n = 5, somehow we can see that it
works for every number, all infinitely many of them. The diagram does
not implicitly suggest a “rigorous” verbal or symbolic proof. The
regular proof of this theorem is by mathematical induction, but the
diagram does not correspond to an inductive proof at all, since the
key element in an inductive proof is the passage from n to
n + 1. The simple moral we could draw from the example is
just this: We can in special cases correctly infer theorems from
pictures, that is, from visualizable situations. There is an intuition
and from this intuition we can grasp the truth of the theorem. (See
Brown 1999 [2008].) 
This assessment of the current situation is very rough and speculative,
though certainly not implausible. Of course, there are challenges to
such a vision of a greater synthesis of the many different takes on
thought experiments. For example, some see additional support arising
for the argument–view from computer simulations (see Beisbart
2012). Others find that “computational modeling is largely
replacing thought experimenting, and the latter will play only a
limited role in future practice of science, especially in the sciences
of complex nonlinear, dynamical phenomena” (see Chandrasekharan
et al. 2012, p. 239). But, there are also proposals such as
that by Marcus Schulzke (2014) to think of video games philosophically
as executable thought experiments. Whatever the merits of this
particular proposal, future explorations of the relationship between
computer simulations and thought experiments can build on outcomes of
closer inquiries into it (see Behmel 2001, pp. 98–108; Di Paolo
et al. 2000; El Skaf and Imbert 2013; Lenhard 2011;
Stäudner 1998; Lenhard 2018). The work on the nature of the
importance of scientific understanding (see, e.g., Stuart 2018) will
inform that exploration as much as the fruits of continuing efforts to
clarify the role of the imagination in thought experiments (see, e.g.,
Meynell 2014; Stuart 2017 and forthcoming (b)).
We conclude with an interesting, but still relatively unexplored issue
that concerns the relative importance of thought experiments in
different disciplines. Physics and philosophy use them extensively.
Chemistry, by contrast, seems to have few or none at all. Why is this
the case? Perhaps it is merely an historical accident that chemists
never developed a culture of doing thought experiments. Perhaps it is
tied to some deep feature of the discipline itself (see Snooks 2006).
Economics and history use thought experiments, but apparently not
anthropology. A good explanation would likely tell us a lot about the
structure of these disciplines.
Related to this is the question of the difference, if any, between
thought experiments in the sciences and those in philosophy.  We have
assumed throughout this article that they are the same kind of thing.
Not everyone sees them this way, so perhaps it should be considered an
open question.  On the one hand, philosophy and science seem to many
to be different kinds of activities.  That might suggest that thought
experiments would differ in the two areas.  On the other hand, there
is a huge difference between thought experiments within a single
field, e.g., Newton’s bucket attempts to establish absolute space
while Schrodinger’s cat aims to show QM as then understood to be
absurd.  Is the difference between them less than the difference
between either of them and Searle’s Chinese Room or Thomson’s
violinist?  The case one way or the other is not obvious.  Of course,
there are differences between constructive and destructive thought
experiments, but this is true within any discipline.  Perhaps for now
the default attitude ought to be that there is no principle difference
between scientific and philosophical thought experiments.  This should
not be treated as a dogmatic principle, but rather a stimulus to look
deeper for important subtle contrasts.