The meta-level claim about self-recontextualization as
self-reversal, which applies at all levels to all Tiantai doctrines,
is itself the consequence of some considerations concerning
contextualism, holism and conditionality, with which it is thus
convenient to begin our exposition. The heart of the matter, the most
fundamental and far-reaching renovation of Buddhism accomplished by
the Tiantai School, is the move from the Two Truths model to
a Three Truths one. The Two Truths is an epistemological and
pedagogical heuristic in most Mahāyāna Buddhism, but in Tiantai the
Three Truths are taken to be a necessary logical entailment of any
proposed determinacy, and thus to apply equally to any possible
ontological, epistemological and ethical entities. They can be
summarized by the claim that no entity can be either the same as or
different from any other entity. This relation of
neither-sameness-nor-difference is the “asness” relation:
each determinate thing is the totality of all other possible
things as this thing. The non-sameness implies that the
specific characteristics of all other things are in some sense
discoverable in each thing, that all their manifold properties and
functions will also be simultaneously operative there. 
We can reconstruct the argument for this claim as follows:
From this we can perhaps see in what way Tiantai is able to
stipulate at once the self-preserving and the self-overcoming of both
holism and apophasis. First, atomism of any kind is rejected as
unintelligible, and a thorough contextualism asserted: things can only
be determinate in relation to a context, and there can be no
non-arbitrary limiting of the extent and multiplicity of contexts,
since each context will itself be intelligible only with respect to a
larger context. This would seem to lead to a holism of some sort: each
apparently isolable thing is really an aspect or expression of some
more inclusive whole, and each of these finite wholes must be an
aspect or expression of a still more inclusive whole. The part is
dependent on the whole, the conditional is dependent on the
unconditional. But the unconditional can have no specific separate
identity, not even as “the unconditional per
se”. Any determination for the whole turns out to
self-overturn into other determinations, precisely due to its success
in being a determination for the exceptionless whole. For example,
Thales says the world is made of water. This is stipulated after first
isolating other lesser wholes: water, earth, fire, air. Each of these
was already a finite whole, involving an alleged collapse from
appearance to a deeper reality: what appeared to be trees and stones
and pillars turned out to be part of the larger whole
“earth”, ways in which earth appears or manifests; what
appeared to be body-heat and flames and sunshine turned out to be part
of the larger whole “fire”, ways in which fire appears or
manifests. Now Thales says both of these are really parts of a larger
whole “water”, ways in which it appears and manifests. But
each of these generalizing claims involves a meaning-change
for the term in question. “Water” initially meant
“what is not fire, earth, wind, which excludes them,
what is contrasted to them”. After Thales, “water”
means also “what expresses itself sometimes as watery, sometimes
as fiery, sometimes as earthy, sometimes as windy”. Along comes
Heraclitus and claims that all is really
“fire”. “Fire” now means also “what
expresses itself sometimes as watery, sometimes as fiery, sometimes as
earthy, sometimes as windy”. What is intended in claims of this
type, allowing them to appear to be doing explanatory work, is the
maintenance of a distinction between which of these expressions is
primary and which secondary, which direct and indirect; but Tiantai
would deny that this distinction can be meaningfully maintained once
this totalization has been effected.  Because each now means the
whole, they lose their original meaning, for that meaning was entirely
dependent on a contrast to what was excluded. If fire is everything,
then fire is not fire. If water is everything, then water is not
water. If fire is everything, then water is really fire. If water is
everything, then fire is really water. If fire is really water, then
water is really fire. Hence by going through the universalization
of any determinate entity, we reach the overturning of that
determination into something that expresses itself as all other
determinations, and at the same time undermines its own privileged
status as ultimate foundation, making all other possible
determinations equally unconditional, all-pervasive, universal,
absolute. To see the absoluteness of any one entity is thus to
de-absolutize that entity and also to absolutize every other
entity.
The Three Truths position of Tiantai derives from a particular
understanding of the Two Truths doctrine advanced by Indian Buddhist
philosophers of the Mādhyamaka school, interpreted as holding that any
specific thing we could say about the world was at best a
“Conventional Truth”, which served as a kind of
“raft” to get beyond it to the “Ultimate
Truth” of Emptiness—determinations of any kind were thus
at best an indispensable means to get beyond themselves, to be
discarded when their work is done. The stipulation of Emptiness
(Śūnyatā) was itself a raft to get beyond not only all other
determinate views but also Emptiness itself as a “view” or
theory or concept. Ultimate Truth, true realization of Emptiness, was
thus at best a celebratory term used to point to an ineffable
experience of the liberation from all views, all definite conceptions
of determinate “things”. The motivation for this was
soteriological in a specific, pan-Buddhist sense: the goal of all
human endeavor, including philosophy, including ethics, including
epistemology, is assumed to be the reduction or elimination of
suffering. Buddhism claims that this is what we’re always trying to
do, but usually in a self-defeating, ignorant way; it claims to
provide a more effective way.  Note that this does not make any claim
about what is valuable, but rather addresses what is assumed to be a
necessary entailment of what it means to consider anything valuable,
i.e., what structures desire qua desire. To desire is to value, and
suffering is simply the non-satisfaction of our desire. Hence all
endeavors are endeavors to eliminate some suffering, i.e., to satisfy
a desire. The characteristic Buddhist contribution is then to note
that desiring any conditional object or state is necessarily
self-defeating. This is because to be conditional is to be brought
into being by a qualitatively distinct, heterogeneous and extrinsic
cause. But examined closely, this cannot be a single
extrinsic cause, for if any effect were produced by a single cause,
that cause and that effect would always be copresent—wherever
and whenever that cause occurred, the effect would also occur. But
that would mean that the cause would therefore no longer be extrinsic
to the effect; they would be, rather, necessary and intrinsically
conjoined, actually two aspects of a single irreducible entity, which
would mean that no causal event actually ever occurs. This means that
all conditional things require multiple causes, each of which itself
requires multiple causes. 
This introduces an intrinsic instability and inner conflict into
whatever exists conditionally, that is, whatever is finite, whatever
is determinate. The unconditional would have to be omnipresent and
omnitemporal and indeterminate. But the nature of desire is to have
specific conditions of satisfaction: to desire is to require some one
state of affairs rather than, to the exclusion of,
some other state of affairs—minimally, pleasure instead of
pain. This means all desire qua desire is desire for something
conditional; otherwise there would be no need for the desire, since
the desired state would already always and everywhere be
present. Desire desires a single effect to the exclusion of any other
effect; but the denial of effectivity for any single cause
also implies that what is produced by any causal process can never be
only a single effect. For since what is produced is not
dependent solely on any single cause, or indeed any finite set of
causes considered as a unit, the production of a new event always
requires the conjunction with some hitherto excluded condition. Since
by hypothesis this new condition is not a consistent part of the
original set, it will not always be the same, and thus the effect will
not be one and the same; every conjunction will produce its own
effects, and by hypothesis there is no limit to the set of
conjunctions (for that would make them simply a single cause). Less
rigorously, it is held that the cross-purposes and conflicting
tendencies thus built into any effect make it impossible for it to be
a stably homogenous entity consistently isolable from the opposite
conditional states it means to exclude, such as is required by the
exclusive structure of specific desires. Whatever is desired must be
identifiably present at a particular time and place, and whatever is
such is conditional, and whatever is conditional entails impermanence,
and thus suffering. 
 The pan-Buddhist denial of the existence of a “self”
rests on the same point: the impossibility of single-cause causal
events. For the “self” rejected here is precisely the
claimant to single-causality: the agent of actions which putatively
requires no second condition to produce an effect, e.g., to will
something, to do something, to want something, to experience
something. The self never acts alone, has no independent effects, and
thus actually is not a self-as-efficacious-agent. “Self”
here essentially means “controller”. Because there is no
single causality, there is no single controller, and thus no self. For
this reason too, satisfaction of desire is not sustainable. For in
doing what the self desires, other causes besides the activity of the
self are always also involved; the effect is not in the self’s
control, and thus will inevitably contravene its desires, its own
causal contributions to the effect. Indeed, the early Buddhist
analysis of the human condition amounts to the claim that all desire
is really a proxy-version of this impossible desire for control, for
single-agent causality, for pure autonomy, for selfhood; thus all
desire is doomed.
 The same considerations have serious epistemological consequences
as well. The Buddhists viewed theoretical stances and philosophical
positions as themselves objects of desire, of clinging. Since all such
stances are themselves specific, determinate, they are ipso
facto conditional. As conditional, they are ipso facto
suffering. Hence attachment to views was seen as a form of suffering
and an obstacle to liberation. All determinate metaphysical views
about how or what things are were to be transcended and left
behind.
In most of the dominant Indian theories, those ideas are granted
temporary validity as conventional truths: they are to serve as
“rafts”, to be clung to temporarily, but only because they
are an effective means of passing beyond themselves. This includes
both specific Buddhist doctrines and also ordinary conventional speech
(necessary for even communicating Buddhist ideas). Whatever ideas do
not lead to their own abandonment in this way (and hence do not lead
to the end of suffering) do not count even as conventional
truths—for example, 1) metaphysical and religious theories about
the Absolute, or unconditional claims about the world as a whole and
2) non-conventional views of things in the world, claims that
contravene ordinary language of the community.  There tends to be a
kind of hierarchy in the Indian Two Truths theory: first, plain
falsehood, including all philosophical theories about reality and
unconventional views. Then conventional truth, which includes ordinary
daily life ideas about self and other, cause and effect and so on, and
also Buddhist ideas about suffering, the Four Noble Truths, non-self,
and even “Emptiness” considered as a concept. These ideas
lead beyond themselves, instrumentally, to the experience of
Emptiness, which is liberation from all views. The conventional truths
had an instrumental value, but none were really “true”
about things—Emptiness meant that all of them were, in the most
ultimate sense, false. Also, there are really only one or two kinds of
conventional truth: first, common sense daily speech, the correct
general names for things as used in the daily life of your particular
community, and second, Buddhist ideas. The reason these count as
“truths” is because they are useful in leading us to
liberation from suffering—and in leading us to liberation from
these ideas themselves. “True” propositions are
propositions that have the power to lead beyond themselves.
This led to a somewhat paradoxical situation, on several
levels. There was always a problem in Emptiness theory: Emptiness was
supposed to be not a “view” at all, to predicate nothing
about reality. But if it does anything at all, if
it negates or excludes any other view, it is, in the Tiantai
view, still a kind of view. For to be something in particular is just
to exclude something else in particular. That is all a
“thing” is, that is all a “view” is. To be
something just is to exclude something else; nothing more is
required to count as a being. Pre-Tiantai Emptiness theory gets into
an infinite regress, chasing its tail around the problem of the
transcendence of Emptiness: no statement can represent it, even
“all things are Empty”. It is purely and totally above and
beyond anything that can be thought or said, all ordinary experience
of identities in the world. It is a negation that is supposed to bear
no relation at all to what it negates, to entirely escape the system
of relations, of conditionality. Emptiness is supposed to be strictly
“inconceivable”. In Tiantai, this problem
disappears. Emptiness is still very important, but it is simply
a conditional assertion of unconditionality. We do not have
all the conditionality (specifiability, particularity) on one side and
all the unconditionality (transcendence, inconceivability) on the
other. Everything, every experience, every identity, every action, is
in the same boat: they are all both conditional and unconditional,
both conceivable and inconceivable. The thought, experience,
concept “Emptiness” is also both conditional and
unconditional, both conceivable and inconceivable, like
“water” and “fire” in our example
about. Emptiness is an especially efficient marker of self-exploded
holism, the term that applies most easily everywhere and thus
ultimately nowhere, allowing all other terms to do the same.  It is
Provisionally Posited, which means it is at least locally coherent
(conditional, determinate, conceivable), but it itself is also Empty,
which means it is globally incoherent (unconditional, indeterminate,
inconceivable). It appears in experience as something in particular
(locally coherent as precisely this word and this thought
“Emptiness”), but this, like every other local coherence,
is haunted by its own inseparable nimbus of infinite outsides,
infinite contexts, each of which differently contextualizes it and
thus bestows on it alternate identities: there is more to it than any
single concept, including the concept “Emptiness”, can
hold.  Emptiness is, to use a word coined for just this Tiantai usage,
“moretitivity”: and moretotivity is itself moretoitive. It
appears not just as moretoitivity, but as specific identities,
something more, above and beyond, simple moretoitivity as such.
Ambiguity is itself ambiguous: fire is not just fire, it is ambiguous;
but the ambiguity is not just ambiguity, it is also fire. This applies
to everything else as well. Local coherence and global coherence
(Provisional Positing and Emptiness) are just two ways of saying the
same thing.
In the Tiantai “Three Truths” theory, instead of
concluding that every particular view and thing is false, we conclude
that all is, ultimately, true. Every possible view is equally a truth.
There is no longer a hierarchy between the levels, and no category of
plain falsehood. “Conventional Truth” in Tiantai is not
something to be left behind when we reach enlightenment, but rather
what is obtained and mastered and intensified there.  Moreover,
nothing is left out of it—all possible statements, viewpoints,
ideas, concepts, positions are conventional truths. The criterion is
still the same: all things can be used as “skillful means”
to lead to Buddhahood. So now we have Three Truths, which are not a
raft-like instrument to get beyond all statements and concepts, and a
final higher truth that allows us to have no biased and particular
view of things, but rather as three true ways of viewing any
particular thing. It is not a raft to get beyond all rafts, but a raft
that leads to the raft factory that makes and houses all rafts, and
allows one to move at will from any raft to any other raft, including
the initial one. However you may be viewing a particular part of the
world or the world as a whole, it is “conventionally”
true. There are not just a few conventional truths, but an infinite
number of them, even when they are directly opposed and
contradictory. So in Two Truths theory, we would say that “this
is a cup” is conventionally true, and “this cup is
empty” is a higher conventional truth, which finally leads us to
a direct inconceivable experience of the emptiness of this cup,
freedom from clinging to any view at all of this cup, which is the
liberation from all suffering. If someone were to point to this
“cup” and say, “This is an elephant”, however,
that would not even be a conventional truth, because that is not how
most people think of it, it is neither the ordinary speech of the
language community, nor a Buddhist term designed to lead beyond
itself. That would be a plain error. And if someone said, “This
is an expression of the will of God”, that would also be an
error, not even a conventional truth, since it tried to make a claim
beyond that of conventional usage to an ultimate, universally
applicable, absolute truth. But in Tiantai Three Truths theory, it is
just as true to say, “This is an elephant” or “This
is the Will of Baal” as to say “This is a cup”. And
neither of these is less true than saying, “This is
empty”, or indeed any less true than “experiencing”
the emptiness of this cup/elephant. In both cases, what we have is
a locally coherent way of viewing this thing—it just
means that it looks that way from some perspective, within
some set of parameters, for some length of time. It doesn’t matter
anymore whether those parameters are shared by the common sense of a
particular community or speech group; all that matters is that it is
possible to make it look that way, that it looks that way from
anywhere, for even one moment. In Two Truths and
Emptiness theory, nothing is really true. In Tiantai Three Truths
theory, everything is true. We don’t need an extra
“Emptiness” outside of this locally coherent way of seeing
things; Emptiness just means that whatever is locally
coherent is also, ipso
facto, globally incoherent. That is, when all
factors are taken into consideration, the original way any thing
appears is no longer unambiguously present, but it restored as a raft
leading to all other rafts, including itself, as ineradicable aspects
of all reality, of any reality.
A simple thought experiment may draw out the implications of this
idea.  Imagine that you come upon what looks like a white marble lying
on the ground. You experience it as round, as small, as white, and
immediately you construct a lived attitude toward it—something
that can be picked up, rolled, played with, pocketed. But then you go
to pick it up, and find that it is stuck to the ground. You cannot
lift it. You try to dig it out, and find that it extends downward,
further than you can dig: it is the tip of a larger item. It appears
to be a long rod or cylindrical pipe of some kind. But as you dig
further, you find that after about five inches of narrow thinness it
starts to expand outward; it is a spire on top of a cone.  This cone
expands outward as you keep digging down. When you get about twenty
feet down, the cone ends, embedded in a soft, scaly material.  Then
the earth rumbles and an enormous two-horned monster emerges from
underground; it is 500 feet tall, and each of its horns is twenty feet
high, with a long sharp tip. You had been digging out one of the
horns.  What you had seen as a marble on the ground was in fact the
very tip of one of the horns. Now look again at that tip. You had
experienced it as round. But it turns out it was not round at all: it
is sharp. Yet it has not changed at all: you are still seeing what you
saw. It is not white either: the tip had looked white against the
ground, but now, looking at the monster’s horn as whole, you see it as
a pattern of mostly green spots interspersed here and there with
white: looked at as a whole, the horn, including its tip, looks
green. Nor is it movable, pocketable, playwithable—it is rather
dangerous, razor sharp, to be avoided. And yet nothing of what you saw
was taken away: it was just supplemented with further information,
with its larger context. 
Tiantai views all things this way. Normally you might make some
qualifications in order to preserve your view that some facts are
unambiguous (indeed, to some extent this process is precisely what
philosophy traditionally is); you might say “the
tip, considered in isolation, is indeed round”. The
usual procedure is to interpose the distinction between “how it
appears” and “how it really is”, some form of
reality-appearance distinction. But the most important consequence of
the transformation of the Two Truths into the Three Truths is the
wholesale dismissal of the appearance-reality distinction. Tiantai
would reject the privileging of either considering in isolation or
considering in any single particular connection; any of these would be
legitimate in some heuristic (upayic) contexts, but none
could be non-arbitrarily assigned the role of representing what is the
“really the case”, simpliciter. To see something
is to see “not-all” of it. We are always seeing a little
fragment of the world, but every bit of the world is changed by the
fact that it is a part of the world, is recontextualized by the rest
of the world, by the rest of space and the rest of time. In fact, if
we ever saw all, we would see nothing. For to see, to take something
as “there”, as “real”, is to place it within a
context, to contrast it to something outside of itself, something
which is not it. To see all is to see nothing. As in the case of
“fire” and “water” above, if someone were to
say that the entire universe is “round”, this would
require changing the meaning of “round”. This round would
not be round: for round requires a non-round outside it to be
round.  It would have to be bordered by something to shape it into
roundness, but the universe would also include that
outside-the-roundness part. If someone were to say the entire universe
were sharp, this would also make no sense. This sharp would not be
sharp; for sharp requires a non-sharp outside it to be
sharp. To say the whole universe is sharp, then, means no more and no
less than saying the whole universe is round. We can make no specific
determinations about the whole, about the entire universe, for that
outside of which nothing exists; for all particular specifications
require a contrast to something outside of them. Everything we can say
or think comes from the realm of the finite, and cannot be applied to
the infinite. But the Tiantai point is that we cannot speak of
anything finite without also involving some determination of the
Whole, of the infinite. If we were to say this thing is sharp, we
would have to be assuming that “the whole universe is such that
this thing is sharp”. We cannot say that: the whole universe
cannot be “such that this marble is sharp” any more than
the whole universe can be “sharp”. But this also means we
cannot say the whole universe is “such that this marble is
not-sharp”. Either is equally legitimate, either is equally
illegitimate. What we can say, then, is that this marble appears to be
round, but round is such that it is always turning out also to be more
than round, to be non-round, and vice versa. Roundness is
moretoitive. Round and non-round intersubsume each other.
In short, roundness is present as every
non-roundness, and as moretoitivity; moretoitivity is present as
roundness, and as every non-roundness.
To clarify this, consider the following:
What is the following figure?
Ο 
What is that “same” figure in the diagram below?
−2 −1 Ο 1 2
What is it now?
How about now:
When we looked at that round figure in isolation, it may have
presented itself immediately and unreflectively in accordance with our
habits or proximate mental acts; if we had been thinking about numbers
a moment ago, it might appear simply and unambiguously as
“zero”, if about letters as the letter “o”, if
about shapes as a “circle”. When a single explicit context
was added in the second diagram, it had a clear and definite identity:
it was the number zero. But when we added another context at the same
time, in the third diagram, the figure became ambiguous: it could now
be read as either a zero or the letter O. As we keep adding more
contexts, its identity becomes more and more ambiguous; in the final
diagram above, we can point to the initial circular figure and say,
validly, “This is a triangle”—for it is the
vertex of a triangle formed with the two other, non-contiguous and
non-proximate, circles. Who knows what other circles there are out in
the world, and what other figures this thing right here is
actually forming? When we consider all things in the universe at the
same time, the initial identities we assigned to them are supplemented
by more and more ambiguity. Looking at just the single series of
letters, is was a zero: this is local coherence. When we see this cup
simply as a cup, we are doing the same thing: ignoring a lot of other
factors, contexts, points of view, ways of viewing, and narrowing down
the relevant factors to allow it to appear as a single unambiguous
something: a cup. If we consider the molecules of which it is made, or
the energy it expresses, or the uses to which it might be put in the
context of various narratives, or its deep past and deep future, its
“cupness” becomes ambiguous: it is simultaneously lots of
other things, part of many different stories. It is a blip on the
screen of energy transformations, or a murder weapon, or an art
object, or a doorstop.  The same is true of yourself, and your actions
right now. They are unambiguous only to the extent that we narrow our
vision around them (one way we can narrow our vision, of course, is to
do philosophy; one of the narratives in which we are contextualizing
our experience might be a conceptual system presupposing the sorting
out of essences, attributes, accidents, substantial forms or what have
you, and distinguishing appearances from reality accordingly, so that
it appears to be “essentially” a cup and only
“accidentally” a murder weapon and only “appearing
to be” a revelation from Baal). This is the meaning of Emptiness
in Tiantai: ontological ambiguity. The term “ambiguity”
usually refers only to how we see things. We assume that, in
themselves, everything simply is what it is; but we may have an
unclear view of it; we can’t yet tell if it’s this or
that. We assume that, at least in principle, it must be one or the
other. The idea of Emptiness is the idea that this is true
“ontologically”: that is, it pertains to the very being of
things. To say they are empty does not mean they are a blank—for
that would be a definite something, a specific exclusion of all
determinate content, which is, ipso facto, itself a
determinate content. Emptiness here means rather that they are, in
themselves, ambiguous. Again, this is also to say that
everything is more than it seems to be, or rather
constitutively more than it can seem to be, no matter what
angles it is seen from, no matter how thoroughly it is known, no
matter how comprehensive a sum of information is gathered about it. It
has the character of being a “something” (a cup, a chair,
an elephant), with a number of specifiable characteristics, but every
“something”, just to be there as something, has the
additional characteristic of “moretoitivity”—of
always overflowing whatever is determined about it, of
being more than what can be seen from any angle.
This “more” however, does not leave the original
“known” part unchanged. Rather, it recontextualizes it. We
are always seeing the tip of an iceberg. But even the
“tip” is no longer what we thought it was before we knew
it was a tip of something more. The key here is that there is
no total decontextualization, that leaving one context is always
simply entering another context; contextual relations do not require
physical contiguity, and the empty space surrounding a given thing
does not cut it off from further recontextualizations but rather is
itself a context, and an illimitable one that opens into infinite
alternate contexts. 
This strange “neither-same-nor-different” structure of
the Three Truths is to be understood in accordance with another key
Tiantai concept, “opening the provisional to reveal the
real” (開權顯實 kaiquan
xianshi). This is a way of further specifying the relation
between local coherence and global incoherence, which are not only
synonymous, but also irrevocably opposed, and indeed identical only by
means of their opposition and mutual exclusivity. Provisional truth is
the antecedent, the premise, and indeed in a distinctive sense
the cause of ultimate truth, but only because it is the
strict exclusion of ultimate truth.
This can be compared to the structure of the relation between the
set up and the punch line of a certain kind of joke. Consider the
following:
Let’s talk about that structure. When we hear the question
“How does he smell?” it seems as if it is a serious query,
an expression of serious curiosity about canine anatomy and its
mutations. It has the quality of seriousness, of factuality, of
non-ironic information. There is nothing funny about that statement.
But, when the punch line comes, retrospectively, that set up is funny.
That set up is funny because it has been recontextualized by the pun
on the word “smell”, which is made to have more than one
identity when put into a new context.
The interesting thing to note here is that it is precisely
by not being funny that the setup was funny. In other words,
if it was already funny, if you didn’t take it seriously for a second,
the contrast between the two different meanings of this thing could
never have clashed in the way that is necessary to make the laughter,
to make it actually funny. We have a setup which is serious and a
punch line which is funny, but when you look back at the setup from
the vantage point of having heard the punchline, that setup is also
funny. After all, we don’t say that just the punch line is funny. We
say the whole joke is funny. The setup is funny in the mode of not
being funny yet. It is only funny because it wasn’t funny.  It is the
same thing in the Lotus Sutra and it is the same thing in life
really. You’re Enlightened! That is what Mahāyāna Buddhism says,
everyone is Enlightened! Everybody is a Buddha! But the way in which
you are a Buddha is the way in which the setup of a joke is funny,
i.e., by not being a Buddha. By struggling toward buddhahood,
toward something else, but by revisualizing or recontextualizing or
expanding awareness, which has been the preferred technique in
Buddhism all along, those very things which are the details of daily
life, of the struggles to interact, to deal with conditions and
suffering and lack of control are not just a means to buddhahood. They
are themselves buddhahood as the life of a sentient being.
The “provisional”, conventional truth, local coherence,
is the set-up. The “ultimate truth”, Emptiness, global
incoherence, ontological ambiguity, is the punch line. What is
important here is to preserve both the contrast between the
two and their ultimate identity in sharing the quality of
humorousness which belongs to every atom of the joke considered as a
whole, once the punch line has been revealed. The setup is serious,
while the punchline is funny. The funniness of the punchline depends
on the seriousness of the setup, and on the contrast and difference
between the two. However, once the punchline has occurred, it is also
the case that the setup is, retrospectively, funny. This also means
that the original contrast between the two is both preserved and
annulled: neither funniness nor seriousness means the same thing after
the punchline dawns, for their original meanings depended on the
mutually exclusive nature of their defining contrast. Is the setup
serious or funny? It is both: it is funny as serious, and
serious as funny. Is the punchline serious or funny? It is
both, but in an interestingly different way. It is obviously funny,
but is it also serious? Yes. Why? Because now that the setup has
occurred, both “funny” and “serious” have a
different meaning. Originally, we thought that “funny”
meant “what I laugh at when I hear it” or something like
that, and “serious” meant “what gives me non-funny
information” or something similar. But now we see that
“funny” can also mean: What I take to be serious, what I am not
laughing about, what I am earnestly considering, or crying over, or
bewailing even.
But this means also that “serious”
means “what can turn out to be either funny or
serious”. So both “funny” and “serious”
now both mean “funny-and-serious, what can appear as both funny
and serious”. Each is now a center that subsumes of the other;
they are intersubsumptive. As a consequence, the old pragmatic
standard of truth is applied more liberally here: all claims,
statements and positions are true in the sense that all can,
if properly recontextualized, lead to liberation—which is to
say, to their own self-overcoming.  Conversely, none will lead to
liberation if not properly contextualized.
This contextualism is applied intricately and thoroughgoingly to
Buddhist teachings themselves, including especially its most
foundational teachings about the basic character of existence:
impermanence, suffering, and non-self--and also about the solutions to
those conditions: enlightenment and Buddhahood. Are all
things permament or impermanent? Are there selves or no
selves? Can we end suffering or can’t we?  For
Tiantai the right question to be asked for understanding and applying
doctrine is not “is it true?”—since all doctrines are
“true” in this sense of “liberating” in some
contexts, and not in others--but rather “in what sense, and in
what context, is it true, i.e., liberating?” It is in
this connection that we must understand the Tiantai
“classification of teachings.” Among the many
rubrics used for this purpose in traditional Tiantai, the most
philosophically important is the classification of the four types of
contents of the Buddha’s teaching
(化法四教), called the Four Teachings, namely,
Tripitaka, Shared, Separate, and Perfect
藏，通，別，圓).
These four types of content are viewed by Tiantai thinkers not as
four different teachings, but as really increasingly subtle
explications of one and the same content, the basic Buddhist teaching,
via more and more expansive recontextualizations. Tiantai
classifies all the teachings found in the Mahāyāna Buddhist
scriptures into these four general types, according to the degree to
which they have developed the understanding of the basic Buddhist
concepts of universal conditionality, i.e., of Impermanence, Suffering,
and Non-Self. It should be noted again that all four
of these types are regarded as “true teachings” of the
Buddha—true in the sense of validly propounded as a way of
liberating sentient beings from suffering in some particular
context—and that all are equally also not considered
uniquely true descriptions of reality. Moreover,
in keeping with the general Tiantai approach to interpretation, they
are not really different teachings at all: they are viewed as
alternate expositions of the same idea as it is recontextualized, to
varying degrees of thoroughness as appropriate, even though—as we
shall see—they appear prima facie to be in direct
contradiction to one another. As such, this schema provides
us with a strong general model of the Tiantai conception of the
self-overcoming of suffering, impermanence and non-self, wherein they
are overcome by remaining exactly as they were, indeed even more so,
and thereby are revealed to also be their own opposites.
 Zhiyi takes an obscure passage from a Chinese translation of
the Mahāyāna Mahāparinirvāna
Sūtra as one of his models for these four expositions.
Literally, the passage reads as follows:
The passage can be somewhat more venturesomely translated as
follows:
For Zhiyi this passage gives more than a standard Buddhist negation
of the tetralemma followed by its provisional affirmation. 
Instead, he links these four positions to the following four general
categories, each with its own distinct way of understanding the Four
Noble Truths, and therefore its own way of understanding the nature of
all things, the nature of all conditional events, of both the arising
and perishing of suffering (i.e., of all ordinary experience), of both
suffering and liberation from suffering, and of how they are
related:
1. Tripitaka Teaching 藏教: “The Generated
Generates” 生生, or literally, “The arising of
what arises.”
The things described by the Four Noble Truths – i.e., all conditional
experience of suffering as well as the experience of the Unconditioned
which is liberation from suffering--actually arise and perish.
(shengmie sidi 生滅四諦)
All things are empty in that they are impermanent, and vanish
without remainder when analyzed and dissolved into their parts
(“analytic emptiness” xikong析空).
2. Shared Teaching 通教：: The [Apparently]
Generated [Actually] is Ungenerated 生不生, or
literally, “the non-arising of what arises.”
The things described by the Four Noble Truths--i,e., all conditional
experiences of suffering as well as the experience of the
Unconditioned which is liberation from suffering--do not arise [or
perish]. (wusheng
sidi 無生四諦)
All things are empty in their very nature from the beginning (whether
literally impermanent and dissolved into parts or not)
(“emptiness embodied right in the thing,”
tikong 體空).
3. Separate Teaching 別教: The [Previously
Established] Ungenerated Generates [Infinitely]
不生生, or literally, “the arisings of what
does not arise”
The things described by the Four Noble Truths – i.e., all
conditional experiences of suffering as well as the experience of the
Unconditioned which is liberation from suffering--can be validly
described not only as “really” empty of any determinations
of their own and thus neither arising nor perishing, but also, because
they are also aspects of the compassionate liberative work of a
bodhisattva, in an infinity of alternate ways. (wuliang
sidi 無量四諦)
The previous characterizations of things as empty or as non-empty were
both one-sided, as things are in reality neither empty nor
non-empty. Rather, both Emptiness and all non-empty
things are manifestations “the Center,” a tertium
quid which is beyond but also includes both the
ungenerated aspect and the generated aspect, at once both form and
formless, the constant infinite productions of forms by the formless,
formlessness present only as the infinity of forms. It is the
collapsing of emptiness and non-emptiness into something that is
immediately both: their unity, which is the real source of both: this
is the Buddha-nature as “Exclusive Center”
danzhong foxing 但中佛性,
hidden beneath the two extremes, the inner kernel of all phenomena, as
their source and ultimate reality.
4. Perfect Teaching 圓教: The (infinite things generated
by the) Ungenerated (are also) Ungenerated
不生不生, or literally, “the
non-arisings of the non-arising.”
The things described by the Four Noble Truths – i.e., all
conditional experiences of suffering as well as the experience of
liberation from suffering--in all those infinite alternate forms, are
[actually, in their very infinite production,] unmade and unbegun (and
unfinishable).  (wuzuo sidi
無作四諦)
Each thing is empty, non-empty, and the Center. Each thing is neither
empty, non-empty, nor the Center. Each thing is entirely and only
empty. Each thing is entirely and only non-empty. Each thing is
entirely and only the Center.  Each thing subsumes all the
others. Each thing is subsumed by all the others. Each of the previous
sentences in this paragraph are synonyms. Not only each thing: the
aspect of emptiness itself is empty, non-empty, and Center, and
considered purely on its own terms is not only the negation of all
things but also, when fully thought through, the positing of all
things (non-empty) and the identity of positing and negation
(Center). The same is true for the aspect of non-emptiness, and
Center: each one alone is all three. This is the “Non-Exclusive
Center.”
budanzhong 不但中佛性 Because
it is what a Buddha lives and realizes, it is also called “the
Buddha-nature”. Each thing is the center of the universe, the
substance of which all other things are attributes. Each is the source
generating all things, but also inherently contains all things within
itself so that it generates nothing, and likewise being generated by,
and contained by, any other thing. Each thing is readable equally as
any other thing. Each thing is also the end toward which all other
things tend, the telos of all things. A more detailed
exposition of these four positions, and their relation to each other,
is given in the following supplementary document:
The Three Truths, then, are actually three different but mutually
implicative ways of looking at any object or state. Each implies the
other two, and each is one way to describe the whole of that
object, including its other two aspects. To be established is to be
negated. To be begun is to be constitutively incomplete; to be
determinate is to be ambiguous, to be anything is to be more than that
thing. If it were not more—other—than X, it would
not even be X. We may think about this in terms of the status
of a “fact”. Emerson says in his essay,
“History” (1841):
Time dissipates to shining ether the solid
angularity of facts. No anchor, no cable, no fences avail to keep a
fact a fact.
He meant that every historical fact registers
“at a distance”, in other times and places, taking on the
role of an ever-ramifying metaphor that applies to more and more
individual cases, with more and more diverse and rich
implications. With a few small modifications, this brings us close to
the Tiantai view: all we need to do is specify that “time”
and “fact” are not really two different things, with the
former acting to ambiguate the solidity of the latter, but are in
reality two sides of the same thing, two aspects of a single process,
in fact are ultimately synonyms. Time is just the addition of other
facts.  New facts are just the presence of additional time. In the
Tiantai view these new facts are not imposed on the initial fact from
without, but are posited as the context which alone made it a fact in
the first place, made it determinate as just this fact.
“Time” just means the self-positing of both itself and
other facts by any fact. Time makes facts facts, and unmakes facts by
making more facts, all of which are intrinsic to the first fact:
history is the positing and transcending, the self-establishment and
self-recontextualization of any given fact. 
Put another way, let us stipulate that a fact—any
determination about what is so—is something that is in principle
knowable, and that knowability implies a subject-object relation, and
therefore a “distance” or separation, some space away from
the fact-to-be-known. That means that a fact is only a fact if there
is something outside of it, another fact, another time, a place to
view it from; it doesn’t count as a fact unless it can impact on some
other site, unless it relates to some otherness. But that means that
its journey out beyond itself to otherness is intrinsic to its very
facticity, and it is this journey out beyond itself that Emerson
denotes with the word “time”. To be thus and so, a fact
must be viewable from elsewhere, and elsewhere, whether in physical or
in conceptual space, implies the illimitable positing of still other
alternate perspectives from which to be seen, facts to impact,
viewpoints to interpret and metaphorically internalize the initial
fact. Determinacy implies limit, limit implies space, space implies
infinity of other spaces, of other perspectives, of other
contexts. For something to be a fact is for it to intrinsically posit
distances from itself, and thus to be viewable otherwise. 
Most simply, we can say that for Tiantai time itself
simply is the continual “opening of the provisional to
reveal the real”: an unceasing process of
self-recontexualization where the past on the one hand remains
unchangeable and on the other is constantly changing with each
recontextualization. A moment of time is a recontextualization of the
all the past. This also implies that the Tiantai notion of
interpervasion of past, present and future, and of the “inherent
inclusion” of all entities in each, is very far from resulting
in a static picture of the universe devoid of any genuine
creativity. For in Tiantai, each moment of time brings with it not
only a new set of actual occasions, but a new set of “eternal
principles”—categorical obligations, eternal objects,
laws, universals. Each moment is effectively the creation of a new God
who determines anew the character of the rest of the universe and of
all the past and future.
A moment, to be a moment, must be surrounded by other moments, from
which it differs. “Now” must be different from
“then”. But that means “now”
must relate to “then”. The “then” is
part of the world of the “now”, against which it defines
itself, to which it stands in necessary contrast. This contrast cannot
be either internal or external to the “now” and to the
“then”. “Now” is really
“now-then”, and “then” is really
“then-now”. This is easy to understand if we consider the
state of the entire totality of being at moment M and at
moment M+1. The state of things at M is thought to have
the power to cause the arising of the state of things
at M+1. But if M is gone when M+1 arrives, it
cannot “reach” M+1 to do anything to it; it is
already gone, non-existent, and thus can do nothing. If the state of
things at M continues to exist when M+1 arrives,
however, time has failed to move ahead, or we must admit the
coexistence of two alternate total states of being at the same
time. If the appearance of M+1 does not necessitate the
disappearance of M (which by our hypothesis possesses the power
to bring about M+1), M would then continue to generate
precisely M+1 repeatedly forever. In either case, time would
not be possible, and no real entities could arise. Moments of time are
neither same nor different; they are present as one another, the past
as present as future, the future as past and present, the present as
past and future. The past is not yet over—every moment of the
present and future reveals more about the past and its infinite
changes, for they are non-different from it, though allowing it to
appear as these new moments.  The present never
begins—however far back you look, you will always be able to
find all the characteristics of the present there, unchanged though
appearing as some former moment. The present never
ends—all future moments are further disclosures about this
present moment of experience happening right now.
We can say all things are impermanent, as in early
Buddhism—but now we know this is just a situationally
attachment-undermining way of saying
“impermanent-permanent”. We can say all things are
permanent—meaning “permanent-impermanent”. We can
say some things are permanent and others are impermanent—meaning
“some-all are permanent-impermanent” and “all-some
are impermanent-permanent”. But note too that this does not mean
“permanent-impermanent” is the real truth, while
“permanent” and “impermanent” are both
one-sided distortions. That would be what Tiantai critiques as the
“exclusive Center”. Rather, just as
“permanent” really means
“impermanent-permanent”,
“impermanent-permanent” really means
“permanent”, or really means
“impermanent”. For impermanent-permanent
appears as permanence and as impermanence, and each
of these is the entirety, not a mere part, of the whole. To be
permanent is already to also be impermanent—there is no other
permanence. To be impermanent is already to also be
permanent—there is no other impermanence. All is funny, all is
serious, all is funny-serious. Each is a perfectly equal synonym for
all three. Each is an equally adequate-inadequate description of the
truth.
The same applies in all other cases. We can say all is
suffering—meaning “suffering-bliss”. We can say all
is bliss—meaning “bliss-suffering”. We can say all
is mind—meaning “mind-matter”. We can say all is
matter—meaning “matter-mind”. We can say there is a
God—meaning “God-Godless”. We can say there is no
God—meaning “Godless-God”. We can say all is
illusion—meaning “illusion-reality”. We can say all
is reality—meaning “reality-illusion”. We can say
some things are true and some things are false—meaning
“some-all is true-false and all-some is false-true”. We
can say there is historical progress—meaning
“progress-stagnation”. We can say there is historical
stagnation—meaning “stagnation-progress”. We can say
society is evil—meaning “evil-good”. We can say
society is good—meaning “good-evil”. We can say we
are sometimes happy and sometimes sad—meaning “we-everyone
are sometimes-always happy-sad and sometimes-always
sad-happy”. And so on. How should we choose which will we say at
any time? If all things are sayable in some sense, what should we say
right now? We should say whatever is most conducive to liberation from
suffering, from one-sided attachments, in this particular situation
and context.
The same method underlies all of Tiantai’s shocking slogans, such
as the claim that “all moments are permanent”, as we have
seen, or “all appearances are the ultimate reality”, or
“evil is ineradicable from the highest good,
Buddhahood”. They mean what they say, of course: no moment ever
ends, and however anything appears to anyone for however long is the
ultimate reality that all things emerge from, all things return to,
that explains and supports and sustains all things. True enough. The
opposite would also be true. But these particular claims are
emphasized in classical Tiantai writings to offset the more common
one-sided prejudices that tend the other way. Because the impermanence
of things and the illusoriness of appearances is stressed in the rest
of Buddhism, it is assumed that anyone getting to Tiantai will already
be aware of this side of reality, and indeed may be in danger of
clinging to it. So Tiantai asserts the opposite, which is equally
true.
All appearances are the ultimate reality: how is that true?
Normally, we believe that in some kind of appearance versus reality
contrast: “I thought that was a snake, but upon closer
inspection it turned out to be a rope”. This is what most of
Buddhism also says: “I thought there was a self, but it turned
out to be a bunch of impermanent aggregates”. Or, “I
thought there was a world, but it turned out to be all mind, or
Buddha-nature, or illusion”. Common sense assumes this too: the
rim of my glass looks oval, but in fact we know that,
“really”, it is round—it’s just that we’re seeing it
from an angle that foreshortens it. The rainbow is a mere
appearance—when we go to touch it, we find nothing there. But
the clouds and sunlight are real, they are what it really is, what it
turns out to really be. Tiantai, however, makes the preposterous claim
that the oval and the circle are both true—in fact, both are the
ultimate reality, are findable in all things and at all times and
places, are the Absolute. The rainbow and the cloudy
sunlight—both true, both absolutely true, both the Absolute. The
“self” and the impermanent aggregates—both true,
both absolutely true, both the Absolute. The snake and the
rope—both true, both absolutely true, both the Absolute. All is
illusion. All is reality. Time is not an illusion. Time is the
illusoriness of every possible thing. Time is a word that means
“whatever you think is so is already not so”. What is
real? What you can go back to, look at again, check up on, verify,
re-examine. But there is literally no experience that you can
go back to, so there is none that is real. What is illusion? Something
that turns out to be otherwise than it appears. There is no thing of
which this is not the case. The horn “appeared” to be
round, but “turned out” to be “sharp”. But
both roundness and sharpness are equally unreal, equally real. Each is
determined by the context in which it is seen. Taking the unnameable
whole into account, they too are unnameable, neither sharp nor
round. Roundness and sharpness are two names for the same thing, which
is round, sharp, and neither round nor sharp, and both round and
sharp.
The same goes for the famous Tiantai claim that “evil is
inherently included in Buddhahod”. Future Buddhahood lives in
past delusion, so delusion is “Buddhahood-delusion”. Past
delusion lives in future Buddhahood, so Buddhahood is
“delusion-Buddhahood”. The same goes also for the famous
Tiantai claim that “insentient beings have the
Buddha-nature”—i.e., that rocks and stones and all other things
with no awareness have the all-pervasive unconditional nature of
awareness: awareness is always nonawareness-awareness (all awareness
exists-with nonawareness, e.g., the objects of awareness, which are
not themselves aware), nonawareness is always awareness-nonawareness
(i.e., nonawareness is determinately nonawareness only as contrasted
by awareness to awareness itself, and is intrinsically inseparable
from whatever awareness might exist in the universe, simply by virtue
of the inseparability of all existence).
 The controversial idea of “the Buddha-nature of insentient
beings” is developed by Zhanran in his Jingangpi using
a slightly different approach to the Three Truths, focusing on the
trope of space as advanced as a metaphor for Buddha-nature in
the Mahāyāna Nirvana Sutra, in its character of
all-pervasiveness, ineradicability, and indivisibility, and the
non-different/non-identical relation of all regions of space to each
other and of each region of space to whatever possible object can
occupy it. But here too the central argument is the inseparable
intersubsumption of the two opposite terms: sentience is always
insentience-sentience, insentience is always
sentience-insentience.
 One way to think about this is to consider a magnet. It has a
north and a south “pole” to it. If we wanted to separate
the north from the south pole, we might try cutting it in half. But
when we do so, we find that each half still has both a north
and a south pole. No matter how many times we slice it, the total set
of different characteristics pertaining to the whole are also found in
that separate part: northness and southness are, in their entirety,
found in what was formerly, in the context of the whole magnet, purely
the north part, and also in the former south part. This is how it is
in the Tiantai universe: the universe is one big magnet, but instead
of just a north and a south, it has 3000 different characteristic
aspects: meness, youness, trains, oceans, dogs, soups, historical
incidents, smiles, tears, delusion, enlightenment. If we try to
isolate any of these, however, what we end up with is another entire
“magnet”, which also has all 3000 aspects to it: this
meness, it turns out, also has its youness part, its train part, its
ocean part, its dog part, and so on. When I face you, it is you-and-me
facing you-and-me. It is me-and-all-worlds facing
all-worlds-and-me. It is the entire universe facing the entire
universe. We are always different, because wherever we go, there is a
you and a me, two different aspects, never merging into a blank
indifferent mush of a single quality. But since me-and-you is
contrasted to me-and-you, there is really no contrast at all: the same
thing is found on both sides of the contrast. We are neither the same
nor different. We are divided from ourselves, impossible to unify into
a simple unity, but for that very reason we are impossible to
separate from one another. Each of us, at each moment, are, in a word,
absolute, the Center as which all appears, and which is appearing in
and as all things. All things are our transformation bodies, we are
the transformation body of all things. 
 This also means that, the more fully one realizes that one is any
particular being, the more one realizes that he or she is also all
other, contrasted, things as well. This is how traditional Buddhist
“non-self” doctrine comes to play out in Tiantai. I think
I am already this self, Brook, but in reality, Buddhism tells me, I am
not yet really any such self—for to be a self is to be
unconditional, and that is impossible for “me”, a
conditional determinate being. Also, I am not yet
enlightened—for enlightenment is unconditionality, the only
freedom from suffering. To become unconditioned, as I’d thought I was
when I thought I was a self, is to become enlightened. This non-self
is the only thing that really fulfills my previous lust to be a self,
to actually be me. I cannot become this by being me as a
determinate being to the exclusion of all other beings, nor other
beings to the exclusion of me. Rather, by the Three Truths, I can only
become more and more me by becoming more and more everything else, and
that is what it means to become more and more enlightened, and to
become more me, more unconditionally this specific me. To
“become what I am”, to be a more fully realized version of
myself, is to see myself, Brook specifically, as unconditional, which
means as omnipresent and eternal, which means as expressing itself in
and as all things, which also means, conversely, intersubsumed, i.e.,
as an expression of all other things, as something as which
all other things are appearing. I cannot be myself until I am a
Buddha, but I cannot be a Buddha until I can be more fully (i.e., more
unconditionally, more all-pervasively) myself, and that means being
more fully a devil, a fool, a table, a spaceship, or, in Siming
Zhili’s example, a dung beetle. Buddhist practice is the progressively
fuller manifestation of my latent Buddhahood—which means also
the progressively fuller manifestation of my latent Dung-Beetlehood,
and indeed, my allegedly long ago already actual but really hitherto
merely latent Brookhood.
 Tiantai is encyclopedic in its approach to Buddhist practice; as
one might expect in light of its view of “exclusion” in
general, it excludes nothing. Hence in Tiantai works we find
extensive, detailed cataloging of a huge diversity of traditional
Buddhist practices, from rituals and devotions to meditations and
contemplations of all kinds, derived from all strata of previous
Buddhist culture. This accords not only with the philosophical
objection to the possibility of any final mutual exclusion of entities
rehearsed above, but also to the Lotus Sutra notion
of upāya, and the expansion of the range of Conventional
Truth in the Three Truths: the diversity of sentient beings is
limitless, their specific delusions and attachments and sufferings are
of limitless specific types, and thus the appropriate remedial
practices and doctrines for them are limitless. This is also the
justification for the “trivialist” position that all
possible claims are true, for “true” in the Tiantai
context meansonly a remedial upāya serving as a raft to
overcome itself, but doing so by totalization of itself, thereby
undermining itself, expressing itself in and as all other things,
intersubsuming all other truth-claims, thereby become all the more
present as all the more absent.
Tiantai takes the non-dualistic ideas suggested by the Lotus
Sutra in fables and unexplained narrative hints, and adapts the
resources of Emptiness and the Two Truths to give them a full
philosophical explanation and practical application for Buddhist
practice. The Lotus Sutra had made upāya the
centerpiece of Buddhism, and asserted a unity of all practices in the
One Vehicle, all leading toward Buddhahood. Tiantai follows this lead
and constructs a vast and complex system for accounting for and
integrating all known forms of Buddhist and even non-Buddhist
practice, all of which are acceptable skillful means appropriate and
wholesome for different persons and times. It rejects nothing, but it
organizes all known teachings and practices into an interconnected
system. The system has an interesting double structure: the first time
through, it appears to be hierarchical, putting the Mahāyāna above the
Hinayana and the Lotus above the rest of the Mahāyāna. But
the idea of redefinition of identity through recontextualization is
applied here, and when the hierarchical crown of the Lotus
has done its work, it has the retroactive effect of making all the
other parts equal as aspects of the One Vehicle. That is, no teaching,
practice or behavior has only a single meaning: its meaning is
determined by the context in which it is viewed. So any given doctrine
or practice can be seen as both the ultimate truth and as a more
partial and only locally relevant, or lesser, truth. The Tiantai
system of integrating all the various teachings and ideas and
perspectives in the world provides a system for seeing everything
twice, three times, infinite times, reassessing and developing the
meanings of each item as it comes into broader and broader relations.
The Hinayana teaching is, in the narrower context, a
“lesser” truth. But in the context of the One Vehicle, it
is itself an instantiation of the One Vehicle, and even gives unique
expression to it: hence the claim (based on a clever strong misreading
of a line from Kumārajīva’s translation of the Lotus:
決了聲聞法
為諸經之王) that the Hinayana doctrine
(rather than the Lotus itself) is itself the Highest of All
Teachings. The same goes for all other particular ideas, beliefs,
practices. Since nothing has only one meaning, everything can
mean anything. The interesting question about any proposition is
not whether it is true (it always is), but how. The
Tiantai “classification of teachings” is an intricate and
complex way of spelling out in what context and in what way each
doctrine means each of the many things it means.
The way in which each and any of these alternate methods or
doctrines is recontextualized to promote the desired Tiantai
implication is through the supplementation of the Three Truths view of
any and every possible content. Tiantai meditation most centrally
applies a method called “the contemplation of mind”,
(觀心 guanxin) given its most famous formulation
in Zhiyi’s unfolding of
一念三千 yiniansanqian (Japanese:
ichinensanzen), which means something like: “One Moment of
Experience as Three Thousand Worlds”. The “three
thousand” is of course a way of saying “everything”,
but it is really something a bit more than that. For of course, as
Zhiyi himself points out, any number would be an equally accurate
possible way to talk about the totality of all things, from none to
infinity. This number, “three thousand”, is concocted
specifically with meditational practice in mind. Here’s how it’s
derived:
Please note a few peculiarities of this way of listing “what
exists”. First, special care is taken here to include both
“purgatories” （i.e., the demonic thoughts,
practices and consequences of extreme subjective delusion and
suffering) on the one hand, and “Buddhas”, (the
enlightened thoughts, practices and consequences of the greatest
wisdom and liberation) on the other hand. This is important, because
it cautions us against viewing these subjective states, good or evil,
as mere epiphenenomena that are somehow outside the ultimate
reality. They are themselves included in the ultimate reality. By
including these terms, Tiantai guards against a vague notion of
“everything” which might lend itself to thinking that only
a pure or neutral substance—mind, matter, energy—is what
is real, or that the values and perspectives, good and bad, painful
and pleasant, that living beings experience are not part of the
“everything”. The “everything” that is
included in each moment of experience, and which is eternally
ineradicable, includes all those good and bad subjective states as
well.
Second, we have two important reduplications. The ten realms are
all the states in which a sentient being might find him or herself in
the Buddhist universe, from the lowest ignorance and suffering to the
highest bliss and enlightenment. They are often interpreted
symbolically: Buddhahood representing a moment of enlightened
experience, Bodhisattvahood a moment of compassion, Sravakahood a
moment of quiescence or renunciation of the worldly, Godhood a moment
of great worldly bliss and power, Asurahood a moment of egoistic rage
and combativeness, animals ignorance, purgatories suffering. One
reason to read these as states that any being might undergo is that
each of the ten realms is listed twice. This is because each realm
“includes” or “instantiates” all the other ten
realms. That is, each can appear “as” any of the others,
and in fact nothing appears which is not always “as”
something else. A human-bodhisattva, an animal-god, a Buddha-demon, an
Asura-Sravaka, etc. A bodhisattva appears as a human, or an animal, or
a Buddha, or an Asura. But as we’ve seen, this also means a human
appears as a bodhisattva, or a demon as an animal, or a Sravaka as a
hungry ghost, etc. Of course this goes on ad infinitum: each
of these included realms further includes all ten realms, and so
on. The 10 times 10 is just to point to this factor of mutual
inclusion, and make sure it is accounted for in our meditative
contemplation of “what exists”.
The other duplication comes in the “Three Worlds”. We
have “the five aggregates” but also “sentient
beings”. Actually, these are two ways of looking at the same
thing. Early Buddhism taught that what we call a sentient
being—you, me, Bill, Dave—is actually a set of five
aggregates, momentarily arising and perishing impersonal processes of
form, sensation, perception, volition and consciousness. One (the
aggregates) was real, the other (the alleged “self”) was a
pernicious illusion. The Three Thousand includes both. In other words,
it does not exclude the illusions about things among the totality of
“what exists”—as we’ve seen, all things are equally
illusions and equally true. The view of you as Bill is one item in the
list; the view of you as five impersonal aggregate processes is
another item on the list. Here too we have a shorthand way of pointing
to a larger principle, and a goad to keep it in mind in our
contemplation of “all that exists”. We are not to think of
a set of real entities lined up side by side, mutually exclusive, of
which there may be some additional erroneous views. Rather, the
erroneous view are part of all that exists, indeed all that exists is
some erroneous (i.e., one-sided, locally coherent) view. There is no
“thing” as such: a thing is just a way of appearing, and
comes with a viewpoint upon it. Tiantai insists further that to have a
single viewpoint requires at least one additional viewpoint, and
so ad infinitum. Normally we drain off the ambiguity and call
it “subjectivity” or “free will” or “the
unknown future” to one side and leave the “reality”
on the other side, calling it “objectivity” or
“determinate fact” or “the settled past”. In
Tiantai, these are inseparable, merely aspects artificially separated
off from the whole, which is always both fixed and open, locally
coherent and globally incoherent.
Now once we have gone through thinking about all possible objects
of experience this way, one by one, almost in the manner of a list out
of Walt Whitman’s Leaves of Grass, we apply the Three Truths,
the neither-same-nor-different relation, to this thought
itself. First temporally: this whole line of thinking required
some time to go through. Are the previous moments of thinking same as
or different from the present one now considering this question?
Neither.  All other moments are present here as this
moment—neither same nor different, the Three Truths. Next we consider
the external world, including my sense organs and brain, that served
as the efficient causes for the arising of this moment of thought
about the Three Thousand realms of possible experience: is the actual
world and my body different from or same as this moment of
thought about them all? Neither.  The external world is
present here as this consciousness of it, neither same nor
different. Next we consider all other possible thoughts or
experiences, the contrast with which is what makes this moment
determinate as itself: are they the same or different from it?
Neither. All other experiences are present here as this
moment of experience. I experience one moment of experience as a
totality, including my illusory presence as the experiencer. The next
moment, when new contents appear, will be experienced as more
of or other expressions of the same moment. I experience
the eternity-temporality of this moment continuing to show itself in
and as the neither-same-nor-different array of all other possible
experiences, beings, ideas, moments. This is the experience of
Buddhahood-as-all-sentient-beings.