On the basis of a number of slender indications, Timon’s date of
birth is generally set at around 325–320 BCE and his date of death at
around 235–230 BCE. For the details of his life we are wholly dependent
on the brief account in Diogenes Laertius (9.109–115) (see the entry on 
 doxography of ancient philosophy); 
Diogenes wrote perhaps in the early to mid-third
century CE, but his account claims to be drawn from several earlier
sources. According to Diogenes, Timon initially studied (after an
early career as a dancer in his home town of Phlius, an inland city of
the Peloponnese not far from the gulf of Corinth) with Stilpo of
Megara. After an interval in which he returned home and married, he
then went to Elis, in the northwest corner of the
Peloponnese,  to study with Pyrrho. Diogenes makes it sound as if
his stay at Elis was relatively brief; he says that it lasted until
Timon had children (9.109), and that at that point he was compelled to
go elsewhere to make money as a sophist, or paid teacher of
philosophical and other theory to late adolescent young men. But
whatever the length of his association with Pyrrho, Timon became an
adherent of Pyrrho’s philosophy from then on. His activities as a
sophist (whatever exactly these involved) appear to have left him
financially secure; we are told that he then went to Athens and lived
there (except for a short stay at Thebes) until his death. Diogenes
names two kings with whom he was acquainted, and several poets with
whom he collaborated; it is difficult to know what to make of this
information, although the recent work of Clayman (2010) has shown, by
means of detailed parallels with contemporary poetry, that he was
deeply immersed in the poetic world of his time. During his time at
Athens—probably several decades—he is likely also to have
made the acquaintance of the leading philosophers of the time;
Diogenes includes anecdotes featuring him making fun of
Arcesilaus, who was head of the 
Academy
 during most or all of this time, but he no doubt encountered Stoics
and Epicureans as well. That no representatives of any of these schools
refer to him in any surviving records is perhaps not surprising, given
the scathing critiques that are implicit in his portraits of them in
the Silloi.
The Silloi, in hexameter verse, has already been mentioned.
The other poem from which a few fragments survive was called
Indalmoi (Images or Appearances), which was
in elegiac couplets (alternating hexameters and pentameters). The
significance of this title is by no means clear. It might refer to the
“appearances” on the basis of which Pyrrhonists are
compelled to make their decisions; one of the surviving lines from the
poem reads “But the appearance [to phainomenon] is
powerful everywhere, wherever it comes” (quoted in Diogenes
Laertius 9.105), and most scholars have taken this to point to the
importance of appearances in shaping our actions. Another possibility
is that the ‘images’ referred to in the title are images
of Pyrrho himself, and that the poem was a depiction of Pyrrho and his
blissful tranquility; the longest surviving fragment from the
poem—a sequence of seven lines pieced together from three
passages in Diogenes Laertius and Sextus Empiricus—certainly
fits this description. A third suggestion is that ‘images’
or ‘appearances’ is to be taken in a negative sense,
referring to the fictions or illusions by which naive non-Pyrrhonists
are taken in. Possible support for this comes from a single pentameter
line, which is regularly assigned to the
Indalmoi because of the meter. This reads “but these
things are judged by mind [or: by convention] on the part of
humans” (Sextus Empiricus M 11.140); the context
suggests that the ‘things’ in question are things
(wrongly) taken to be by nature good or bad. None of these proposals
as to the character of the work can be ruled out, but none can be
regarded as more than conjecture. With the exception of a four-line
fragment about “the nature of the divine and the good”,
which is probably the most contentious of all the fragments of Timon,
no other lines survive beyond the three passages just referred
to. (See the discussion of “The Nature of the Divine and the
Good” in Section 6 of the entry on
 Pyrrho,
 for a brief account of the difficulties
surrounding this fragment.) Nor do we have any general description of
the work (unlike in the case of the Silloi—see the next
section); Diogenes Laertius does not even include it in his list of
Timon’s works, although he does elsewhere cite it. Thus despite the
importance of the few surviving pieces of the Indalmoi, the
poem as a whole is almost entirely opaque to us.
Diogenes (9.110) claims that, in addition to the poems already
mentioned, Timon wrote sixty tragedies and thirty comedies, as well as
epics, satyr plays and kinaidoi (usually translated
‘obscene poems’—kinaidos normally means
‘catamite’; see Strabo 14.1.41, Athenaeus XIV.620e–f for
what appear to be other references to the same verse form). He says
that Timon indulged in poetry while taking time off from philosophy;
but the poems he lists in this context include the
Silloi, which certainly qualifies as part of Timon’s
philosophical activity. The report is confused in other ways as well;
in any case, no trace of this voluminous non-philosophical corpus, if
it ever existed, seems to have survived. (There are a few lines of
Timon’s verse that cannot be definitely attributed to either the
Silloi or the Indalmoi; but there is no particular
reason to believe that they derive from any of these other works.)
The remaining works attributed to Timon are prose works. Of these the
most important is the Pytho. We are told (by Aristocles in
Eusebius,
Praeparatio evangelica 14.18.14) that this described a meeting
and a dialogue between Timon and Pyrrho; Timon portrayed himself as
encountering Pyrrho by a temple, as he was walking towards Pytho (the
region that included Delphi). Whether the work itself was in dialogue
form, or merely recounted a dialogue in the third person, is not clear.
But it appears that this dialogue consisted of a thorough presentation
of Pyrrho’s outlook and demeanor; Diogenes Laertius, in what seems to
be a reference to the same work (9.67), says that Timon
‘clarifies’ (diasaphei) Pyrrho’s disposition
(diathesin) in the account that he ‘goes through’
(diexeisin, a word often used of detailed exposition). This
account will presumably have been placed in Pyrrho’s mouth, with Timon
himself depicted as an eager pupil. (This motif seems to have been a
recurring one in Timon’s writings; fragments from both the
Silloi and the Indalmoi consist of questions put to
Pyrrho—most probably by Timon himself as speaker—about how he
manages to sustain his tranquility.) There is one quotation from the
Pytho and one further report about a statement that it
included; both are of some philosophical significance, and will be
touched on below, but neither furnishes any additional clues concerning
the general character of the Pytho itself. It has usually been
thought that the setting of the dialogue has symbolic significance
(Delphi being the seat of the important oracle of Apollo), but the
interpretations that have been offered of this are various. Aristocles
offers a summary of an account by Timon of the central points of
Pyrrho’s philosophy, and this is often thought to have occurred in the
Pytho; but this is no more than plausible speculation. (The
summary itself, however, is crucial for the reconstruction of Pyrrho’s
views; for discussion see the entry on
 Pyrrho.)
Diogenes (9.105) mentions a work called On the Senses and
Sextus (M 3.2) mentions a work called Against the
Physicists. Again, the specific words or ideas that are attributed
to Timon in these contexts deserve some discussion, but they tell us
little or nothing about the works themselves, beyond what the titles
would anyway suggest. It is worth noting, however, that there is no
indication that these works consisted of or included exposition of
Pyrrho’s philosophy. Finally, Diogenes tells us (9.115) that Timon
praised Arcesilaus (who, during Timon’s lifetime, took the Academy in a
skeptical direction) in a work called Arcesilaus’ Funeral
Banquet—this by contrast with his attacks on him in the
Silloi, as Diogenes mentions and as we can confirm from the
surviving fragments. This work is generally taken as evidence that
Timon outlived Arcesilaus. But given Timon’s penchant for elaborate
narrative conceits, the inference is hazardous. As Clayman (2010),
13–15 has made clear, the funeral banquet was a recognized
parodic verse form dating back to before Timon’s day, and by no means
requires that its subjects be actually deceased; the genre also gives
us grounds for wondering whether the praise of Arcesilaus was partly
or even wholly mock-praise.
Literary devices appear to have been extensively employed in the
Silloi. Diogenes Laertius tells us (9.111) that the
Silloi was divided into three books. In the first book Timon
spoke solely in the first person, whereas the second and third took the
form of dialogues between Timon himself and the early (late 6th c. BCE)
philosopher
Xenophanes. Timon is said to
have questioned Xenophanes about every philosopher—the older ones
in the second book and the more recent in the third book—and
Xenophanes answered him. The work as a whole, however, was devoted to
abuse and ridicule of non-Pyrrhonist philosophers. It looks as if part
of the work was modeled after the famous scene in Odyssey
Book XI where Odysseus visits the underworld; several fragments
include the words ‘I saw’ or ‘I recognized’
(where the person seen or recognized is a dead philosopher), and this
formula is highly reminiscent of Odysseus’ language in describing his
encounters with his dead comrades. There are other echoes of Homer as
well, most notably from the early books of the Iliad, the
effect being to represent philosophical disputants as literal
combatants. Clayman (2010), chapter 3 identifies two other likely
scenes: “Marketplace of Ideas” in which philosophers are shown selling
their ideas, and “Hyde Park Corner”, in which philosophers address
crowds. Clayman, however, convincingly argues against the hypothesis
of a fishing scene, accepted by several earlier scholars; the
fragments that have been taken to depict philosophers as fishers or as
fish frequently do not need to be, or even lend themselves especially
to being, interpreted in this way.
Timon is indebted for his style and tone in the Silloi to a
tradition of moralizing diatribe prevalent among the Cynics. The word
tuphos, ‘vanity,’ was a favorite Cynic term of
invective, and it occurs in several fragments from the Silloi,
as do a number of related terms. The Cynic Crates also wrote satirical
verses; one of the few surviving fragments of Crates begins “And
I saw Stilpo enduring severe pains in Megara,” which is a parody
of a line from Odyssey XI and again seems to assimilate a
philosophical encounter to Odysseus’ underworld encounters. Crates’
writings may well, then, have been an important influence on the
Silloi (on this see Long 1978). A more distant inspiration was
Xenophanes, who can plausibly be seen as the originator of the genre of
philosophical satire in which Timon was writing. (Later sources even
give Silloi as the title of a poem by Xenophanes; but it is
not clear whether this title was attached to the poem before or only
after Timon’s day.) This is surely part of the reason for Timon’s
choice of Xenophanes as the main character in the second and third
books.
But there were philosophical as well as literary reasons for this
choice, and this takes us into the question of the outlook projected by
the poem. In one of the two surviving fragments concerned with
Xenophanes, he is referred to as hupatuphos, ‘partly
free from tuphos.’ Pyrrho is the only one who managed to
be entirely ‘free from tuphos’ (atuphos);
but in the highly critical context of the Silloi, the epithet
hupatuphos already raises Xenophanes above almost all the
other philosophers who appear in the poem. The specific point for which
Timon singles him out for this qualified praise is that he was a
“mocker of Homeric deception.” This clearly refers to
Xenophanes’ criticism of Homer’s (and Hesiod’s) anthropomorphic
depiction of the gods (in which, among other typically human faults,
they engage in deception—Timon’s coinage ‘of Homeric
deception’ (Homêrapatês) may very well be a
reflection of this point). This is not to say, however, that Timon
wholly approves of Xenophanes’ theological stance. For Xenophanes’
positive view, according to which there is one unchanging god, appears
to be a target for criticism in the same fragment (which is why he
qualifies only as partly free from tuphos). In fact, it looks
as if Timon is suspicious of theological pronouncements of any kind.
For in another fragment Timon (very unusually among ancient
commentators) praises Protagoras for his agnostic attitude towards
the gods. This is understandable
given the general framework supplied by Pyrrho; however precisely
Pyrrho’s thought is interpreted, he clearly rejected physical
speculation—and it was under that heading that speculation about the
gods was taken, in the Hellenistic period, to belong.
In another fragment Xenophanes is represented as regretting his
failure to ‘look both ways’ (to be
amphoterobleptos), and so embracing an ill-considered monism.
(This interpretation of Xenophanes, which assimilates him to the
Eleatics, is highly disputable given the surviving fragments, but was
common in the ancient world.) The ability to ‘look both
ways’ is therefore presented as a positive characteristic, and
this is echoed in two other fragments. 

Zeno of Elea
 is described as ‘double-tongued’
(amphoteroglôssos)—presumably on the basis of his
paradoxes arguing for two opposite conclusions—and Democritus is
described as ‘two-minded’ (amphinoon); the
contexts make clear that these, too, are intended as positive
appellations. Timon is eager, then, to reject any fixed or one-sided
view of reality. Again, the precise interpretation of this attitude
will depend in part on one’s conception of Pyrrho’s philosophy; but the
link with a Pyrrhonist outlook is, at a general level, not hard to see.
In the same fragment Xenophanes is also pictured as regretting his
failure to engage in skeptosunê. It is tempting to read
this as an early occurrence of the notion of skepticism familiar to us
from the later Pyrrhonist (or Neo-Pyrrhonist) Sextus Empiricus. But
there is no clear reason for doing so; the term may just mean
‘inquiry’ in the usual sense, and Xenophanes may simply be
bemoaning his inadequate investigation of things.
Zeno is not the only Eleatic thinker to receive favorable treatment
in the Silloi. Timon calls Parmenides
‘high-minded’ and ‘not full of opinions,’ and
says that he “elevated our thought-processes from the deception
of appearance.” This clearly refers to Parmenides’ rejection of
ordinary common-sense views of reality, and of the senses as an
adequate guide to the nature of reality; and it is no doubt on the same
grounds that Parmenides’ follower Melissus is described as “above
many illusions and yielding to few.” This, of course, indicates
that Melissus did go wrong in certain respects, but that is not
surprising. As was suggested in the previous paragraph, Timon would
have had little sympathy for the Eleatics’ positive doctrines; he
regards them as valuable because they refuse to accept any
simple-minded conception according to which things are as they
seem.
As was mentioned in the previous section, Timon’s picture of
Arcesilaus, in three surviving fragments of the Silloi,
appears wholly uncomplimentary; although the imagery in these fragments
(shorn of their surrounding context) is not entirely perspicuous, the
general impression seems to be of an unoriginal and self-important
fool. This may seem surprising given the points just mentioned; one
might have expected that Arcesilaus’ skepticism would have struck Timon
as highly congenial. However, there do clearly seem to have been some
differences in temperament and approach between Arcesilaus and Pyrrho;
and this may be a case (of a kind common in intellectual history) where
broad common ground led to especially intense rivalry over differences
that, from an outsider’s perspective, might have seemed
insignificant.
We only have one fragment specifically cited from the
Silloi in which Pyrrho himself is the subject; one other about
Pyrrho is regularly and probably correctly assigned to the
Silloi, and the same is true of a third fragment about
Pyrrho’s follower Philo. In all three fragments (as in the fragment on
Pyrrho from the Indalmoi) the emphasis is on the attainment of
a supremely tranquil disposition. This tranquility is associated with a
refusal to be involved in detailed speculations about the universe, and
also with not engaging in contentious disputes with philosophical
opponents. (By contrast, several other fragments about non-Pyrrhonists
berate them for their contentiousness.) But these fragments give few if
any clues about the specifics of Pyrrho’s (or Timon’s) thought. The aim
in the Silloi is clearly to evoke a certain kind of ideal
attitude rather than to detail the means of attaining that
attitude.
This is not to say, however, that the Silloi has no concern
for philosophical detail. We have seen that Timon’s remarks about those
philosophers of whom he partially approves often point to specific
views of theirs as worthy of praise or criticism. Similarly, many of
the fragments on philosophers with whom he has no sympathy pick on some
central point in their philosophies as material for caricature—Mind
in the case of
 Anaxagoras, for
example, or the four basic elements in the case of 
Empedocles. The surviving
fragments include portraits of most of the major Greek philosophers up
to and including Timon’s time; like good political cartoons, they are
sharply drawn and often savagely witty. Indeed, it is arguable that the
intensity of the implied criticism in these fragments is at odds with
the calm demeanor, and the lack of concern with competitive
philosophical debate, that Timon elsewhere celebrates in Pyrrho. Timon
may have been an effective spokesman for Pyrrho’s outlook, but it is
not clear that he entirely succeeds in exemplifying it himself.
As was noted earlier, the surviving fragments of the
Indalmoi include a line that is plausibly taken to point to
the importance, for the Pyrrhonist, of the appearances of things as a
basis for decision and action. Whether or not it is this theme that is
alluded to in the title Indalmoi itself (see above, in Section
2, Works), it looks as if this is a topic to which Timon returned in
several works. The sole reference to Timon’s On the Senses is
a quotation that reads “that honey is sweet I do not posit, but
that it appears so I agree” (Diogenes Laertius 9.105). Both the
context in Diogenes, and the obvious implication of the words
themselves, suggest that here too Timon is making the same point: for
practical purposes it is both possible and legitimate for Pyrrhonists
to let themselves be guided by appearances of things, even while they
rigorously refrain from attributing definite characteristics to those
things in their real nature. On this matter Timon’s influence on the
Pyrrhonist tradition seems to have been far-reaching; the same point
and the same example (and even the notion of “agreeing”
that things appear a certain way, although the Greek words are not
identical) reappear in the opening pages of Sextus Empiricus’
Outlines of Pyrrhonism (1.20).
The same passage of Diogenes Laertius includes a reference to
another remark of Timon, this time from the Pytho; according
to Diogenes, Timon said in this work that he had not “gone
outside sunêtheia.” Sunêtheia can
mean several things. But the meaning that best fits the context, and
the one that tends to occur in epistemological contexts in general, is
‘ordinary experience.’ Diogenes is commenting on the
Pyrrhonists’ response to the common objection that their philosophy
amounts to a rejection of life itself. The Pyrrhonists, he says, reply
that this is not so, since they readily accept that things appear in
their many familiar ways; it is only at the level of the underlying
nature of things that they avoid definite pronouncements. The comment
from the Pytho is then cited as an instance of this kind of
reply. Timon, then, is apparently saying that, in allowing the
appearances to guide his behavior, he is not doing away with our
everyday experience of things.
The fact that Timon needs to make this statement suggests that the
accusation regularly leveled against the Pyrrhonists (as well as the
skeptical Academy), that it would be impossible to live in accordance
with their philosophy, goes back to the earliest phase of the
tradition. It was perhaps in response to this objection that Timon
developed this position on the practical value of the appearances.
While we cannot exclude the possibility that it was already an element
in Pyrrho’s thinking, there is no evidence linking Pyrrho with any
remarks about appearances; this may, then, be Timon’s own contribution,
prompted by hostile criticism.
There are other instances where it is not clear whether Timon is
simply reproducing Pyrrho’s outlook or adding creatively to it. For
example, Diogenes reports that in the Pytho Timon offered a
gloss on the phrase ‘no more’ (ouden mallon),
namely, ‘determining nothing and withholding assent’
(9.76). The phrase ouden mallon became a stock Pyrrhonist
expression, and occurs several times in connection with Pyrrho’s own
views. But is Timon here giving his own distinctive explanation of the
significance of this phrase? Given the meager evidence available, we
cannot hope to settle the matter. It has even been suggested that
large parts of the Pyrrhonist position expounded in the key passage of
Aristocles mentioned earlier are in fact additions by Timon to a core
idea of Pyrrho’s. But this is controversial, and the passage as a
whole has generally been taken to be giving us the philosophy of
Pyrrho—though via the medium of a summary by Timon. However,
since so much of what we know about Pyrrho comes through Timon, the
line between these two possibilities is often very difficult to
draw.
There are, though, two cases where it seems clear that Timon is
speaking for himself rather than reproducing the thoughts of Pyrrho.
Sextus (M 3.2) reports a comment (from Timon’s On the
Physicists) about the legitimacy of using hypotheses. He also
twice reports a remark of Timon about divisibility and time (M
6.66, 10.197—the wording is not quite identical, but it is clearly
the same thought in both places); it is a reasonable supposition that
this too came from On the Physicists, although Sextus does not
say so. Now in both cases Timon is involved in a very different kind of
activity from anything attested for Pyrrho. He is intervening in
technical philosophical debates; the very concepts at issue make this
clear. But as we saw earlier, philosophical debate was something that
Pyrrho rigorously avoided; this was emphasized by Timon himself as one
of the main sources of his tranquility. Again, it appears that Timon
does not entirely live up to the ideal that he ascribes to his
teacher.
Beyond the fact that these are Timon’s own ideas, the amount that we
can learn from Sextus’ reports is less than one might have hoped. On
the subject of hypothesis, he simply tells us that Timon regarded it as
a question of primary importance whether anything should be assumed by
hypothesis. The practice of assuming things by hypothesis appears to
have had its original home in geometry, and it is not surprising that
the remark is cited at the beginning of Sextus’ Against the
Geometers. But the occurrence of the remark in a work called
Against the Physicists may suggest that Timon had in mind a
notion of unargued assumption that was not restricted to any particular
subject-matter. In any case, it is a fair conjecture that Timon’s
implied answer to the question was ‘no’; accepting things
by hypothesis is equivalent to accepting them without grounds, and this
is a highly dubious procedure. If so, Timon anticipates the Mode from
Hypothesis, which is one of the Five Modes of the later Pyrrhonists
(and where the notion of hypothesis has lost its specific link with
geometry).
The other claim that Sextus attributes to Timon is that no process
divisible into temporal parts—such as coming into being, perishing,
and the like—can take place in an indivisible time. Sextus uses this
as an argument for the conclusion that the present is not indivisible;
but there is no clear indication that this was Timon’s purpose as well.
The claim itself is unobjectionable, indeed almost tautological; one
can imagine numerous contexts in debates about the nature of time in
which it might have had a point. Some scholars have sought to link it
to doctrines current in the immediately preceding period, including
those of Timon’s first teacher Stilpo of Megara. But again, it is hard
to connect such a trivially true statement with any definite
philosophical position. If Timon retained any of Stilpo’s teachings,
they were most likely in the area of ethics; Stilpo, and the Megarians
generally, seem to have espoused an ideal of mild or moderate feeling
and freedom from disturbance that is recognizably akin to Pyrrho’s
tranquility.