Arthur has the measles and stays in a closed environment with his
little sister Mafalda. If Mafalda ends up contracting the measles
herself because of her staying in close contact with Arthur, there
must be something—the measles virus—which is transmitted
from Arthur to Mafalda in virtue of a relation—the relation of
staying in close contact with one another—instantiated by the
two siblings. Epistemologists have been devoting their attention to
the fact that epistemicproperties—like being justified
or being known—are often transmitted in a similar way. An
example—which we shall not discuss in this entry—is the
transmission of knowledge via testimony from an individual to another.
A different but equally important phenomenon—which occupies
centre stage in this entry—is the transmission of epistemic
justification across an inference or argument from one proposition to
another.
Consider proposition q constituting the conclusion of an
argument having proposition p as premise (where p can be
a set or conjunction of more propositions). If p is justified
for a subject s by evidence e, this justification may
transmit to q if s is aware of the entailment between
p and q. When this happens, q is justified for
s in virtue of her justification for p based on
e and her knowledge of the inferential relation from p
to q. Consider this example from Wright (2002):
Here a subject s can deductively infer Q1 from
P1 given some background
 information.[1]
 Suppose s acquires justification for P1 by learning
E1. In this case s will also acquire justification
for Q1 in virtue of her knowledge of the inferential
relation from P1 to Q1 and her justification for
 P1.[2]
 Thus s’s justification for P1 will transmit to
Q1.
It is widely recognised that epistemic justification sometimes
fails to transmit across an inference or argument. In
interesting cases of transmission failure, s has justification
for believing p and s knows the inferential link between
p and q, but s has no justification for believing
q in virtue of her justification for p and her
knowledge of the inferential link. Here is an example from Wright
(2003). Suppose s’s background information entails, among
ordinary things, that Jessica and Jocelyn are indistinguishable twins.
Consider this possible reasoning:
In Twins E2 can give s justification for
believing P2 only if s has independent
justification for believing Q2 in the first instance.
Suppose that s does have independent justification for
believing Q2, and imagine that s learns
E2. In this case s will acquire justification for
believing P2 from E2. But it is intuitive that
s will acquire no justification for Q2 in virtue
of her justification for believing P2 based on
E2 and her knowledge of the inferential link between
P2 and Q2. So Twins instantiates
transmission failure when Q2 is independently
justified.
An argument incapable of transmitting to its conclusion a
specific justification for its premise(s)—e.g., a
justification based on evidence e—may turn out to be able
to transmit to the same conclusion a different justification for its
premise(s)—e.g., one based on different evidence e*.
Replace for instance E2 with E2* = ‘This
girl’s passport certifies she is Jessica’ in Twins.
E2* appears capable of providing s with
justification for believing P2 even if s has no
independent justification for Q2. Suppose then that
s has no independent justification for Q2, and that
she acquires E2*. It is intuitive that s will
acquire justification from E2* for P2 that does
transmit to Q2. Now the inference from P2 to
Q2 instantiates epistemic transmission. 
Although many of the epistemologists taking part in the debate on
epistemic transmission and transmission failure speak of transmission
of warrant, rather than justification, they all seem
to use the term ‘warrant’ to refer to some kind of
epistemic justification. Most epistemologists investigating epistemic
transmission and transmission failure—e.g., Wright (2011, 2007,
2004, 2003, 2002 and 1985), Davies (2003a, 2000 and 1998), Dretske
(2005), Pryor (2004), Moretti (2012) and Moretti & Piazza
(2013)—broadly identify the epistemic property capable of being
transmitted with propositional
 justification.[3]
 Only a few authors explicitly focus on transmission of
doxastic justification—e.g., Silins (2005), Davies
(2009) and Tucker (2010a and 2010b). In this entry we will follow the
majority in discussing transmission and failure of transmission of
justification as phenomena primarily pertaining to propositional
justification. (See however the supplement on
 Transmission of Propositional Justification versus Transmission of Doxastic Justification.)
Epistemologists typically concentrate on transmission of
(propositional or doxastic) justification across deductively
valid arguments (or arguments deductively valid given background
information). The fact that justification can transmit across
deduction is crucial for our cognitive processes because it makes the
advancement of knowledge—or of justified belief—through
deductive reasoning possible. Suppose evidence e gives you
justification for believing hypothesis or proposition p and you
know that p entails another proposition q that you have
not directly checked. If the justification you have for p
transmits to its unchecked prediction q through the entailment,
you acquire justification for believing q too.
Epistemologists may analyse epistemic transmission across
ampliative (or inductive) inferences too. (Note that
arguments deductively valid given background information can
often be turned into good ampliative arguments by simply removing some
background information.) Yet this topic has received much less
attention in the recent literature on epistemic transmission. (See
however interesting remarks in Tucker 2010a.)
In the remaining part of this entry we will focus on transmission and
transmission failure of propositional justification across deductive
inference. Unless differently specified, by ‘epistemic
justification’ or ‘justification’ we will always
mean ‘propositional justification’.
As said, s’s justification for p based on evidence
e transmits across entailment from p to p’s
consequence q whenever q is justified for s in
virtue of s’s justification for p based on e and
her knowledge of q’s deducibility from p. This initial
characterisation can be distilled into three conditions individually
necessary and jointly sufficient for epistemic transmission:
s’s justification for p based on e transmits to
p’s logical consequence q if and only if:
Condition (iii) is crucial for distinguishing transmission of
justification across (known) entailment from closure of
justification across (known) entailment. To say that a subject
s’s justification for believing p is closed under
p’s (known) entailment to q is to say that:
If (i) s has justification for believing p and (ii)
s knows that p entails q, then (iii-c) s
has justification for believing q.
One can coherently accept the above principle—known as the
 principle of epistemic closure—and
 deny a corresponding principle of epistemic transmission,
cashed out in terms of the conditions outlined above:
If (i) s has justification for believing p and (ii)
s knows that p entails q, then (iii) s has
justification for believing q in virtue of the
satisfaction of (i) and (ii).
The principle of epistemic closure just requires that when
s has justification for believing p and knows that
q is deducible from p, s have justification for
believing q. In addition, the principle of epistemic
transmission requires this justification to be had in virtue of
her having justification for p and knowing that p
entails q (for further discussion see Tucker 2010b).
Another important distinction, at this juncture, is the one between
the principle of epistemic transmission and a different
principle of transmission discussed by Pritchard (2012) under the
label of evidential transmission principle. According to
it,
If s perceptually knows that p in virtue of evidence set
e, and s competently deduces q from p
(thereby coming to believe that q while retaining her knowledge
that p), then s knows that q, where that
knowledge is sufficiently supported by e. (Pritchard 2012, 75)
Pritchard’s principle, to begin with, pertains to (perceptual)
knowledge and not to propositional justification. Moreover, it
deserves emphasis that there are inferences that apparently satisfy
Pritchard’s principle but fail to satisfy the principle of
epistemic transmission. Consider for instance the following triad:
(Zebra)

E3. The animals in the pen look like zebras.

P3. The animals in the pen are zebras.

Therefore:

Q3. The animals in the pen are not mules cleverly disguised
so as to look like zebras.
According to Pritchard, the evidence set of a normal zoo-goer standing
before the zebra enclosure will typically include, above and beyond
E3, the background proposition that (EB) to
disguise mules like zebras would be very costly and time-consuming,
would bring no comparable benefit and would be relatively easy to
unmask. Suppose s knows P3 on the basis of her
evidence set, and competently deduces Q3 from P3
thereby coming to believe Q3. Pritchard’s evidential
transmission principle apparently accommodates the fact that
s thereby comes to know Q3. For her evidence set
— because of its inclusion of EB
— sufficiently supports Q3. But the
principle of epistemic transmission is not satisfied. Although
(i) s has justification for P3 and (ii) she knows that
P3 entails Q3, she has justification for
believing Q3 in virtue of, not (i) and (ii), but the
independent support lent to it by EB. 
Condition (iii) is sufficient to distinguish the notion of epistemic
transmission from different notions in the neighbourhood. However, as
it stands, it is still unsuitable for the purpose to completely
characterize the phenomenon of epistemic transmission. The problem is
that there are many other cases in which it is intuitive that the
justification for p based on e transmits to q
even if condition (iii), strictly speaking, is not satisfied.
These cases can be described as situations in which only part
of the justification that s has for q is based on her
justification for p and her knowledge of the entailment from
p to q. Consider the following example. Suppose you are
travelling on a train heading to Edinburgh. At 16:00, as you enter
Newcastle upon Tyne, you spot the train station sign. Then, at 16:05,
the ticket controller tells you that you are not yet in Scotland. Now
consider the following reasoning: 
As you learn E4, given suitable background information, you
acquire justification for P4; moreover, to the extent to
which you know that not being in Scotland is sufficient for not being
in Edinburgh, you also acquire via transmission justification for
Q4. This additional justification is transmitted
irrespective of the fact that you already have justification
for Q4, acquired by spotting the train station sign
‘Newcastle upon Tyne’. If (iii) were read as requiring
that the whole of the justification available for a proposition
q were had in virtue of the satisfaction of (i) and (ii), cases
like these would become invisible.
A simple way to deal with this complication is to amend the tripartite
analysis of epistemic transmission by turning (iii) into (iii+),
saying that at least part of the justification that s
has for q has been achieved by her in virtue of the
satisfaction of (i) and (ii). Let us say that a justification for
q is an additional justification for q whenever
it is not a first-time justification for it. Condition (iii+)
can be reformulated as the following disjunction:
Much of the extant literature on epistemic transmission concentrates
on examples of transmission of first-time justification. These
examples include Toadstool. We have seen, however, that what
intuitively transmits in certain cases is simply additional
justification. Epistemologists have identified at least
two—possibly overlapping—kinds of additional justification
(cf. for instance Moretti & Piazza 2013). 
One is what can be called independent justification because it
appears—intuitively—independent of the original
justification for q. This notion of justification could
probably be sharpened by appealing to counterfactual analysis. Suppose
s’s justification for p based on e transmits to
p’s logical consequence q. This justification
transmitted to q is an additional independent
justification just in case the following three conditions are met: (1)
s was already justified in believing q before acquiring
e, (2) as s acquires e, s is still
justified in believing q, and (3) if s had not been
antecedently justified in believing q, upon learning e,
s would have acquired via transmission a first-time
justification for believing q. Journey instantiates
transmission of justification by meeting (1), (2) and (3). Thus
Journey exemplifies a case of transmission of additional
independent justification.
Consider now that justification for a proposition or belief normally
comes in degrees of strength. The second kind of additional
justification can be characterised as quantitatively
strengthening justification. Suppose again that s’s
justification for p based on e transmits to p’s
logical consequence q. This justification transmitted to
q is an additional quantitatively strengthening
justification just in case the following two conditions are satisfied:
(1) s was already justified in believing q before
acquiring e, and (2*) as s acquires e, the
strength of s’s justification for believing q increases.
Here is an example from Moretti (2012). Your background information
says that only one ticket out of 5,000 of a fair lottery has been
bought by a person born in 1970, and that all other tickets have been
bought by older or younger people. Consider now this reasoning:
The proposition Q5 given its high chance, is already
justified on your background information only. As you learn
E5, it is intuitive that you acquire an additional
quantitatively strengthening justification for Q5 via
transmission. For your justification for P5 transmitted to
Q5 is intuitively quantitatively stronger than your initial
justification for Q5.
In many cases when q receives via transmission from p an
additional independent justification, q will also receive a
quantitatively strengthening justification. This is not true in
general though. For there seem to be cases in which an additional
independent justification transmitted from p to q
intuitively lessens an antecedent justification for q
(cf. Wright 2011).
An interesting question is whether it is true that as q
receives via transmission from p an additional quantitatively
strengthening justification, q also receives an independent
justification. This seems true in some cases—for instance in
Lottery above. It is controversial, however, whether it is the
case that whenever q receives via transmission a
quantitatively strengthening justification, q also receives an
independent justification. Wright 2011, and Moretti & Piazza 2013
describe two examples in which a subject allegedly receives via
transmission a quantitatively strengthening but not independent
additional justification.
To summarise, additional justification comes apparently in two
species at least: independent justification and
quantitatively strengthening justification. This fact enables
us to lay down three specifications of the general condition (iii+)
necessary for justification transmission, each of which represents a
condition necessary for the transmission of one particular type of
justification. Let us call these specifications (iii-ft), (iii-ai) and
(iii-aqs).
(iii-ft) s has first time justification for q in
virtue of the satisfaction of (i) and (ii).
(iii-ai) s has additional independent justification for
q in virtue of the satisfaction of (i) and (ii).
(iii-aqs) s has additional quantitatively strengthening
justification for q in virtue of the satisfaction of (i) and
(ii).
Transmission of first-time justification makes the advancement of
justified belief through deductive reasoning possible. However, the
acquisition of first-time justification for q is not the sole
possible improvement of one’s epistemic position relative to q
that one could expect from transmission of justification. Moretti
& Piazza (2013, 2491–93), for instance, have described a variety
of different ways in which s’s epistemic standing toward a
proposition can be improved upon the acquisition via transmission of
an additional justification for it.
It is widely acknowledged that justification sometimes fails to
transmit across known entailment (this acknowledgement dates back at
least to Wright 1985). Moreover, it is no overstatement to say that
the recent literature has investigated the phenomenon of failure of
transmission of justification more extensively than that of
transmission of justification. As we have seen, justification based on
e transmits from p to q across the entailment if
and only if (i) s has justification for p based on
e, (ii) s knows that q is deducible from
p, and (iii+) at least part of s’s justification for
q is based on the satisfaction of (i) and (ii). It follows from
this characterisation that no justification based on e
transmits from p to q across the entailment if
condition (i), condition (ii), or condition (iii+) are not satisfied.
These are cases of transmission failure. 
The most trivial cases of transmission failure are such that it is
true that condition (iii+) is unsatisfied because condition (i) or
condition (ii) are unsatisfied, but it is also true that (iii+) would
have been satisfied if both condition (i) and (ii) have been satisfied
(cf. Tucker 2010b). It deserves emphasis that these cases involve
arguments that are not unsuitable for the purpose to transmit
justification depending on evidence e: had the epistemic
circumstances been congenial to the satisfaction of (i) and (ii),
these arguments would have transmitted the justification based on
e from p to q. As we could put the point, these
arguments are transmissive of the justification depending on
 e.[4]
More interesting cases of transmission failure—or, for some
authors (e.g., Beebee 2001), the only genuine cases of transmission
failure—are those in which condition (iii+) is not satisfied
because it could not have been satisfied, no matter whether or not
conditions (i) and (ii) have been satisfied. These cases concern
arguments non-transmissive of justification depending on a
given evidence, i.e., arguments incapable of transmitting
justification depending on that evidence under any epistemic
circumstance. One example in point is provided by Twins.
Suppose first that s has independent justification for
Q2. In those circumstances (i) s has justification
from E2 for P2. Furthermore (ii) s does know
that P2 entails Q2. However, s has not
justification for Q2 in virtue of the satisfaction of (i)
and (ii). So (iii+) is not met. Suppose now that s has no
independent justification for Q2. Then, it is not the case
that (i) s has justification from E2 for
P2. So, in this case (iii+) is not met either. Since there
is no other possibility — either s has independent
justification for Q2 or she doesn’t — it
cannot be the case that s’s belief that Q2 is
justified in virtue of her justification for P2
from E2 and her knowledge that P2 entails
Q2. 
It is worth noting that none of these cases of failure of transmission
of justification considered above entails failure of epistemic
closure. For in none of these cases s has justification
for believing p, s knows that p entails q,
and s fails to have justification for believing q.
Unsurprisingly, the epistemologists contributing to the literature on
transmission failure have principally devoted their attention to the
cases of transmission failure involving non-transmissive arguments.
Some epistemologists have attempted to identify conditions whose
satisfaction suffices to make an argument non-transmissive of
justification based on a given evidence. The next section is devoted
to reviewing the most influential of these proposals.
Some non-transmissive arguments explicitly feature their
conclusion among their premises. Suppose p is justified for
s by e, and consider the premise-circular argument that
deduces p from itself. This argument cannot satisfy condition
(iii+) even if conditions (i) and (ii) are satisfied. The reason is
that no part of s’s justification for p can be acquired
in virtue of, among other things, the satisfaction of (ii). For
if (i) is satisfied, p is justified for s by the
relevant evidence e independently of s’s
knowledge of p’ self-entailment, thus not in virtue of
(ii).
Non-transmissive arguments are not necessarily premise-circular
arguments. A different source of non-transmissivity instantiating a
subtler form of circularity is the dependence of evidential relations
on background or collateral information. This type of dependence is a
rather familiar phenomenon: the boiling of a kettle on a camping stove
gives one justification for believing that the temperature of the
liquid inside is approximately 100 °C only if one knows
that the liquid is water and that atmospheric pressure is the one of
the sea-level. It doesn’t if one knows that the kettle is on the top
of a high mountain, or if one knows that the kettle contains, say,
sulphuric acid. 
Wright argues, for instance, that the following epistemic set-up,
which he calls the information-dependence template, suffices
for an argument’s inability to transmit justification.
A body of evidence, e, is an information-dependent
justification for a particular proposition p if whether
e justifies p depends on what one has by way of
collateral information, i. […] Such a relationship is
always liable to generate examples of transmission failure: it will do
so just when the particular e, p, and i have the
feature that needed elements of the relevant i are themselves
entailed by p (together perhaps with other warranted premises).
In that case, any warrant supplied by e for p will not
be transmissible to those elements of i. (2003, 59, edited.)
The claim that s’s justification from e for p
requires s to have background information i is
customarily understood as equivalent (in this context) to the claim
that s’s justification from e for p depends on
some type of independent justification for believing or accepting
 i.[5]
The instantiation of the information-dependence template
appears sufficient for an argument’s inability to transmit
first-time justification. Consider again the following
triad:
(Twins)

E2. This girl looks just like Jessica.

P2. This girl is actually Jessica.

Therefore:

Q2. This girl is not Jocelyn. 
Suppose s’s background information entails that Jessica and
Jocelyn are indistinguishable twins. Imagine that s acquires
E2. It is intuitive that E2 could justify
P2 for s in Twins only if s had
independent justification for believing Q2 in the
first instance. Thus Twins instantiates the
information-dependence template. Note that s acquires
first-time justification for Q2 in Twins only if (i)
E2 gives her justification for P2, (ii) s
knows that P2 entails Q2 and (iii-ft) s
acquires first-time justification for believing Q2 in
virtue of (i) and (ii). The satisfaction of (iii-ft) requires
s’s justification for believing Q2 not to be
independent of s’s justification from E2 for
P2. However, if (i) is true, the
informational-dependence template requires s to have
justification for believing Q2 independently of
s’s justification from E2 for P2. Thus,
when the information-dependence template is instantiated, (i)
and (iii-ft) cannot be satisfied at once. In general, no argument
satisfying this template together with a given evidence will be
transmissive of first-time justification based on that evidence. 
One may wonder whether a deductive argument from p to q
instantiating the information-dependence template will be
unable to transmit additional justification for q. The
answer seems to be affirmative when the additional justification is
independent justification. Suppose the
information-dependence template is instantiated such that
s’s justification for p from e depends on
s’s independent justification for q. Note that s
acquires additional independent justification for q only if (i)
e gives her justification for p, (ii) s knows
that p entails q, and (iii-ai) s acquires an
additional independent justification in virtue of (i) and (ii). This
additional justification is independent of s’s antecedent
justification for q only if, in particular, condition (3) of
the characterisation of additional independent justification is
satisfied. (3) says that if s had not been antecedently
justified in believing q, upon learning e, s
would have acquired via transmission a first-time justification for
believing q. (3) entails that if q were not antecedently
justified for s, e would still justify p for
s. Hence, the satisfaction of (3) is incompatible with the
instantiation of the information-dependence template, which
entails that if s had not antecedent justification for
q, e would not justify p for s. The
instantiation of the information-dependence template then
precludes the transmission of independent justification.
As suggested by Wright (2007, 36) the instantiation of the
information-dependence template might also appear sufficient for an
argument’s inability to transmit additional quantitatively
strengthening justification. This claim might appear intuitively
plausible: perhaps it is reasonable to expect that, if the
justification from e for p depends on independent
justification for another proposition q, the strength of the
justification available for q sets an upper bound to the
strength of the justification possibly supplied by e for
p. However, the examples by Wright (2011) and Moretti &
Piazza (2013) mentioned in Sect. 2 appear to undermine this
suggestion. For they involve arguments that instantiate the
information-dependent template yet seem to transmit quantitatively
strengthening justification to their conclusions. 
Some authors have attempted Bayesian formalisations of the
information dependence template (see the supplement on
 Bayesian Formalisations of the Information-Dependence Template.)
 Furthermore, Coliva (2012) has proposed a variant of the same
template. In accordance with the information-dependence
template, s’s justification from e for p
fails to transmit to p’s consequence q whenever
s’s possessing that justification for p requires
s’s independent justification for q. According to
Coliva’s variant, s’s justification from e for
p fails to transmit to q whenever s’s possessing
the latter justification for p requires s’s independent
assumption of q, whether this assumption is justified
or not. Pryor (2012, § VII) can be read as pressing
objections against Coliva’s template, which are addressed in
Coliva (2012). 
So far we have seen that non-transmissivity may depend on
premise-circularity or on reliance on collateral information. There is
at least a third possibility: an argument can be non-transmissive of
the justification for its premise(s) based on given evidence because
that evidence justifies directly the conclusion—i.e.,
independently of the argument itself (cf. Davies 2009). In
this case the argument instantiates indirectness, for
s’s going through the argument would result in nothing but an
indirect (and unneeded) detour for justifying its conclusion. If
e directly justifies q, no part of the justification for
q is based on, among other things, s’s knowledge of the
inferential relation between p and q. So (iii+) is
unfulfilled whether or not (i) and (ii) are fulfilled. Here is an
example from Wright (2002): 
(Soccer)

E6. Jones has just kicked the ball between the white posts.

P6. Jones has just scored a goal.

Therefore:

Q6. A game of soccer is taking place.
Suppose s learns evidence E6. On ordinary background
information (i) E6 justifies P6 for s,
(ii) s knows that P6 entails Q6, and
E6 also justifies Q6 for s. It seems
false, however, that Q6 is justified for s in
virtue of the satisfaction of (i) and (ii). Quite the reverse,
Q6 seems justified for s by E6
independently the satisfaction of (i) and (ii). This is so because in
the (imagined) actual scenario it seems true that s would still
possess a justification for Q6 based on E6 even
if E6 did not justify P6 for s.
Suppose in fact s had noticed that the referee’s assistant
raised her flag to signal Jones’s off-side. Against this altered
background information, E6 would no longer justify
P6 for s but it would still justify Q6
for s. Thus Soccer is non-transmissive of the
justification depending on E6. In general, no argument
instantiating indirectness in relation to some evidence will
be transmissive of justification based on that evidence.
The information-dependence template and indirectness
are diagnostics for a deductive argument’s inability to transmit the
justification for its premise(s) p based on evidence e
to its conclusion q, where e is conceived of as a
believed proposition capable of supplying
inferential and (typically) fallible justification
for p. (Note that even though e is conceived of as a
belief, the collateral information i, which is part of the
template, doesn’t need to be believed on some views.) The
justification for a proposition p might come in further forms.
For instance, it has been proposed that a proposition p about
the perceivable environment around the subject s can be
justified by the fact that s sees that p. In this
case, s is claimed to attain a kind of non-inferential
and infallible justification for believing p. The latter
view has been explored by epistemological disjunctivists (see
for instance McDowell 1982, 1994 and 2008, and Pritchard 2007, 2008,
2009, 2011 and 2012). 
One might find it intuitively plausible that when s sees that
p, s attains non-inferential and infallible
justification for believing p that doesn’t rely on s’s
background information. Since this justification for believing
p would be a fortiori unconstrained by s’s
independent justification for believing any consequence q of
p, in these cases the information-dependence template could not
possibly be instantiated. Therefore, one might be tempted to conclude
that when s sees that p, s acquires a
justification that typically transmits to the propositions that
s knows to be deducible from p (cf. Wright 2002).
Pritchard (2009 and 2012) comes very close to endorsing this view
explicitly. 
The latter contention has not stayed unchallenged. Suppose one accepts
a notion of epistemic justification with internalist resonances
saying that a factor J is relevant to s’s epistemic
justification only if s is able to determine, by reflection
alone, whether J is or is not realised. On this notion, s’s
seeing that p cannot provide s with justification for
believing p unless s can rationally claim that she is
seeing that p upon reflection alone. Seeing that p,
however, is subjectively indistinguishable from hallucinating
that p, or from being in some other delusional state in which
it merely seems to s that she is seeing that p.
For this reason, one may find it compelling that s can claim by
reflection alone that she’s seeing that p only if s has
an independent reason for ruling out that it merely seems to her that
she does (cf. mainly Wright 2011). If this is true, for many deductive
arguments from p to q, s will be unable to
acquire non-inferential and infallible justification for believing
p of the type described by the disjunctivist and capable of
transmitting to q. In particular, this will happen whenever
q is the logical negation of a proposition ascribing to
s some delusionary mental state in which it merely seems to her
that she is directly perceiving that p. 
Wright’s disjunctive template is meant to be a diagnostic of
failure of transmission of non-inferential justification when
epistemic justification is conceived of in the internalist fashion
suggested
 above.[6]
 According to Wright (2000), for any propositions p, q
and r and subject s, the disjunctive template is
instantiated whenever: 
(a) p entails q;

(b) s’s justification for p consists in s’s being
in a state subjectively indistinguishable from a state in which
r would be true;

(c) r is incompatible with p;

(d) r would be true if q were false. 
To see how this template might apply, consider again the following
triad:
(Zebra)

E3. The animals in the pen look like zebras.

P3. The animals in the pen are zebras.

Therefore:

Q3. The animals in the pen are not mules cleverly disguised
so as to look like zebras.
The justification from E3 for P3 arguably fails
to transmit across the inference from P3 to Q3
because of the satisfaction of the information-dependence
template. For it seems true that s could acquire a
justification for believing P3 on the basis of
E3 only if s had an independent justification for
believing Q3. But suppose that s’s justification for
believing P3 is based not on E3 but on
s’s seeing that P3. Let’s call Zebra*
the corresponding variant of Zebra. Given the
non-inferential nature of the justification considered for
P3, Zebra* could not instantiate the
information-dependence template. However, it is easy to check
that Zebra* instantiates the disjunctive template. To
begin with, (a) P3 entails Q3; (b) s’s
justification for believing P3 is constituted by s’s
seeing that P3, which is subjectively indistinguishable
from the state that s would be in if it were true that (R) the
animals in the pen are mules cleverly disguised so as to look like
zebras; (c) R is incompatible with P3; and, trivially, (d)
if Q3 were false R would be true. 
Since Zebra* instantiates the disjunctive template, it
is non-transmissive of at least first-time justification. In
fact note that s acquires first-time justification for
Q3 in this case if and only if (i) s has
justification for P3 based on seeing that P3,
(ii) s knows that P3 entails Q3, and
(iii-ft) s acquires first-time justification for believing
Q3 in virtue of (i) and (ii). Also note that (iii-ft)
requires s’s justification for believing Q3
not to be independent of s’s justification for
P3 based on seeing that P3. However, if (i) is
true, the disjunctive template requires s to have
justification for believing Q3 independent of
s’s justification for P3 based on her seeing that
P3. (For if s could not independently exclude that
Q3 is false, given (d), (c) and (b), s could not
exclude that the incompatible alternative R to P3, which
s cannot subjectively distinguish from P3 on the
ground of her seeing that P3, is true.) Thus, when the
disjunctive template is instantiated, (i) and (iii-ft) cannot
be satisfied at once. 
The disjunctive template has been criticised by McLaughlin (2003) on
the ground that the template is instantiated whenever the
justification for p is fallible, i.e. compatible with
p’s falsity. Here is an example from Brown (2004).
Consider the following deductive argument:
(Fox)

P7. The animal in the garbage is a fox.

Therefore:

Q7. The animal in the garbage is not a cat.
Suppose s has a fallible justification for believing
P7 based on s’s experience as if the animal
in the garbage is a fox. Take now R to be P7’s logical
negation. Since the justification that s has for P7
is fallible, condition (b) above is met by default. As one can
easily check, conditions (a), (c) and (d) are also met. So Fox
instantiates the disjunctive template. Yet it is intuitive that
Fox does transmit justification to its conclusion. 
One could simply respond to McLaughlin that his argument is misplaced
because the disjunctive template was only meant to apply to
infallible and not fallible justification. A more useful
response to McLaughlin is however to refine the conditions listed in
the disjunctive template so as to block McLaughlin’s argument
while letting this template account for transmission failure of both
fallible and infallible justification. Wright (2011) for instance
suggests replacing (c) with the following
 condition:[7]
(c*) r is incompatible (not necessarily with p but) with
some presupposition of the cognitive project of obtaining a
justification for p in the relevant fashion.  
According to Wright’s (2011) characterisation, a presupposition of a
cognitive project is any condition such that doubting it before
carrying out the project would rationally commit one to doubting the
significance or competence of the project irrespective of its outcome.
For a wide class of cognitive projects examples of these
presuppositions include: normal and proper functioning of the relevant
cognitive faculties, the reliability of utilised instruments, the
obtaining of the circumstances congenial to the proposed method of
investigation, the soundness of relevant principles of inference
utilised in developing and collating one’s results, and so on. 
With (c*) in the place of (c), Fox no longer instantiates the
disjunctive template. For the truth of R—the proposition
that the animal in the garbage is not a fox—appears to
jeopardize no presupposition of the cognitive project of obtaining a
perceptual justification for P7. Thus (c*) is not
fulfilled. On the other hand, arguments that intuitively do not
transmit do satisfy (c*). Take again Zebra*. In that case R is
the proposition that the animals in the pen are mules cleverly
disguised so as to look like zebras. Since R entails that conditions
are unsuitable for attaining perceptual justification for believing
P3, R looks incompatible with a presupposition of the
cognitive project of obtaining perceptual justification for
P3. Thus R does satisfy (c*) in this case. 
In order to illuminate philosophical puzzles (e.g., McKinsey Paradox
illustrated below in Sect. 5.2) Davies has proposed other
conditions—which he calls limiting principles—whose
satisfaction would prevent an argument from possibly transmitting
justification. Some of these principles will be discussed in Sect. 5.1
and Sect. 5.2. Further conditions are considered in Pryor (2012).
To conclude this section we outline an explanation of epistemic
transmission failure delivered by Smith
 (2009),[8]
 which is very different from all those considered so far. According
to Smith, epistemic justification requires reliability. A
subject s’s belief that p, held on the basis of
s’s belief that e, is reliable in the sense defined by
Smith if and only if in all possible worlds including e as true
and that are as normal (from the perspective of the actual
world) as the truth of e permits, p is also true.
Consider Zebra again. s’s belief that P3
— that the animals in the pen are zebras —
proves reliable in Smith’s sense when it is based on s’s belief
that E3 — that the animals in the pen look
like zebras. (Disguising mules so as to make them look like zebras is
after all an abnormal practice.) Thus, all possible
E3-worlds that are as normal as the truth of E3
permits are not worlds in which the animals in the pen are cleverly
disguised mules. Rather, they are
P3-worlds—that is to say, worlds in which the
animals in the pen are zebras.
Smith distinguishes between two ways in which a belief can come to
possess this property of being reliable. One possibility is that a
belief that p possesses it in virtue of the modal relationship
with its basis e. In this case, e is a contributing
reliable basis. Another possibility is when it is the content of the
belief that p, rather than the belief’s modal relationship with
its basis e, that guarantees by itself the belief’s
reliability. In this case, e is a non-contributing reliable
basis. An example of the first kind is s’s belief that
P3, which is reliable because of its modal relationship
with E3. There are obviously many sufficiently normal
worlds in which P3 is false, but no sufficiently normal
world in which P3 is false and E3 true. An
example of the second kind is s’s belief that Q3 as
based on E3. It is this belief’s content, and not its modal
relationship with E3, that guarantees its reliability. As
Smith puts it, there are no sufficiently normal worlds in which
E3 is true and Q3 is false, but this is simply
because there are no sufficiently normal worlds in which Q3
is false.
According to Smith, roughly, a deductive inference from p to
q fails to transmit to q justification relative to
p’s basis e, if e is a contributing reliable
basis for believing p but is a non-contributing reliable basis
for believing q. In this case the inference fails to
explain q’s reliability: if s deduced one
proposition from another, she would reliably believe that q,
but not — not even in part — in virtue of
having inferred this proposition from p (as held on the basis
of e). Zebra fails to transmit to Q3
justification relative to P3’s basis E3 in this
precise sense. (Smith 2009 also includes an account of failure of
transmission of knowledge across valid inference criticized by
Tucker 2012. A discussion of this account is beyond the aims of this
entry.)
Let us say that a subject s doubts q just in case
s either disbelieves or withholds belief about
q, namely refrains from both believing and disbelieving
q after deciding about q. s’s doubting
q should be distinguished from s’s being open
minded about q and from s’s having no
doxastic attitude whatsoever towards q (cf. Tucker 2010a). Let
us say that a deductively valid argument from p to q has
the power to resolve doubt about its conclusion just in case it is
possible for s to be rationally moved from doubting q to
believing q solely in virtue of grasping the argument from
p to q and the evidence offered for p.
There is today wide agreement in the literature that the property of
being a transmissive argument does not coincide with the property of
being an argument capable of resolving doubt about its conclusion (see
for example, Beebee 2001, Coliva 2010, Markie 2005, Pryor 2004,
Bergmann 2004 and 2006, White 2006, Silins 2005 and Tucker 2010a). A
reason for thinking so is that whereas the property of being
transmissive appears to be a genuinely epistemic property of an
argument, the one of resolving doubt seems to be only a
dialectical feature of it, which varies with the audience whose
doubt the argument is used to address.
In spite of these considerations, a few authors (e.g., Davies 1998,
and 2003a, 2004, and 2009, McLaughlin 2000 and Wright 2002, 2003, and
2007) have insisted that we should conceive of epistemic
transmissivity in a way that proves very closely related or even
identical to the capability of resolving doubt. Whereas some of these
authors have eventually conceded that epistemic transmissivity cannot
be defined as capability of resolving doubt (e.g., Wright 2011),
others have attempted to articulate their views in full (see mostly
Davies 2003a, 2004 and 2009). Suppose one wants to claim that an
argument is transmissive when it is at the service of resolving a
subject’s doubt about the conclusion. One possible way to go
— which parallels Jackson’s (1987, §6)  analysis of
when an argument begs the hearer’s question — is this. An
argument could be considered to be non-transmissive when the fact that
the subject doubts (or suppositionally
 doubts)[9]
 its conclusion, in her own thought, rationally requires the subject
to adopt new background assumptions on which the premises are no
longer justified by the relevant evidence (cf. Davies 2003a, 2004 and
2009. For a critical discussion of Davies’ project see Coliva 2010).
As we will see below, it can be argued that Moore’s proof and the
inference central to McKinsey paradox are non-transmissive in this
sense.
The notions of transmissive and non-transmissive argument, above and
beyond being investigated for their own sake, have been put to work in
relation to specific philosophical problems and issues. An important
problem is whether Moore’s infamous proof of a material world and
similar Moorean responses to the skeptic are successful. Another issue
pertains to the solution of McKinsey paradox. A third issue concerns
Boghossian’s (2001 and 2003) explanation of our logical knowledge via
implicit definitions, criticised as resting on a non-transmissive
argument schema (see for instance Ebert 2005 and Jenkins 2008). As the
debate focusing on the last topic is only at an early stage of its
development, it is preferable to concentrate on the first two, which
will be reviewed in respectively Sect. 5.1 and Sect. 5.2 below.
Much of the contemporary debate on Moore’s proof of a material world
(see Moore 1939) is interwoven with the topic of epistemic
transmission and its failure. Moore’s proof can be reconstructed as
follows:
(Moore)

E8. My experience is in all respects as of a hand held up
in front of my face.

P8. Here is a hand.

Therefore:

Q8. There is a material world (since any hand is a material
object existing in space). 
The evidence E8 in Moore is constituted by a
proposition believed by s. One might suggest, however,
that this is a misinterpretation of Moore’s proof (and the variants of
it that we shall consider shortly). One might argue, in other words,
that what is meant to give s justification for believing
P8 is s’s experience of a hand. Nevertheless,
most of the epistemologists taking part in this debate implicitly or
explicitly assume that one’s experience as if p and one’s
belief that one has an experience as if p have the same
justifying power (cf. White 2006 and Silins 2007).
Many philosophers find Moore’s proof unsuccessful. Philosophers have
put forward explanations of this impression according to which
Moore is non-transmissive in some of the senses described in
Sect. 3 (see mainly Wright 1985, 2002, 2007 and 2011) or
non-transmissive in the non-standard sense that it is incapable of
resolving doubt about its conclusion (see mainly Davies 1998, 2000,
2003a, 2003b, 2004 and 2009). A different explanation is that Moore’s
proof does transmit justification but is dialectically ineffective
(see mainly Pryor 2004). 
According to Wright there exist cornerstone
propositions—or simply cornerstones—for
different areas of discourse. In accordance with Wright’s
characterization of it, c is a cornerstone for an area of
discourse d just in case for any proposition p belonging
to d, p could not be justified for any subject s
if s had no independent justification for accepting c
(see mostly Wright
 2004).[10]
 Cornerstones for the area of discourse about perceivable things are
for instance the logical negations of skeptical
conjectures, such as the proposition that one’s experiences are
nothing but one’s hallucinations caused by a Cartesian demon or the
Matrix. Wright contends that the conclusion Q8 of
Moore is also a cornerstone for the area of discourse about
perceivable things. Adapting terminology introduced by Pryor (2004),
Wright’s conception of the architecture of perceptual justification
thus treats Q8 conservatively with respect to any
perceptual hypothesis p: if s had no independent
justification for Q8, no proposition e describing an
apparent perception could supply s with prima facie
justification for any perceptual hypothesis p. It follows from
this that Moore instantiates the information-dependence
template considered in Sect. 3.2. For Q8 is part of the
collateral information which s needs independent justification
for if s is to receive some justification for P8
from E8. Hence Moore is non-transmissive. (See
mainly Wright 2002.) Note that the thesis that Moore’s proof is
epistemologically useless because non-transmissive in the sense
explained is compatible with the claim that by learning E8,
in Moore,s does acquire a justification for believing
P8. For instance, Wright (2004) contends that we all have a
special kind of non-evidential justification, which he calls
entitlement, for accepting Q8 as well as other
cornerstones in
 general.[11]
 Thus by learning E8 we do acquire justification for
P8. Wright’s analysis of Moore’s proof and Wright’s
conservatism have mostly been criticized in conjunction with his
theory of entitlement. A presentation of these objections is beyond
the scope of this entry. (See however Davies 2004, Pritchard 2005 and
Jenkins 2007. For a defense of Wright’s views see for instance Neta
2007.) 
As anticipated, other philosophers contend that Moore’s proof does
transmit justification and that its ineffectiveness has a different
explanation. An important conception of the architecture of perceptual
justification, called dogmatism in Pryor (2000 and 2004),
embraces a generalised form of liberalism about perceptual
justification. This form of liberalism is opposed to Wright’s
conservatism, and claims that in order to have prima facie
perceptual justification for believing p from an apparent
perception that p, s doesn’t need independent
justification for believing the negation of skeptical conjectures or
of other non-perceiving hypotheses like Not-Q8. This is so,
for the dogmatist, because our experiences give us immediate
and prima facie justification for believing their contents.
Saying that our perceptual justification is immediate is saying that
it does not presuppose—not even in part—justification for
anything else. Saying that our justification is prima facie is saying
that it can be defeated by additional evidence. Our perceptual
justification would be defeated, for example, by evidence that a
relevant non-perceiving hypothesis is true or just as probable as its
negation. For instance, s’s perceptual justification for
believing P8 in Moore’s proof would be defeated by evidence
that Not-Q8 is true, or evidence that Q8 and
Not-Q8 are equally probable. On this point the dogmatist
and Wright do agree. They disagree on whether s’s perceptual
justification for P8 requires independent justification for
believing or accepting Q8. The dogmatist denies that
s needs that independent justification. Thus, according to the
dogmatist, Moore’s proof transmits the perceptual justification
available for its premise to its
 conclusion.[12]
The dogmatist argues (or may argue), however, that Moore’s proof is
dialectically flawed (cf. Pryor 2004). The contention is that
Moore’s is unsuccessful because it is useless for the purpose to
convince the idealist or the external world sceptic that there is a
material world. In short, the idealist and the global sceptic don’t
believe that there is a material world. Since the idealist and the
sceptic don’t believe Q8, they are rationally required to
distrust any perceptual evidence offered in favor of
P8 in the first instance. For this reason they both will
reject Moore’s proof as one based on an unjustified
 premise.[13]
 Moretti (2014) suggests that the dogmatist could alternatively
contend that Moore’s proof is non-transmissive because s’s
experience of a hand gives s immediate justification for
believing the conclusion Q8 of the proof. According
to this diagnosis, Moore’s proof is epistemically flawed because
it instantiates a variant of indirectness in which the evidence
is an experience of a hand. Pryor’s analysis of Moore’s proof
has principally been criticised in conjunction with his liberalism in
epistemology of perception. (See Cohen 2002 and 2005, Schiffer 2004
Wright 2007, White 2006, and Siegel and Silins 2015.) 
Some authors (e.g., Wright 2003, Pryor 2004, White 2006, Silins 2007,
Neta 2010) have investigated whether certain variants of Moore
are transmissive of justification. These arguments start from a
premise like P8, describing a (supposed) perceivable state
of affairs of the external world, and deduce from it the logical
negation of a relevant skeptical conjecture. Consider for
example the variant of Moore that starts from P8 and
replaces Q8 with:
Q8*. It is not the case that I am a handless brain in a vat
fed with the hallucination of a hand held up in front of my face.
Let’s call Moore* this variant of Moore. While
dogmatists à la Pryor argue (or may argue) that
Moore* is transmissive but dialectically flawed (cf. Pryor
2004), conservatives à la Wright contend (or may
contend) that it is non-transmissive (cf. Wright 2007). Although it
remains very controversial whether or not Moore is
transmissive, epistemologists have found some prima facie
reason to think that arguments like Moore* are
non-transmissive.
An important difference between Moore and Moore* is
this: whereas the logical negation of Q8 does not
explain the evidential statement E8 (“My
experience is in all respects as of a hand held up in front of my
face”) adduced in support of P8, the logical negation
of Q8* — i.e., Not-Q8*
— explains E8 to some extent.
Accordingly, since Not-Q8* provides a potential explanation
of E8, is it intuitive that E8 is
evidence (perhaps very week evidence) for believing
Not-Q8*. It is easy to conclude from this that s
cannot acquire justification for believing Q8* via
transmission through Moore* upon learning E8. For it
is intuitive that if this were the case, E8 should count as
evidence for Q8*. But this is impossible: one and the same
proposition cannot simultaneously be evidence for a hypothesis and its
logical negation. By formalizing intuitions of this type, White (2006)
has put forward a simple Bayesian argument to the effect that
Moore* and similar variants of Moore are not
transmissive of
 justification.[14]
 (See Silins 2007 for discussion. For responses to White, see for
instance Weatherson 2007, Kung 2010 and Moretti 2015). 
From the above analysis it is easy to conclude that the
information-dependence template is satisfied by Moore*
and akin proofs. In fact note that if E8 is evidence for
both P8 and Not-Q8*, it seems correct to say
that s can acquire a justification for believing P8
only if s has independent justification for disbelieving
Not-Q8* and thus believing Q8*. Since
Not-Q8* counts as a non-perceiving hypothesis for
Pryor, this gives us a reason to doubt dogmatism (cf. White
 2006).[15]
Coliva (2005 and 2012) defends a view — baptized by her
moderatism — that aims to be a middle way between
Wright’s conservatism and Pryor’s dogmatism. On the one hand, the
moderate contends — against the conservative
— that cornerstones cannot be justified and that in order
to possess perceptual justification s needs no justification
for accepting any cornerstones. On the other hand, the moderate claims
— against the dogmatist — that to possess
perceptual justification s needs to assume (without
justification) relevant
 cornerstones.[16]
 By relying on her variant of the information-dependent template
described in Sect. 3.2, Coliva concludes that neither Moore
nor any proof like Moore* is transmissive. (For a critical
discussion of moderatism see for instance Avnur 2017, Baghramian 2017,
Millar 2017, Volpe 2017, and Coliva 2017.) 
Epistemological disjunctivists like McDowell and Pritchard have argued
that in paradigmatic cases of perceptual knowledge, what is meant to
give s justification for believing P8 is, not
E8, but s’s factive state of seeing that
P8. This — it might be contended
— is not without consequences with respect to the
question whether Moore* transmits propositional justification.
Pritchard explicitly defends the claim that when s sees that
P8, thereby learning that P8, s can come
to know by inference from P8 the negation of any sceptical
hypothesis inconsistent with P8, like Q8* (cf.
Pritchard 2012, 129–30). This might encourage the belief that, for
Pritchard, the inference in Moore* can transmit the
justification for P8 based on s’s seeing that
P8 across the entailment from P8 to
Q8* (see Lockhart 2018 for an explicit
argument to this effect). The latter claim must however be handled
with some care.
As we have seen in Sect. 2, Pritchard contends that when one knows
p on the basis of evidence e, one can know p’s
consequence q by inference from p only if e
sufficiently supports q. For Pritchard this condition is met
when s’s support for believing P8 is constituted by
s’s seeing that P8, s’s epistemic situation
is objectively good (i.e., s’s cognitive faculties are working
properly in a cooperative environment) and the skeptical hypothesis
ruled out by Q8* has not been epistemically motivated. For,
in this case, s has a reflectively accessible factive
support for believing P8 that entails —
and so sufficiently supports — Q8*. Thus, in
this case nothing stands in the way of s competently deducing
Q8* from P8, thereby coming to know
Q8* on the basis of P8. 
If upon deducing one proposition from another, s comes
to justifiably believe Q8* for the first-time, the
inference from P8 to Q8* arguably transmits
doxastic justification. (See the supplement on
 Transmission of Propositional Justification versus Transmission of Doxastic Justification.)
 It is more dubious, however, that when s’s support for
P8 is constituted by s’s seeing that P8,
Moore* is also transmissive of propositional
justification. For instance, one might contend that Moore* is
non-transmissive because it instantiates the disjunctive
template described in Sect. 3.2 (cf. Wright 2002). To start with,
P8 entails Q8*, so (a) is satisfied. Let R* be
the proposition that this is no hand but s is victim of a
hallucination of a hand held up before her face. Since R* would be
true if Q8* were false, (d) is also satisfied. Furthermore,
take the grounds of s’s justification for P8 to be
s’s seeing that P8. Since this experience is a state
for s indistinguishable from one in which R* is true, condition
(b) is also satisfied. Finally, it might be argued that the
proposition that one is not hallucinating is a presupposition of the
cognitive project of learning about one’s environment through
perception. It follows that R* is incompatible with a presupposition
of s’s cognitive project of learning about one’s environment
through perception. Thus (c*) appears to be fulfilled too. So
Moore* will not transmit the justification that s
possesses for P8 to Q8*. 
To resist the this conclusion, a disjunctivist might insist that
Moore*, relative to s’s support for P8
supplied by s’s seeing that P8, does not always
instantiate the disjunctive template, in particular because
condition (b) is not necessarily fulfilled (cf. Lockhart 2018.) By
appealing to a distinction drawn by Pritchard (2012), one might
contend that (b) is not necessarily fulfilled, because s,
though unable to perceptually discriminate between seeing that
P8 and merely hallucinating it, may have evidence that
favors the hypothesis that she is in the first state.  For Pritchard,
this happens — as we have seen — when s sees that
P8 in good epistemic conditions and the skeptical
conjecture that s is having a hallucination of a hand has not
been epistemically motivated. In this case, s is in position to
come to know Q8* by inference from P8 even if
she is unable to perceptually discriminate one situation from the
other. 
Pritchard’s thesis that, in good epistemic conditions, s’s
factive support for believing P8 coinciding with s’s
seeing that P8 is reflectively accessible is open to
controversy (cf. Piazza 2016 and Lockhart 2018). Since
this thesis is essential to the contention that Moore* may not
instantiate the disjunctive template and may thus be
transmissive of propositional justification, the latter contention is
also open to controversy. 
One could explain the ineffectiveness of Moore and similar
proofs in a specific way that differs from any of the diagnoses
described so far. This new account diagnoses Moorean proofs with being
non-transmissive in the precise sense (discussed Sect. 4) of being
incapable of resolving doubt about their conclusions. 
Diagnoses of non-transmissivity as incapability of resolving doubt can
be systematised by appealing to limitation
principles—i.e., principles that restrain justification
transmission. For instance, a limitation principle that seems to
explain why Moore is non-transmissive as incapable of resolving
doubt about its conclusion has been proposed by Davies (2009) and it
reads roughly as
 follows:[17]
The antecedent of (LP) would seem to be satisfied by E8,
P8 and Q8. Suppose s doubted (in her
thought) Q8. This alone would rationally commit s to
doubting that E8 actually justifies P8. Thus
Moore turns out to be non-transmissive when (LP) is in place.
(Mutatis mutandis, the same explanation applies to
Moore* too.) 
Interestingly enough, any argument satisfying the
information-dependence template also satisfies the antecedent
of (LP). Suppose the justification from e for the premise(s)
p of a known deductively valid argument concluding in q
is conditional on independent justification for q. This implies
that any subject examining the argument who had a doubt about q
would be rationally required to accept a defeater for the
justification for p based on e. Hence non-transmissivity
as incapability of satisfying (iii+) engendered by reliance on
collateral information entails non-transmissivity as incapability of
resolving doubt.
McKinsey (1991, 2002, 2003 and 2007) has offered a reductio argument
for the incompatibility of first-person privileged access to mental
content and externalism about mental content. The privileged access
thesis roughly says that it is necessarily true that if a subject
s is thinking that x, then s can in principle
know a priori (or in a non-empirical way) that she herself is thinking
that x. Externalism about mental content roughly says that
predicates of the form ‘is thinking that
x’—e.g., ‘is thinking that water is
wet’—express properties that are wide, in the
sense that possession of these properties by s logically or
conceptually implies the existence of relevant contingent objects
external to s’s mind—e.g., water. McKinsey argues that
s may reason along these lines:
(Water)

P9. I am thinking that water is wet.

P10. If I am thinking that water is wet then I have (or my
linguistic community has) been embedded in an environment that
contains water.

Therefore:

Q9. I have (or my linguistic community has) been embedded
in an environment that contains water. 
Water produces an absurdity. If the privileged access thesis
is true, s knows P9 non-empirically. If
semantic externalism is true, s knows P10 a
priori by mere conceptual analysis. Since P9 and
P10 do entail Q9 and knowledge is presumably
closed under known entailment, s knows
Q9—which is an empirical
proposition—by simply competently deducing it from P9
and P10 and without conducting any empirical
investigation. As this is absurd, McKinsey concludes that the
privileged access thesis or semantic externalism must be false.
One way to resist McKinsey’s incompatibilist conclusion that
the privileged access thesis and externalism about mental content
cannot be true together is to argue that Water is
non-transmissive. Since knowledge is presumably closed under known
entailment, it remains true that s cannot know P9
and P10 while failing to know Q9. However,
McKinsey paradox originates from the stronger
conclusion—motivated by the claim that Water is a
deductively valid argument featuring premises knowable
non-empirically—that s, by running Water, could
come to know non-empirically the empirical proposition
Q9 that she or members of her community have had contact
with water. This is precisely what could not happen if Water
is non-transmissive: in this case s could not learn
Q9 on the basis of her non-empirical justification for
P9 and P10, and her knowledge of the entailment
between P9, P10 and Q9 (see mainly
Wright 2000, 2003 and 2011, and Davies 1998, 2000, 2003a, 2003b and
2009).
A first possibility to defend the thesis that Water is
non-transmissive is to argue that Water instantiates the
disjunctive template (considered in Sect. 3.2) (cf. Wright
2000, 2003 and 2011). If Water is non-transmissive, s
could acquire a justification for, or knowledge of, P9 and
P10 only if s were in possession of an
independent justification for, or knowledge of,
Q9. (And to avoid the absurd result that McKinsey recoils
from, this independent justification for Q9 should
presumably be empirical.) If this diagnosis is correct, one need not
deny P9 or P10 to block the intuitively false
consequence that s could acquire knowledge of the empirical
proposition Q9 in virtue of only non-empirical
knowledge.
To substantiate the thesis that Water instantiates the
disjunctive template one should first emphasise that the kind
of externalism about mental content underlying P10 in
Water is compatible with the possibility that s
suffers from illusion of content. Were this to happen with
P9 in Water, s would seem to introspect that
she believes that water is wet whereas there is nothing like that
content to be believed by s in the first instance.
Consider:
R. ‘water’ refers to no natural kind so that
there is no content expressed by the sentence ‘water is
wet’.
s’s state of having introspective justification for believing
P9 is arguably subjectively indistinguishable from a
situation in which R is true. Thus condition (b) of the disjunctive
template is met. Moreover, R appears incompatible with an obvious
presupposition of s’s cognitive project of attaining
introspective justification for believing P9, at least if
the content that water is wet embedded in P9 is constrained
by s or her linguistic community having being in contact with
water. Thus condition (c*) is also met. Furthermore, P9
entails Q9 (when P10 is in background
information). Hence condition (a) is fulfilled. If we could also show
that (d) is satisfied in Water, in the sense that if
Q9 were false R would be true, we would have shown that the
disjunctive template is satisfied by Water. Wright
(2000), for instance, takes (d) to be actually fulfilled and concludes
that the disjunctive template is satisfied by
Water.
Unfortunately, the claim that (d) is satisfied in Water cannot
easily be vindicated (cf. Wright 2003). Condition (d) is satisfied in
Water only if it is true that if s (or s’s
linguistic community) had not been embedded in an environment that
contains water, the term ‘water’ would have
referred to no natural kind. This is true only if the closest possible
world w in which this counterfactual’s antecedent is true is
like Boghossian’s (1997) Dry Earth—namely, a world
where no one has ever had any contact with any kind of watery stuff,
and all apparent contacts with it are always due to multi-sensory
hallucination. If w is not Dry Earth, but Putnam’s
Twin Earth, however, the counterfactual turns out to be
false, as in this possible world people usually have contact with some
other watery stuff that they call ‘water’. So, in this
world ‘water’ refers to a natural kind, though not to one
having chemical composition H2O. Since
determining which of Dry Earth or Twin Earth is
modally closer to the actual world (supposing s is in the
actual world)—and so determining whether (d) is satisfied in
Water—is a potentially elusive task, the claim that
Water instantiates the disjunctive template appears
to be less than fully warranted.
 [18]
An alternative dissolution of McKinsey paradox—also based on a
diagnosis of non-transmissivity—seems however to be available if
one considers the proposition (Q10) saying that s
(or s’s linguistic community) has been embedded in an
environment containing some watery substance (cf. Wright 2003
and 2011). This alternative strategy assumes that Q10,
rather than Q9, is a presupposition of s’s cognitive
project of attaining introspective justification for P9.
Even if Water does not instantiate the disjunctive
template, a new diagnosis of what’s wrong with McKinsey paradox
could rest on the claim that the different argument yielded by
expanding Water with Q10 as conclusion
— call it Water* — instantiates the
disjunctive template. If R is the same proposition displayed
above, it is easy to see that Water* satisfies conditions (d),
(b) and (c*) of the disjunctive template. Furthermore (a) is
satisfied at least in the sense that it seems a priori that
P9 via Q9 entails Q10 (if
P10 is in background information) (cf. Wright 2011). On
this novel diagnosis of non-transmissivity, what would be paradoxical
is that s could earn justification for Q10 in virtue
of her non-empirical justification for P9 and
P10 and her knowledge of the a priori link from
P9, P10 via Q9 to Q10. If
one follows Wright’s (2003)
 suggestion[19]
 that s isentitled to accept Q10
— namely to accept the presupposition that there is
a watery substance that provides ‘water’ with its
extension — Water becomes innocuously
transmissive, and the apparent paradox surrounding Water
vanishes. This is so at least if one grants that it is a priori that
water is the watery stuff of our actual acquaintance, once it is
presupposed that there is any watery stuff of our actual acquaintance.
For useful criticism of responses of this type to McKinsey paradox see
Sainsbury (2000), Pritchard (2002), Brown (2003) and (2004),
McLaughlin (2003), McKinsey (2003) and Kallestrup (2011).
According to a different interpretation, the paradox elicited by 
Water is to the effect that s would be in position to
settle the question—in the sense of removing
doubt—about whether she or her community have been embedded
in an environment containing water by simply reflecting on the content
of her mental states and by attending to some specific implication of
content externalism, but without engaging in any empirical
investigation. If one accepts this interpretation, a way to dissolve
the paradox is to show that Water is non-transmissive precisely
in the sense that it is incapable of resolving doubt about its
conclusion (cf. Davies 1998, 2000, 2003a and 2009). As we have seen in
the previous section, diagnoses of non-transmissivity as incapability
of resolving doubt can be systematised by appealing to limitation
principles. Consider then following limitation principle, which is
alluded to—even if not explicitly formulated—in Davies
(2009):
Suppose the antecedent of (LP*) is satisfied by an argument that
s has carried out. If s doubts the conclusion of the
argument, s should also doubt at least one of its premises. So
the argument is unable to dispel doubt about its conclusion and it is
non-transmissive in this sense. It can be argued that Water
does satisfy the antecedent of (LP*) so that it is non-transmissive in
this sense.
Take E9 to be the theory of externalism about mental
content. As we have already seen E9 gives s
justification for believing P10 in Water—i.e.,
the conditional: ‘If I am thinking that water is wet, I have (or
my linguistic community has) been embedded in an environment that
contains water’. Note that E9 gives s
justification for, not only P10, but also the following
conditional:
If there is a content such as the proposition that water is wet to be
thought by me, then (Q9) I have (or my linguistic community
has) been embedded in an environment that contains water.
Suppose now that s doubts Q9. Since Q9 is
the consequent of the above conditional, which s accepts,
s is committed to doubting its antecedent. So s has to
doubt that there is a content like the proposition that water is wet.
But s’s doubt that there is such a content for her to think
rationally requires s to accept a defeater for her
justification for believing P9 offered by her reflective
evidence E10. For if there is no content like the
proposition that water is wet for s to think, s cannot
be thinking that water is wet. In conclusion, it appears that
Water satisfies the antecedent of (LP*), and thus seems to
prove non-transmissive in the sense of not being able to resolve
antecedent doubt about its conclusion. For criticism see Beebee
(2001), Pritchard (2002), McLaughlin (2003) and McKinsey (2003).