The father of the contemporary debate on tropes was D. C. Williams
(1953; 1963; 1986; 1997[1953];
 2018).[2]
 Williams defends a one-category theory of tropes (for the first time
so labeled), a bundle theory of concrete particulars, and a
resemblance class theory of universals. All of which are now elements
of the so-called ‘standard’ view of tropes. Who to count
among Williams’ trope-theoretical predecessors is unavoidably
contentious. It depends on one’s views on the nature of the
trope itself, as well as on which theses, besides the thesis that
tropes exist, one is prepared to accept as part of a trope—or
trope-like—theory. 
According to some philosophers, trope theory has roots going back at
least to Aristotle (possibly to Plato, perhaps even to the
pre-socratics, cf. Mertz 1996: 83–118). In the
Categories, Aristotle points out that Substance and Quality
both come in what we may call a universal and a particular variety
(man and this man in the case of substance, and
pallor and this pale—to ti leukon—in the
case of quality). Not everyone believe that this means that Aristotle
accepts the existence of tropes, however. On one interpretation (Owen
1965) this pale names an absolutely determinate, yet
perfectly shareable, shade of pallor. But on a more traditional
interpretation (cf. e.g., Ackrill 1963), it picks out a
trope, i.e., a particular ‘bit’ of pallor peculiar to the
substance that happens to exemplify it (for a discussion, cf.
Cohen 2013). In view of the strong Aristotelian influence on medieval
thinkers, it is perhaps not surprising that tropes or trope-like
entities are found also here (often mentioned in this connection are
Aquinas, Duns Scotus, Ockham, and Suarez). And in early modern
philosophy, entities resembling tropes can be found in the works of
e.g., Leibniz and
 Locke.[3]
Still, it is in the writings of 19th century
phenomenological philosophers that the earliest and most systematic
pre-Williams ‘trope’-theories are found (Mulligan et al.
1984: 293). The clearest example of an early trope theorist of this
variety is undoubtedly Edmund Husserl. In the third part of his
Logical Investigations (2001[1900/1913]), Husserl sets out
his theory of moments, which is his name for the
world’s abstract (and essentially dependent) individual parts
(Correia 2004; Beyer 2016). Husserl was most likely heavily influenced
by Bolzano, who held that everything real is either a substance or an
adherence, i.e., an attribute that cannot be shared (Bolzano
 1950[1851]).[4]
 Husserl thought of his moments as (one of) the fundamental
constituents of phenomenal reality. This was also how fellow
phenomenologists G. F. Stout (1921;
 1952),[5]
 Roman Ingarden (1964[1947–1948]) and Ivar Segelberg
 (1999[1945;1947;1953])[6]
 viewed their fundamental and trope-like posits. Williams’ views
are not so easily classified. Although he maintained that all our
knowledge rests on perceptual experience, he agreed that it should not
be limited to the perceptually given and that it could be extended
beyond that by legitimate inference (Campbell et al. 2015). That more
or less all post-Williams proponents of tropes treat their
posits as the fundamental constituents of
mind-independent—not phenomenal—reality, is
however clear (cf. e.g., Heil 2003). 
After Williams, the second most influential trope theorist is arguably
Keith Campbell (1997[1981]; 1990). Campbell adopted the basics of
Williams’ (standard) theory and then further developed and
defended it. Later proponents of more or less standard versions of the
trope view include Peter Simons, John Bacon, Anna-Sofia Maurin,
Douglas Ehring, Jonathan Schaffer, Kris McDaniel, Markku Keinänen,
Jani Hakkarainen, Marta Ujvári, Daniel Giberman and Robert K. Garcia
(all of whose most central works on the topic are listed in the
Bibliography). A very influential paper also arguing for a version of
the theory (inspired more by Husserl than by Williams) is
“Truth-Makers” (Mulligan et al. 1984; cf. also
Denkel 1996). This paper defends the view that tropes are essentially
dependent entities, the objects of perception, and the world’s
basic truthmakers. Proponents of trope theories which posit tropes as
one of several fundamental categories include C. B. Martin
(1980), John Heil (2003), George Molnar (2003), and Jonathan Lowe
(2006). Molnar and Heil both defend ontologies that include (but are
not limited to) tropes understood as powers, and Lowe counts tropes as
one of four fundamental categories. Even more unorthodox are
the views of D. W. Mertz (1996, 2016), whose trope-like entities are
categorized as a kind of
 relation.[7]
According to several trope theorists, what exists when a trope does is
an abstract particular. Williams—who coined the
phrase—was also acutely aware of its potential to confuse.
Tropes, he was careful to point out, although ‘abstract’
are not: “the product of a magical feat of mind”,
“the denzien of some remote immaterial eternity”,
“imprecise”, “the mental”, “the
rational”, “the incorporeal”, “the ideally
perfect”, “the non-temporal”, “the primordial
or ultimate”, “the deficient”, “the
potential”, “the unreal”, “the symbolic,
figurative or merely representative”, or “the vague,
confused and indefinite” (Williams, 1997[1953]: 121;
cf. also his 1953: 174f.). This, he explained, is because the
various senses people have given to the term ‘abstract’
can be traced back to two main sources—that which transcends
individual existence and that which is partial, incomplete or
fragmentary—where the source of the trope’s
abstractness is of the latter kind only. Campbell agrees. According to
him, more precisely, tropes are abstract because they
“(ordinarily) occur in conjunction with many other instances of
qualities”, which is why they can only be “brought before
the mind…by a process of selection, of systematic setting aside, of
these other qualities of which we are aware” (Campbell 1990:
2).
Unfortunately, as soon as the sense in which tropes are abstract has
been thus disambiguated, it becomes less clear in what sense being
told that tropes are abstract informs us about their (unique)
nature. For isn’t it true of anything (short of everything) that
attending to it involves abstracting it away from the surrounding
environment?[8]
To further confuse matters, quite a few trope proponents (cf.
e.g., Küng 1967 and Giberman 2014) characterize the trope as
concrete, and Simons (1994: 557) thinks tropes are
both abstract and concrete. The trope’s nature is hence
not easy to pin down. To further demonstrate this fact, the rest of
this section surveys debates on what kind of thing the trope
is, whether the trope is (in)dependent of the object that
‘has’ it, whether tropes can be simple, and how best to
individuate tropes.
In philosophy, new posits are regularly introduced by being compared
with, or likened to, an already familiar item. Tropes are no exception
to this rule. In fact, tropes have been introduced by being compared
with and likened to not one but two distinct but equally
familiar kinds of things: properties and objects (Loux 2015). Up until
very recently, that tropes can be introduced in both of these ways was
considered a feature of the theory, not a source of concern. Tropes,
it was thought, can be compared with and likened to both properties
and objects, because tropes are a bit of both. 
Recently, however, both friends and foes of tropes have started to
question whether tropes can be a bit of both. At any rate,
this will depend on what being a property and being an
object amounts to, an issue on which there is no clear consensus.
Looking more closely at existing versions of the trope view, whether
one thinks of one’s posit primarily as a kind of property or as
a kind of object certainly influences what one takes to be true (or
not) of it. To see this, compare the tropes defended by Williams, with
those defended by Mulligan et al. Williams seems to belong to the camp
of those who view the trope (primarily) as a kind of object. Tropes
are that out of which everything else there is, is constructed. As a
consequence, names for tropes should not be understood as abbreviated
definite descriptions of the kind “the Φ-ness of
x”. Instead, to name a trope should be likened with
baptizing a child or with introducing a man “present in the
flesh”, i.e., ostensively (Williams 1997[1953]: 114). Mulligan
et al. (1984), on the other hand, seem to regard the trope more as a
kind of property, and as a consequence of this, argue to the contrary
that the correct (in fact the only) way to refer to tropes is
precisely by way of expressions such as “the Φ-ness of
x”. This, they claim (again pace Williams), is
because tropes are essentially of some object, because they
are ways the objects are (cf. also Heil 2003: 126f).
In general, a theory which models its posit primarily on the property
hence thinks of it as a dependent sort of entity, as of
something else. And a theory which thinks of its tropes more as
objects—as ‘the alphabet of being’—thinks of
them as independent, either in the sense that they need not make up
the things they actually make up, or—more radically—in the
sense that they need not make up anything at all (that they could be
so-called ‘free-floaters’).
How one views the nature of properties and objects, respectively, also
plays a role for some of the criticisms the trope view has had to
face. According to e.g., Levinson, tropes cannot be a kind of property
(Levinson 1980: 107). This is because, according to him, having a
property—being red—amounts to being in a certain
condition. And conditions do not lend themselves well to
particularization. The alternative is that tropes are what he calls
“qualities”, by which he means something resembling bits
of abstract stuff. However, positing bits of stuff like that, he later
argues, would be “ontologically extravagant and conceptually
outlandish”. Tropes, then, are
neither a kind of property nor a kind of object. A
circumstance that makes Levinson conclude that tropes do not exist
(2006: 564). 
According to Chrudzimski (2002), next, although tropes can be
viewed either as a kind of property or as a kind of object, they
cannot be both. Which means that the theory loses its coveted
‘middle-position’, and with it any advantage it might have
had over rival views. For, he argues, to conceptualize the trope as a
property—a way things are—means imputing in it a
propositional structure (Levinson 1980: 107 holds a similar
view). Not so if the trope is understood as a kind of object. But,
then, although tropes understood as properties are suitable as
semantically efficient truthmakers, the same is not true of tropes
understood as a kind of object. Conversely, although tropes understood
as a kind of object are suitable candidates for being that from which
both concrete particulars and abstract universals are constructed,
tropes understood as properties are not. Whichever way we conceive of
tropes, therefore, the theory’s overall appeal is severely
diminished. 
Both Levinson’s and Chrudzimski’s pessimistic conclusions
can arguably be resisted. One option is simply to refuse to accept
that one cannot seriously propose that there are “abstract
stuffs”. Levinson offers us little more than an incredulous
stare in defense of this claim, and incredulous stares are well-known
for lacking the force to convince those not similarly
incredulous. Another option is to reject the claim that tropes
understood as properties must be propositionally structured. Or, more
specifically, to reject the claim that complex truths need
complex—(again)
propositionally structured— truthmakers. Some
truthmaker theorists—not surprisingly, Mulligan et
al. (1984) are among them—reject this claim. In so doing,
they avoid having to draw the sorts of conclusions to which Levinson
and (perhaps especially) Chrudzimski gesture.
 A more radical option, finally, is to simply reject the idea that
tropes can be informatively categorized either as a kind of property
or as a kind of object. Part of the problem is that some of the
features we want to attribute to tropes seem to cut across those
categories anyhow. So, for instance, if you think ‘being
shareable’ is essential to ‘being a property’, then,
obviously, tropes are not properties. Yet tropes, even if not
shareable, can still be ways objects are, and they can still
essentially depend on the objects that have them.  Likewise, if
‘monopolizing one’s position in space-time’ is
understood as a central trait for objects, tropes are not objects. Yet
tropes can still be the independent building-blocks out of which
everything else there is, is constructed.
According to Garcia (2016), this is why we ought to frame our
discussion of the nature(s) of tropes in terms of another
distinction. More precisely, he argues, rather than distinguishing
between tropes understood as a kind of property, and tropes understood
as a kind of object—and risk getting caught up in infected
debates about the nature of objects and properties generally—we
should distinguish between tropes understood as
‘modifiers’ and tropes understood as
‘modules’. The main difference between tropes understood
in these two ways—a difference that is the source of a great
many further differences—is that tropes understood as modifiers
do not have the character they confer (on objects), whereas tropes
understood as modules do. With recourse to this way of distinguishing
between different versions of the trope-view, Garcia argues, we can
now evaluate each version separately, independently of how we view
objects and properties,
 respectively.[9]
According to most proponents of tropes, tropes are ontologically
simple.[10]
Here this should be taken to mean that tropes have no constituents, in
the sense that they are not ‘made up’ or
‘built’ from entities belonging to some other
category. Simple tropes, thus understood, can still have
parts—even necessarily so—as long as those parts are also
tropes (cf. e.g., Robb 2005:
 469).[11],
 [12]
That tropes are ontologically simple can be seen as providing the
trope theorist with a tie-breaker vis-à-vis states of affairs
(at least if those are understood as substrates instantiating
universals). Such a tie-breaker is needed because, at least prima
facie, a theory positing states of affairs has the same
explanatory power as does one positing tropes. But a theory of states
of affairs invokes—apart from the state of affairs
itself—at least two (fundamental) sorts of things (universals
and substrates), whereas a theory of tropes (at least a theory of
tropes according to which tropes are simple, and objects are bundles
of tropes) invokes only one (tropes). From the point of view of
ontological parsimony, therefore, the trope view ought to be
preferred.[13]
Can the trope be simple? According to a number of the
theory’s critics, it cannot. Here is Hochberg’s argument
to that effect (2004: 39; cf. also his 2001: 178–179; a
similar argument can be found in Brownstein 1973: 47 and Armstrong
2005: 310):
Let a basic proposition be one that is either atomic or the negation
of an atomic proposition. Then consider tropes t and
t* where “t is different from
t*” and “t is exactly similar to
t*” are both true. Assume you take either
“diversity” or “identity” as primitive. Then
both propositions are basic propositions. But they are logically
independent. Hence, they cannot have the same truth makers. Yet,
for…trope theory /…/ they do and must have the same
truth makers. Thus the theory fails.
Ehring presents two (kinds of) arguments against the simplicity of
tropes. The first is a version of Hochberg’s argument,
but—importantly—is not formulated in terms of truthmakers
(Ehring 2011: 179–180, cf. also Moreland 2001: 70–71):
Argument 1: If a and b are related by
arbitrarily different internal relations then a and
b are not simple. Trope t is numerically different
from trope t* and t resembles t* exactly.
Exact resemblance and numerical difference are internal relations that
are arbitrarily different from each other. Hence t and
t* are not
 simple.[14]
Ehring’s second argument is inspired by an argument first
delivered by Moreland (2001: 64). Moreland’s argument concludes
that trope theory is unintelligible. Ehring thinks this is much too
strong. This is therefore the formulation of the objection he prefers
(2011: 180):
Argument 2: The nature and particularity of a trope are
intrinsically grounded in that trope. If tropes are simple, their
nature and their particularity are hence identical. The natures of a
red trope and an orange trope are inexactly similar. Hence their
respective particularities should be inexactly similar as well.
However, these particularities are exactly similar. Hence,
their particularities are not identical to their natures, and tropes
are not simple.
A number of different things can be said in response to these
arguments. According to Hochberg’s argument, first, if tropes
are simple, trope theory must violate what appears to be a truly
fundamental principle (call it HP, short for ‘Hochberg’s
principle’): logically independent basic propositions must
have distinct
 truthmakers.[15]
 Having to reject HP is hence a cost of having simple tropes. Perhaps
the cost is acceptable. That it is—indeed that there are
circumstances which speak in favor of rejecting HP—seems to be
accepted by Mulligan et al. (a similar view is, according to Armstrong
2005: 310 also held by Robb). For, they claim (1984: 296):
…[w]e conceive it as in principle possible that one and the same
truth-maker may make true sentences with different meanings: this
happens anyway if we take non-atomic sentences into account, and no
arguments occur to us which suggest that this cannot happen for atomic
sentences as well.
A positive reason for thinking that HP does not hold in general has
been provided by MacBride (2004, cf. also (in response to
Ehring’s first argument) Hakkarainen and Keinänen 2017).
According to Hochberg, to be able to conclude whether one truth-maker
can make true two propositions, we must first consider whether those
two propositions are formally independent or not. But, MacBride points
out, just considering formal (in)dependence is not enough. We
must also consider whether the propositions in question are
materially independent. Only if they are, thinks MacBride,
does it follow from the fact that they are independent, that they must
have distinct
 truthmakers.[16]
 However, formal and material independence can—and in this case
most likely will—come apart. For (ibid: 190):
…[i]nsofar as truth-makers are conceived as inhabitants of the
world, as creatures that exist independently of language, it is far
from evident that logically independent statements in the formal sense
are compelled to correspond to distinct truth-makers.
As for Ehring’s second argument, Ehring himself (2011: 180ff.)
offers up a number of different replies (none of which he himself
finds satisfactory). The most convincing response available to the
trope theorist is most likely to claim that the objection rests on a
kind of ‘category mistake’ in that
‘particularities’ are not things amenable to standing in
similarity relations in the first place.
Could not the trope theorist concede that tropes are complex, yet
argue that they are so in the innocent sense of having other tropes as
parts? According to Ehring, she could not. For, he argues (2011:
183f), if the trope has its particularity reside in one of the tropes
that make it up, we can always ask about that trope what
grounds its particularity and quality respectively. Again, we
must point to the parts of the trope in question. And so on, ad
infinitum. That this regress is benign seems highly
 questionable.[17],
 [18]
What makes two tropes, existing in the same world, at the same time,
distinct? To ask this question is to ask for a principle of
individuation for tropes. A natural suggestion is that we take the way
we normally identify and refer to tropes very literally, and
individuate tropes with reference to the objects that
‘have’ 
them:[19]
Object Individuation (OI):

For any tropes a and b such that a exactly
resembles b, a ≠ b iff a
belongs to an object that is distinct from the object to which
b belongs.
Whether this account is really informative can however be
questioned. For, at least if objects are bundles of tropes, the
individuation of objects will depend on the individuation of the
tropes that make them up, which means that, on OI, individuation
becomes circular (Lowe 1998: 206f.; Schaffer 2001: 249; Ehring 2011:
77). Indeed, matters improve only marginally if objects are understood
as substrates in which tropes are instantiated. For, although on this
view, individuation can be non-circularly accounted for, this is
because it is now the substrate which carries the individuating
burden. This leaves the individuation of the substrate still
unaccounted for, and so we appear to have gotten nowhere (Mertz
2001). Any trope theorist who accepts the possible existence of
‘free-floating’ tropes—i.e., tropes that exist
unattached to any object—must in any case reject this
account of trope individuation (at least as long as she accepts the
possibility of there being more than one free-floating trope
at any given time). For these reasons, although some of the things
trope theorists have said may make it sound as if they endorse OI, no
trope theorist has come out ‘in public’ to state that she
does.
The main-contenders are instead spatiotemporal individuation
(SI) and primitivist individuation (PI). According to SI,
first, that two tropes belonging to the same world are distinct can be
metaphysically explained with reference to a difference in their
respective spatiotemporal position (Campbell 1990: 53f.; Lowe 1998:
207; Schaffer 2001: 249):
Spatiotemporal Individuation (SI):

For any tropes a and b such that a exactly
resemble b, a ≠ b iff a is at
non-zero distance from b.
This is an account of trope individuation that seems to respect the
way tropes are normally picked out, yet which does
not—circularly—individuate tropes with reference to the
objects they make up and which does not rule out the existence of
‘free-floaters’. In spite of this, the majority of the
trope theorists (Schaffer 2001 being an important exception) have
opted instead for primitivism (cf.  Schaffer 2001: 248 and
Ehring 2011: 76; cf. also Campbell 1990: 69; Keinänen &
Hakkarainen 2014). Primitivism is best understood as the denial of the
idea that there is any true and informative way of filling out the
biconditional “For any exactly resembling tropes a
and b, a ≠ b iff
…”. That a and b are distinct—if
they are—is hence primitive. It has no further (ontological)
analysis or (metaphysical) explanation.
According to what is probably the most influential argument in favor
of PI over SI (an argument that changed Campbell’s mind:
cf. his 1990: 55f.; cf. also Moreland 1985: 65), SI
should be abandoned because it rules out the (non-empty) possibility
that (parts of) reality could be
 non-spatiotemporal.[20]
 Against this, proponents of SI have argued that the thesis that
reality must be spatiotemporal can be independently justified
(primarily because naturalism can be independently justified,
cf. Schaffer 2001: 251). And even if it cannot, SI could
easily be modified to accommodate the analogue of the
locational order of space (Campbell 1997[1981]: 136; Schaffer
 ibid.).[21]
A common argument in favor of SI is that it allows its
proponents to rule out what most agree are empty
possibilities: swapping and piling. 
Swapping: According to the so-called ‘swapping
argument’ (first formulated in Armstrong 1989: 131–132;
cf. also Schaffer 2001: 250f; Ehring 2011:
 78f.),[22]
 if properties are tropes, and individuation is primitive, two
distinct yet exactly similar tropes might swap places (this redness
here might have been there, and vice versa). The
result, post-swap, is a situation that is ontologically distinct from
that pre-swap. However, empirically/causally the pre- and post-swap
situations are nevertheless the same (cf. LaBossiere 1993:
262 and Denkel 1996: 173f. for arguments to the contrary). That is,
given the natural laws as we know them, that this
red-trope here swaps places with that
red-trope there makes no difference to the future evolution
of things. Which means that, not only would the world look, feel and
smell exactly the same to us pre- and post-swap, it would be in
principle impossible to construct a device able to distinguish the two
situations from one another. The reason for this is precisely that any
device able to detect the (primitive) difference between the two
situations would have be able to somehow communicate this difference
(say, by making a sound, by turning a handle, or …). But since
whether this red-trope here is there or not makes no
difference to the future evolution of things, it can make no
difference to whatever the device does when we turn it on
(cf. Dasgupta 2009). This makes admitting the possibility of
swapping seem unnecessary. If we also accept the (arguably reasonable)
Eleatic principle according to which only changes that matter
empirically/causally should count as genuine, we can draw the even
stronger conclusion that swapping is not genuinely possible, and,
hence, that any account of individuation from which it follows that it
is, should be 
abandoned.[23]
To accept SI does not immediately block swapping (Schaffer 2001: 250).
For, SI (just like OI and PI) is a principle about trope individuation
that holds
intra-worldly. In this case: within any given world, no two
exactly similar tropes are at zero distance from each other. Swapping,
on the other hand, concerns what is possibly true (or not) of exactly
similar tropes considered inter-worldly. But this means that,
although SI does not declare swapping possible, it doesn’t rule
it out either. According to the proponent of SI, this is actually a
good thing. For there is one possibility that it would be unfortunate
if one’s principle of individuation did block, namely
the possibility—called sliding—that this
red-trope here could have been there had the wind
blown differently (Schaffer 2001: 251). To get the desired result
(i.e., to block swapping while allowing for sliding), Schaffer
suggests we combine trope theory with SI and a Lewisian
counterpart theory of transworld identity (Lewis 1986). The result is
an account according to which exactly resembling tropes are
intra-worldly identical if they inhabit the same position in
space-time. And according to which they are inter-worldly
counterparts, if they are distinct, yet stand in sufficiently similar
distance- and other types of relations to their respective
(intra-worldly) neighbors. With this addition in place, Schaffer
claims, a trope theory which individuates its posits with reference to
their spatiotemporal position will make room for the
possibility of sliding, because (2001: 253):
On the counterfactual supposition of a shift in wind, what results is
a redness exactly like the actual one, which is in perfectly
isomorphic resemblance relations to its worldmates as the actual one
is to its worldmates, with just a slight difference in distance with
respect to, e.g., the roundness of the moon.
…yet it won’t allow for the possibility of
swapping, because:
…the nearest relative of the redness of the rose which is
here at our world would be the redness still here
‘post-swap’. The redness which would be here has exactly
the same inter- and intraworld resemblance relations as the redness
which actually is here, and the same distance relations, and hence is
a better counterpart than the redness which would be
there.
This is not in itself a reason to prefer SI over PI, however. For, PI,
just like SI, is an inter-worldly principle of individuation, which
means that it, just like SI, could be combined with a Lewisian
counterpart theory, thereby preventing swapping yet making room for
sliding. It is, in other words, the counterpart theory, and not SI (or
PI), which does all the work. In any case, it is not clear that
intra-worldly swapping is an empty possibility. According to
Ehring, there are circumstances in which a series of slidings
constitute one case of swapping, something that he thinks would make
swapping more a reason for than against PI (Ehring 2011:
81–85).
Piling: Even if swapping does not give us a reason to prefer
SI over PI, perhaps its close cousin ‘piling’ does.
Consider a particular red rose. Given trope theory, this rose is red
because it is partly constituted by a redness-trope. But what is to
prevent more than one—even indefinitely
many—exactly similar red-tropes from partly constituting this
rose? Given PI: nothing. It is however far from clear how one could
empirically detect that the rose has more than one redness trope, just
like it is not clear how one could empirically detect how many redness
tropes it has, provided it has more than one. This is primarily
because it is far from clear how having more than one redness trope
could make a causal difference in the world. But if piling makes no
empirical/causal difference, then given a (plausible) Eleatic
principle, the possibility of piling is empty, which means that PI
ought to be rejected (Armstrong 1978: 86; cf. also Simons
1994: 558; Schaffer 2001: 254,
fn. 11).
In defense of PI, its proponents now point to a special case of
piling, called ‘pyramiding’ (an example being a 5 kg
object consisting of five 1 kg tropes). Pyramiding does seem
genuinely possible. Yet, if piling is ruled out, so is pyramiding
(Ehring 2011: 87ff.; cf. also Armstrong 1997: 64f.; Daly
1997: 155). According to Schaffer, this is fine. For, although
admittedly not quite as objectionable as other types of piling (which
he calls ‘stacking’), pyramiding faces a serious problem
with predication: if admitted, it will be true of the 5 kg object that
“It has the property of weighing 1 kg” (Schaffer 2001:
254). Against this, Ehring has pointed out that to say of the 5 kg
object that “It has the property of weighing 1 kg” is at
most pragmatically odd, and that, even if this oddness is regarded as
unacceptable, to avoid it would not require the considerable
complication of one’s theory of predication imagined by Schaffer
(Ehring 2011: 88–91). 
According to Schaffer, the best argument for the possibility of
piling—hence the best argument against SI—is rather
provided by the existence of so-called bosons (photons being one
example). Bosons are entitites which do not obey Pauli’s
Exclusion Principle, and hence such that two or more bosons
can occupy the same quantum state. A ‘one-high’
boson-pile is hence empirically distinguishable from a
‘two-high’ one, which means that the possibility of piling
in general is not ruled out even if we accept an Eleatic
principle. Schaffer (2001: 255) suggests we solve this problem for SI
by considering the wave—not the particle/boson—as the way
the object ‘really’ is.  But this solution comes with
complications of its own for the proponent of SI. For, “[t]he
wave function lives in configuration space rather than physical space,
and the ontology of the wave function, its relation to physical space,
and its relation to the relativistic conception of spacetime which SI
so naturally fits remain deeply mysterious” (Schaffer 2001:
256).
As we have seen, tropes can be conceptualized, not just as
particularized ways things are, but also—and on some
versions of trope theory, primarily—as that out of which
everything else there is, is constructed. Minimally, this means that
tropes must fulfill at least two constructive tasks: that of making up
(the equivalent of) the realist’s universal, and that of making
up (the equivalent of) the nominalist’s concrete particular.
How can distinct things have one thing in common? This is the problem
of ‘the One over Many’ (cf. Rodriguez-Pereyra
2000). Universals provide a straightforward solution to this problem:
Distinct things can have one thing in common, because there is
one thing—the universal—which characterizes each
of them individually. The trope theorist—at least if she does
not accept the existence of universals in addition to
 tropes[24]—does
 not have recourse to entities that can be likewise identical in
distinct instances, and must therefore come up with a slightly more
complicated solution to this problem. She must ‘build’
something able to do the same problem-solving work the universal does,
using only tropes.
According to standard trope theory, two objects, a and
b, ‘share’ a
property—F-ness— if at least one of
of the tropes that make up a belongs to the same (exact) resemblance
class as does at least one of the tropes that make up b (cf.
Williams 1997[1953]: 117–118; Campbell 1990: 31f.). The majority of
the trope theorists agree that exact resemblance is to be formally
characterized as an equivalence relation (although
cf. Mormann 1995 for an alternative view), i.e., as a
relation that is symmetrical, reflexive, and
transitive. As such, exact resemblance partitions the set of
tropes into mutually excluding and non-overlapping classes; classes
functioning more or less as the traditional universal does.
What does this entail with respect to what exists? Two different
answers have been
 proposed.[25]
 Either, what exists when distinct tropes ‘share’ a
property is nothing but the resembling tropes themselves, or it is
those same tropes plus a (trope-)relation of exact resemblance. Both
suggestions have been rejected by the theory’s critics.
The most convincing reason for thinking that nothing but the
resembling tropes is needed in order to account for the phenomenon of
sameness of property, is provided by (one aspect of) the nature of
resemblance itself. Resemblance is an internal relation; it
supervenes on whatever it relates. Once two tropes exist, therefore,
so must their (degree of) resemblance. Given a
‘sparse’ ontology, only what is minimally required to make
true all truths exists. Sparse ontologies can be independently
justified (cf. Schaffer 2004 and Armstrong 1978). Therefore,
what exists when distinct tropes resemble each other—and so what
plays the role of the realist’s universal—is nothing but
the resembling tropes themselves (Williams 1963: 608; Campbell 1990:
37f.; cf. also Armstrong 1989:
 56).[26]
Alternatively, exact resemblance has been regarded as a
(relation-)trope, and hence as an addition to the tropes it relates.
The main problem with this view is that it appears to gives rise to a
version of Russell’s famous resemblance regress (first
formulated in his 1997 [1912]: 48; cf. also Küng 1967).
In Daly’s words (1997: 149):
Consider three concrete particulars which are the same shade of
red…each of these concrete particulars has a red
trope—call these tropes F, G, and
H—and these concrete particulars exactly resemble each
other in colour because F, G, and H exactly
resemble each other in colour. But it seems that this account is
incomplete. It seems that the account should further claim that
resemblance tropes hold between F, G, and
H. That is, it seems that there are resemblance tropes
holding between the members of the pairs F and G,
G and H, and F and H… Let
us call the resemblance tropes in question R1,
R2, and R3…each of
these resemblance tropes in turn exactly resemble each other.
Therefore, certain resemblance tropes hold between these
tropes…we are launched on a regress.
This regress is a problem only if it is vicious. The most
convincing reason for thinking that it is not is provided if we
consider the ‘pattern of dependence’ it
 instantiates.[27]
 For even those who do not think that the internality of exact
resemblance makes it a mere ‘pseudo-addition’ to its
subvenient base, agree that resemblance, whatever it is, is such that
its existence is necessarily incurred simply given the existence of
its relata. But then, no matter how many resemblances we regressively
generate, ultimately they all depend for their existence on the
existence of the resembling tropes, which resemble each other because
of their individual nature, which is primitive. This means that the
existence of the regress in no way contradicts—it does not
function as a reductio against—the resemblance of the
original tropes. On the contrary; it is because the tropes
resemble each other, that the regress exists. Therefore, the regress
is benign (cf. e.g., Campbell 1990: 37; Maurin 2002:
 78ff).[28]
A radical option, finally, is to simply opt out of the resemblance
game. For if resemblance is out of the picture then, clearly, so is
the resemblance regress. One such alternative is provided by Ehring
(2011: 175ff). According to him, the trope is not what it is either
primitively or because of whatever resemblance relations it stands in
to other tropes. Rather, it is what it is because of the natural
classes to which it belongs. Although not without its advantages
(cf. e.g., fn. 18), a downside of the suggestion is
that it seems to turn explanation implausibly on its head. If adopted,
tropes do not belong to this or that class because of the nature they
have, but have the nature they do because of the classes they belong
to. Many find that this is a high price to pay for avoiding the
resemblance regress, and the view has few
 proponents.[29]
The second constructive task facing the trope theorist is that of
building something that behaves like a concrete particular does, using
only tropes. Exactly how a concrete particular behaves is of course a
matter that can be
 debated.[30]
 This is not a debate to which the trope theorist has had very
much—or at least not anything very original—to contribute.
Instead, the trope theoretical discussion has been focused on an issue
that arguably needs solving before questions concerning what
a concrete particular can or cannot do more precisely become relevant:
the issue of if and how tropes make up concrete
particulars in the first place.
Whether this issue is best approached by considering if and how tropes
can make up or ground the existence of what me might call
‘ordinary’ objects, or if it is better to concentrate
instead on the world’s simplest, most fundamental,
objects—like those you find discussed in e.g., fundamental
physics—is another issue on which trope theorists disagree.
Campbell thinks we should concentrate on the latter sort of object. In
particular, he thinks we should concentrate on objects that have no
other objects as parts, as that way we avoid confusing
‘substantial’ complexity (and unity) with the—here
relevant—qualitative one. Robb (2005) and McDaniel (2001)
disagree. This may in part be due to the fact that they both
(cf. also Paul 2002, 2017) think that objects are
mereologically composed both on the level of their
substantial parts and on the level of their
 qualitative—trope—parts.[31]
According to a majority of the trope theorists, objects are bundles of
tropes. The alternative is to understand the object as a complex
consisting of a substrate in which tropes are instantiated. This is
the minority view (defended by e.g., Martin 1980; Heil 2003; and Lowe
2006). According to Armstrong (1989, 2004)—a staunch but
comparatively speaking rather friendly trope-critic—the
substrate-attribute view is the superior one, even for a trope
theorist. There exist several reasons to be suspicious of that claim,
however (Maurin 2016). One such reason has to do with parsimony. If
you adopt a substrate-attribute view, you accept the existence of
substrates on top of the existence of tropes. Accepting this
additional category makes at least some sense if properties are
universals. For if objects are bundles of universals, then
if a is qualitatively identical to b, a is
numerically identical to b. That is, if object are bundles of
universals, the Identity of Indiscernibles is not just true, but
necessarily true (although cf. O’Leary Hawthorne 1995
for a reason against this). This is a consequence few universal
realists have been prepared to
accept.[32] If
properties are tropes, on the other hand, then the tropes that make up
one object will be numerically distinct from the tropes that
make up the other, which means that the possibility of qualitatively
identical, yet numerically distinct, objects is rather easily provided
for. But then, if you are a trope theorist, the added cost of
accepting substrates into your ontology becomes much harder to
justify.
According to the bundle view, objects consist of, are made up by, or
are grounded in, a sufficient number of mutually compresent
and/or in some other way mutually dependent tropes. What is
compresence? When the same question was asked about (exact)
resemblance, the trope theorist had the option of treating the
relation as a ‘pseudo-addition’. This was because
resemblance is an internal relation and so holds necessarily simply
given the existence of its relata. According to most trope-theorists,
however, compresence is an external relation, and hence a
real addition to the tropes it
 relates.[33]
 But then adding compresence gives rise to an infinite
regress (often called ‘Bradley’s regress’ after
Bradley 1930[1893]; cf. also Armstrong 1978; Vallicella 2002
and 2005; Schnieder 2004; Cameron 2008; Maurin 2012). Unlike what was
true in the case of resemblance, this regress is most likely a vicious
regress. This is because the ‘pattern of dependence’ it
instantiates is the opposite of that instantiated by the resemblance
regress. In the resemblance case, for tropes t1,
t2, and t3 to exactly resemble
each other, it is enough that they exist. Not so in the compresence
case. Tropes t1,
t2, and t3 could exist and not
be compresent, which means that in order to ensure that
they are compresent, a
compresence-trope, c1, must be added to the
bundle. But
c1 could exist without being compresent with those
very tropes. Therefore, in order for t1,
t2, t3 and
c1 to be compresent, there must be
something—call it c2—that makes them
so. But since c2 could exist and not be
compresent with t1, t2,
t3 and c1, it too needs
something that ensures its compresence with those entities. Enter
c3. And so on. The existence of this regress
arguably contradicts—and hence functions as a reductio
against—the compresence of the original (first-order) tropes
and, thereby, the (possible) existence of the concrete particular.
Since concrete particulars (possibly) exist, something must be wrong
with this argument. One option is to claim that compresence is
internal after all, in which case the regress (if there even is one)
is benign (Molnar 2003; Heil 2003 and 2012; cf. also
Armstrong 2006). This may seem attractive especially to those who
think of their tropes as non-transferable and as ways
things are. Even given this way of thinking of the nature of the
trope, however, to take compresence as internal means having to give
up what are arguably some deeply held modal beliefs. For even if you
have reason to think that properties must be ‘borne’ by
some object, to be able to solve the regress-problem one would have to
accept the much stronger thesis that every trope must be borne by a
specific object. If the only reason we have for
thinking that compresence is internal in this sense is that this
solves the problem with Bradley’s regress, therefore, we should
opt to go down this route as a last resort only (cf. Cameron
2006; Maurin 2010).
As a way of saving at least some of our modal intuitions while still
avoiding Bradley’s regress, Simons (1994; cf. also
Keinänen 2011 and Keinänen and Hakkarainen 2014 for a
slightly different version of this
 view[34])
 suggests we view the concrete particular as constituted partly by a
‘nucleus’ (made up from mutually and specifically
dependent tropes) and partly—at least in the normal
case—by a ‘halo’ (made up from tropes that depend
specifically on the tropes in the nucleus). The result is a structured
bundle such that, although the tropes in the nucleus at most depend
for their existence on the existence of tropes of the same
kind as those now in its halo, they do not depend specifically on
those tropes. In this way, at least some room is made for contingency, yet
Bradley’s regress is avoided. For, as the tropes in the
halo depend specifically for their existence on the tropes that make
up the nucleus, their existence is enough to guarantee the existence
of the whole to which they belong. This is better but perhaps not good
enough. For, although the same object could now have had a slightly
different halo, the possibility that the tropes that actually make up
the halo could exist and not be joined to this particular
nucleus is ruled out with no apparent justification (other than that
this helps its proponent solve the problem with the Bradley regress)
(cf. also Garcia 2014 for more kinds of criticism of this
view).
According to several between themselves very different sorts of trope
theorists, therefore, we should stop bothering with the (nature and
dependence of the) related tropes and investigate instead the
(special) nature of compresence itself. This seems intuitive enough.
After all, is it not the business of a relation to relate? According
to one suggestion along these lines (defended in Simons 2010; Maurin
2002, 2010 and 2011; and Wieland and Betti 2008; cf. also
Mertz 1996, Robb 2005 and Giberman 2014 for similar
 views),[35]
 non-relational tropes have an existence that is independent of the
existence of some specific—either non-relational or
relational—trope, but relational tropes (including compresence)
depend specifically for their existence on the very tropes they
relate. This means that if c1 exists, it
must relate the tropes it in fact relates, even though those
tropes might very well exist and not be compresent (at least not with
each other). There is, then, no regress, and except for
c1, the tropes involved in constituting the
concrete particular could exist without being compresent with each
other. And this, in turn, means that our modal intuitions are left
more or less intact.[36]
According to Mertz (cf. also Maurin 2011), moreover, to be
able to do the unifying work for which it is introduced, compresence
cannot be a universal. If it were, then if one of the concrete
particulars whose constituents it joins ceases to exist, so will every
other concrete particular unified by the same (universal) relation of
compresence. But, as Mertz points out, “this is absurdly
counterfactual!” (Mertz 1996: 190).  Nor can it be a state of
affairs. For, states of affairs are in themselves complexes, and so
could not be used to solve the Bradley
problem.[37]
It seems, then, that compresence, if understood in a way that blocks
the regress, is a trope. Assuming that Bradley’s regress
threatens any account according to which many things make up
one unified thing (i.e., assuming that it does not only threaten the
trope-bundle theorist), therefore, that there is this threat is in
itself a reason to think there are tropes.
The suggestion is not without its critics. To these belong MacBride
who argues that, “…to call a trope relational is to pack
into its essence the relating function it is supposed to perform
without explaining what Bradley’s regress calls into question,
viz. the capacity of relations to relate” (2011: 173). Rather
than solve the problem, in other words, MacBride thinks the suggestion
“transfers our original puzzlement to that thing [i.e., the
compresence-relation]”. For, he asks “how can positing the
existence of a relational trope explain anything about its capacity to
relate when it has been stipulated to be the very essence of R that it
relates a and b. It is as though the capacity of
relational tropes to relate is explained by mentioning the fact that
they have a ‘virtus relativa’”(ibid.).
Assuming we agree that there is something that needs
explaining (i.e., assuming we agree that how several tropes
can—contingently—make up one object needs explaining), we
can either reject a proposed solution because we prefer what we think
is a better solution, or we can reject it because it is in
itself bad or unacceptable (irrespective of whether there are any
alternative solutions on offer). MacBride appears to suggest we do the
latter. More precisely, what MacBride proposes is that the solution
fails because it leaves unexplained the special ‘power’ to
relate it attributes to the compresence trope. If this is why the
suggestion fails, however, then either this is because no
explanation that posits something (‘primitively’) apt to
perform whatever function we need explained, is acceptable, or it is
because in this particular case, an explanation of this kind
will not do. If the former, the objection risks leading to an
overgeneration of explanatory failures. Everyone will at some point
need to posit some things as fundamental. And in order for those
fundamental posits to be able to contribute somehow to the theory in
question, it seems we must be allowed to say something about them. We
must, to use the terminology introduced by Schaffer, outfit our
fundamental posits with axioms. But then, as Schaffer also points out
(2016: 587): “it is a bad question—albeit one that has
tempted excellent philosophers from Bradley through van Fraassen and
Lewis—to ask how a posit can do what its axioms say, for that
work is simply the business of the posit. End of story”.
If, on the other hand, the problem is isolated to the case at hand, we
are owed an explanation of what makes this case so special. MacBride
complains that if the ‘explanatory task’ is that of
accounting for the capacity of compresence to relate, being told that
compresence has that capacity ‘by nature’, will not
do. Perhaps he is right about this. But, then, the explanatory task is
arguably not that one, but rather the task of accounting for the
possible existence of concrete objects, (contingently) made up from
tropes. If this is the explanatory task, it is far from clear
why positing a special kind of (relational) trope that is ‘by
nature’ apt to perform its relating function, will not do as an
explanation.
According to the trope proponent, if you accept the existence of
tropes, you have the means available to solve or to dissolve a number
of serious problems, not just in metaphysics but in philosophy
generally. In what follows, the most common trope-applications
proposed in the literature are very briefly introduced.
According to a majority of the trope theorists, an important reason
for thinking tropes exist is the role they play in causation. It is
after all not the whole stove that burns you, it is its
temperature that does the damage. And it is not any
temperature, nor temperature in general, which leaves a red mark. That
mark is left by the particular temperature had by this particular
stove now. It makes sense, therefore, to say that the mark is
left by the stove’s temperature-trope, which means that
tropes are very good candidates for being the world’s basic
causal relata (Williams 1997 [1953]; Campbell 1990; Denkel 1996;
Molnar 2003; Heil 2003; Ehring 2011).
That tropes can play a role in causation can hardly be
doubted. But can this role also provide the trope-proponent with a
reason to think that tropes exist? According to the theory’s
critics, it cannot. The role tropes (can) play in causation does not
provide the trope proponent with any special reason to prefer an
ontology of tropes over alternative ontologies. More specifically, it
does not give her any special reason to prefer an ontology of tropes
over one of states of affairs or events. Just like tropes, state of
affairs and events are particular. Just like tropes, they are
localized. And, just like tropes, they are non-repeatable (although at
least the state of affairs contains a repeatable item—the
universal—as one of its constituents). Every reason for thinking
that tropes are the world’s basic causal relata is therefore
also a reason to think that this role is played by states of affairs
and/or
 events.[38]
According to Ehring, this is not true. To see why not, he asks us to
consider the following simple scenario: a property-instance at
t1 is causally responsible for an instance of
the same property at t2. This is a case of
causation which is also a case of property persistence. But
what does property persistence involve? According to Ehring, property
persistence is not just a matter of something not changing its
properties. For, even in cases where nothing discernibly changes, the
property instantiated at t1 could nevertheless
have been replaced by another property of the same type during the
period between t1 and t2. To
be able to ontologically explain the scenario, therefore, we first
need an account of property persistence able to distinguish
‘true’ property persistence from cases of
‘non-salient property change’ or what may also be called
property type persistence. But, Ehring claims, this is
something a theory according to which property instances are states of
affairs cannot do (this he demonstrates with the help of a number of
thought experiments, which space does not allow me to reproduce here,
but cf. Ehring 1997: 91ff). Therefore, causation gives us
reason to think that tropes exist (for more reasons to prefer tropes
as causal relata, cf. Garcia-Encinas
 2009).[39]
According to Garcia (2016), what role tropes can play in causation
will depend on how we conceive of the nature of tropes. If tropes are
what he calls ‘modifiers’, they do not have the character
they confer, a fact that would seem to make them less suitable as
causal relata.  Not so if tropes are of the module kind (and so have
the character they confer). But if tropes have the character they
confer, Garcia points out, we may always ask, e.g.: Is it the couch or
is it the couch’s couch-shaped mass-trope that causes the
indentation in the carpet? Garcia thinks we have reason to think they
both do. The couch causes the indentation by courtesy, but the mass
trope would have sufficed to cause it even if it had existed alone,
unbundled with the couch’s other tropes. But this suggests that
if tropes are of the module kind, we end up with a world that is
(objectionably) systematically causally overdetermined. The role
tropes play in causation may therefore be more problematic than what
it might initially seem.
Suppose Lisa burns herself on the hot stove. One of the causal
transactions that then follow can be described thus: Lisa removed her
hand from the stove because she felt pain. This is a
description which seems to pick out ‘being in pain’ as one
causally relevant property of the cause. That ‘being in
pain’ is a causally relevant property accords well with
our intuitions. However, to say it is leads to trouble. The reason for
this is that mental properties, like that of ‘being in
pain’, can be realized by physically very different systems.
Therefore, mental properties cannot be identified with
physical ones. On the other hand, we seem to live in a physically
closed and causally non-overdetermined universe. But this means that,
contrary to what we have supposed so far, Lisa did not remove her hand
because she felt pain. In general, it means that mental properties are
not causally relevant, however much they seem to be (cf. Kim
1989 for a famous expression of this problem).
If properties are tropes, some trope theorists have proposed, this
conclusion can be resisted (cf. Robb 1997; Martin and Heil
1999; Heil and Robb 2003; for a hybrid version cf. Nanay
2009; cf. also Gozzano and Orilia 2008). To see this, we need
first to disambiguate our notion of a property. This notion, it is
argued, is really two notions, namely:
Once ‘property’ has been disambiguated, we can see how
mental properties can be causally relevant after all. For now, if
mental properties1 are tropes, they can be identified with
physical properties1. Mental properties2 can
still be distinguished from physical properties2, for
properties considered as types are—in line with the
standard view of tropes—identified with similarity classes
of tropes. When Lisa removes her hand from the stove because she
feels pain, therefore, she removes her hand in virtue of
something that is partly characterized by a trope which is such that
it belongs to a class of mentally similar tropes. This trope is
identical with a physical trope—it is both mental and
physical—because it also belongs to a (distinct)
similarity class of physically similar tropes. Therefore, mental
properties can be causally relevant in spite of the fact that the
mental is multiply realizable by the physical, and in spite of the
fact that we live in a physically closed and non-overdetermined
universe.
This suggestion has been criticized. According to Noordhof (1998: 223)
it fails because it does not respect the “bulge in the carpet
constraint”. For now the question which was ambiguously asked
about properties, can be unambiguously asked about tropes: is it in
virtue of being mental or in virtue of being physical that the trope
is causally relevant for the effect (for a response, cf. Robb
2001 and Ehring 2003)? And Gibb (2004) has complained that the
trope’s simple and primitive nature makes it unsuitable for
membership in two such radically different classes as that of the
mentally and of the physically similar tropes, respectively (for more
reasons against the suggestion cf. Macdonald and Macdonald
2006).
Another important reason for thinking that tropes exist, it has been
proposed, is the role tropes play in perception. That what we perceive
are the qualities of the things rather than the things themselves,
first, seems plausible (for various claims to this effect,
cf. Williams 1997 [1953]: 123; Campbell 1997 [1981]: 130;
Schaffer 2001: 247; cf. also Nanay 2012 and Almäng
2013). And that the qualities we perceive are tropes rather than
universals or instantiations of universals (states of affairs) is,
according to Lowe, a matter that can be determined with reference to
our experience. Lowe argues (1998: 205; cf. also, Lowe 2008;
Mulligan 1999):
[W]hen I see the leaf change in colour—perhaps as it
turned brown by a flame—I seem to see something cease to
exist in the location of the leaf, namely, its greenness. But it
could not be the universal greenness which ceases to exist,
at least so long as other green things continue to exist. My opponent
must say that really what I see is not something ceasing to exist, but
merely the leaf’s ceasing to instantiate greenness, or greenness
ceasing to be ‘wholly present’ just here. I can only say
that that suggestion strikes me as being quite false to the
phenomenology of perception. The objects of perception seem, one and
all, to be particulars—and, indeed, a causal theory of
perception (which I myself favour) would appear to require this, since
particulars alone seem capable of entering into causal relations.
A similar view is put forth by Mulligan et al. They argue (1984:
306):
[W]hoever wishes to reject moments [i.e., tropes] must of course give
an account of those cases where we seem to see and hear them, cases we
report using definite descriptions such as ‘the smile that just
appeared on Rupert’s face’. This means that he must claim
that in such circumstances we see not just independent things per
se, but also things as falling under certain concepts or
as exemplifying certain universals. On some
accounts…it is even claimed that we see the universal in the
thing. But the friend of moments finds this counterintuitive. When we
see Rupert’s smile, we see something just as spatio-temporal as
Rupert himself, and not something as absurd as a spatio-temporal
entity that somehow contains a concept or a universal.
These are admittedly not very strong reasons for thinking that it is
tropes and not state of affairs that are the objects of perception.
For the view that our perception of a trope is not only distinct, but
also phenomenologically distinguishable, from our perception of a
state of affairs seems grounded in little more than its
proponent’s introspective intuitions. States of affairs, just
like tropes, are particulars (cf. Armstrong 1997: 126 on the
“victory of particularity”). And to say, as Mulligan et
al. do, that the very idea of something spatiotemporal containing a
universal is absurd, clearly begs the question against the view they
are opposing.
That language furnishes the trope theorist with solid reasons for
thinking that there are tropes has been indicated by several trope
theorists and it has also been forcefully argued, especially by
Friederike Moltmann (2003, 2007, 2009, 2013a and
2013b; cf. also Mertz 1996: 3–6). Taking
Mulligan et al. 1984 as her point of departure, Moltmann argues that
natural language contains several phenomena whose semantic treatment
is best spelled out in terms of an ontology that includes tropes.
Nominalizations, first, may seem to point in the opposite
direction. For, in the classical discussion, the nominalization of
predicates such as is wise into nouns fit to refer, has been
taken to count in favor of universal realism. A sub-class of
nominalizations—such as John’s wisdom—can,
however, be taken to speak in favor of the existence of tropes. This
is a kind of nominalization which, as Moltmann puts it,
“introduce ‘new’ objects, but only partially
characterize them” (2007: 363). That these nominalizations refer
to tropes rather than to states of affairs, she argues, can be seen
once we consider the vast range of adjectival modifiers they allow
for, modifiers only tropes and not states of affairs can be the
recipients of (2009: 62–63; cf. also her 2003).
Bare demonstratives, next, especially as they occur in
so-called identificational sentences, provide another reason for
thinking that tropes exist (Moltmann 2013a). In combination
with the preposition like—as in Turquoise looks
like that—they straightforwardly refer to tropes. But even
in cases where they do not refer to tropes, tropes nevertheless
contribute to the semantics of sentences in which they figure. In
particular, tropes contribute to the meaning of sentences like
This is Mary or That is a beautiful woman. These are
no ordinary identity statements. What makes them stand out, Moltmann
points out, is the exceptional neutrality of the demonstratives in
subject position. These sentences are best understood in such a way
that the bare demonstratives that figure in them do not refer to
individuals (like Mary), but rather to perceptual features (which
Moltmann thinks of as tropes) in the situation at hand.
Identificational sentences, then, involve the identification of a
bearer of a trope via the denotation (if not reference) of a
(perceptual) trope.
Comparatives—like John is happier than
Mary—finally, are according to the received view such that
they refer to abstract objects that form a total ordering (so-called
degrees). According to Moltmann, a better way to understand these
sorts of sentences is with reference to tropes. John is happier
than Mary should hence be understood as John’s
happiness exceeds Mary’s happiness. Moltmann thinks this
way of understanding comparatives is preferable to the standard view,
because tropes are easier to live with than “abstract, rarely
explicit entities such as degrees or sets of degrees” (Moltmann
2009: 64).
Whether nominalizations, bare demonstratives and/or comparatives
succeed in providing the trope theorist with strong reasons to think
tropes exist will, among other things, depend on whether or not they
really do manage to distinguish between tropes and states of affairs.
Moltmann thinks they do but, again, this depends on how one
understands the nature of the items in question. It will also depend
on if and how one thinks goings on at the linguistic level can tell us
anything much about what there is at the ontological level. According
to quite a few trope theorists (cf. esp. Heil 2003), we
should avoid aguing from the way we conceptualize reality to
conclusions about the nature of reality itself. Depending on
one’s take on the relationship between language and world,
therefore, semantics might turn out to have precious little to say
about the existence (or not) of tropes.
Discussions of what use can be made of tropes in science can be found
scattered in the literature. Examples include Harré’s
2009 discussion of the role tropes play (and don’t play) in
chemistry, and Nanay’s 2010 attempt to use tropes to improve on
Ernst Mayr’s population thinking in biology. Most discussions
have however been focused on the relationship between tropes and
physics (Kuhlmann et al. 2002). Most influential in this respect is
Campbell’s field-theory of tropes (defended in his 1990: Ch. 6;
cf. also Von Wachter 2000) and Simons’
‘nuclear’ theory of tropes and the scientific use he
tentatively makes of it (Simons 1994; cf. also Morganti 2009
and Wayne 2008).
According to Campbell, the world is constituted by a rather limited
number of field tropes which, according to our (current) best science,
ought to be identified with the fields of gravitation,
electromagnetism, and the weak and strong nuclear forces (plus a
spacetime field). Standardly, these forces are understood as exerted
by bodies that are not themselves fields. Not so on Campbell’s
view. Instead, matter is thought of as spread out and as present in
various strengths across a region without any sharp boundaries to its
location. What parts of the mass field we choose to focus on will be
to a certain degree arbitrary. A zone in which several fields all
sharply increase their intensity will likely be taken as one single
entity or particle. But given the overall framework, individuals of
this kind are to be viewed as “well-founded appearances”
(Campbell 1990: 151).
Campbell’s views have been criticized by e.g., Schneider (2006).
According to Schneider, the field ontology proposed by Campbell (and
by Von Wachter) fails, because the notion of a field with which they
seem to be working, is not mathematically
 rigorous.[40]
 And Morganti who, just like Campbell, wants to identify tropes with
entities described by quantum physics, finds several problems with the
identifications actually made by Campbell. He proposes instead that we
follow Simons and identify the basic constituents of reality with the
fundamental particles, understood as bundles of tropes (Morganti
2009). If we take the basic properties described by the Standard Model
as fundamental tropes, is the idea, then the constitution of particles
out of more elementary constituents can be readily reconstructed
(possibly by using the sheaf-theoretical framework proposed by Mormann
1995, or the algebraic framework suggested by Fuhrmann 1991).
Relatively little has so far been written on the topic of tropes in
relation to issues in moral philosophy and value theory. Two things
have however been argued. First, that tropes (and not, as is more
commonly supposed, objects or persons or states of affairs) are the
bearers of final value. Second, that moral non-naturalists (who hold
that moral facts are fundamentally autonomous from natural facts) must
regard properties as tropes to be able to account for the
supervenience of the moral on the natural.
That tropes are the bearers of (final) value is a view held by several
trope theorists. To say that what we value are the particular
properties of things and persons is prima facie
intuitive (Williams 1997 [1953]: 123). And since concrete
particulars—but not tropes—are sometimes the subjects of
simultaneous yet conflicting evaluations, tropes seem
especially suited for the job as (final) value-bearers
(Campbell 1997 [1981]: 130–131). That tropes are the only
bearers of final value has however been questioned. According to
Rabinowicz and Rønnow-Rasmussen (2003), this is because
different pro-attitudes are fitting with respect to different kinds of
valuable objects. However, according to Olson (2003), even if this is
so, it does not show that tropes are not the only bearers of final
value. For that conclusion only follows if we assume that, to what we
direct our evaluative attitude is indicative of where value is
localized. But final value should be understood strictly as the value
something has for its own sake, which means that if e.g., a
person is valuable because of her courage, then she is not valuable
for her own sake but is valuable, rather, for the sake of one of her
properties (i.e., her tropes). But this means that, although the
evaluative attitude may well be directed at a person or a thing, the
person or thing is nevertheless valued because of, or for the sake of,
the tropes which characterize it.
Non-naturalists, next, are often charged with not being able to
explain what appears to be a necessary dependence of moral facts on
natural facts. Normally, this dependence is explained in terms of
supervenience, but in order for such an account to be compatible with
the basic tenets of moral non-naturalism, it has been argued, this
supervenience must, in turn, be explainable in purely non-naturalistic
terms (for an overview of this debate, cf. Ridge 2018).
According to Shafer-Landau (2003) (as interpreted by Ridge 2007) this
problem is solved if moral and physical properties in the sense of
kinds, are distinguished from moral and physical properties in the
sense of tokens, or tropes. For then we can say, in analogy with what
has been suggested in the debate on the causal relevance of mental
properties, that although (necessarily) every moral trope is
constituted by some concatenation of natural tropes, it does not
follow that every moral type is identical to a natural type. This
suggestion is criticized in Ridge 2007.