Abu'l Fatḥ Umar ibn Ibrāhīm
Khayyām, commonly known as Umar Khayyām, is almost certainly
the best known Iranian poet-scientist in the West. He was born in the
district of Shādyakh of Nayshābūr (originally
“Nayshāpūr”) in the province of
Khorāsān sometime around 439 AH/1048
 CE,1
and died there between 515 and 520 AH/1124 and 1129
 CE.2
Considering the word “Khayyām,” means
“tent maker,” it is likely that his father
Ibrāhīm or forefathers were tent makers. Khayyām is said
to have been quiet, reserved, and humble. His reluctance to accept
students drew criticism from opponents, who claimed that he was
impatient, bad tempered, and uninterested in sharing his knowledge.
Given the radical nature of his views in the
Rubā‘iyyāt, he may merely have wished to remain
intellectually inconspicuous.
The secrets which my book of love has bred, Cannot be told for
fear of loss of head; Since none is fit to learn, or cares to
know, ‘Tis better all my thoughts remain
unsaid. (Rubā‘iyyāt, Tirtha 1941 p. 266.)
Khayyam’s reference to Ibn Sīnā
as “his teacher” has led some to speculate that he actually
studied with Ibn Sīnā. Although this is incorrect, several
traditional biographers indicate that Umar Khayyam may have
studied with Bahmanyār, an outstanding student of Ibn
Sīnā.3
       Following a number of journeys to Herat,
Ray, and Iṣfahān (the latter being the capital of the
Seljuqs) in search of libraries and in pursuit of astronomical
calculations, Khayyam’s declining health caused him to
return to Nayshābūr, where he died in the district of
Shādyākh.   
Khayyam wrote little, but his works—some fourteen
treatises identified to date—were remarkable. They can be
categorized primarily in three genres: mathematics, philosophy, and
poetry. His philosophical works which have been edited and published
recently are:
Except the first work mentioned above which is a free translation
and commentary on a discourse by Ibn Sīnā, the other six
philosophical treatises represent Khayyam’s own independent
philosophical views. It is noteworthy that
Khayyam’s philosophical treatises were written in the
Peripatetic tradition at a time when philosophy in general and
rationalism in particular was under attack by orthodox Muslim
jurists—so much that Khayyam had to defend himself against
the charge of “being a philosopher.”
 “A philosopher I am,” my enemies falsely say,
 But God knows I am not what they say;
 While in this sorrow-laden nook, I reside
   Need to know who I am, and why Here stay. (translation
by the author.)
In “On Being and Necessity”, Khayyam defines
“philosophy” along the Peripatetic line: “The
essential and real issues that are discussed in philosophy are three,
[first], ‘is it?’…second, ‘what is
it?’…third, ‘why is it?’” (Mālik
(ed.), 335). While these are standard Aristotelian questions,
for Khayyam they have a wider range of philosophical implications,
especially with regard to the following topics: 
In accordance with Peripatetic tradition, Umar Khayyam refers
to God as the “Necessary Being” and offers
several
 cosmological,5
teleological, and ontological
(Risālah fi'l-wujūd, 112) arguments for
His existence. Khayyam discusses issues such as necessity,
causality, and the impossibility of a chain of causes and effects
continuing ad infinitum. Among other topics pertaining to God which
Khayyam discusses are God’s knowledge of universals and
particulars and the complex nature of Divine essence.
For Khayyam, the most complex philosophical problem is to
account for the gradation of beings and the manner in which they are
ranked in terms of their nobility.   In “On Being and Necessity”,
Khayyam asserts:
What remains from among the most important and difficult
problems
[to solve] is the difference among the order of
existents…. Perhaps I, and my teacher, the master of all
who have proceeded before him, Avicenna, have thoughtfully reflected
upon this problem and to the extent that it is satisfactory to our
intellects, we have understood it.6
In his treatise “On the Knowledge of the Universal Principles of
Existence,” (Risālah dar ‘ilm kulliyāt-i
wujūd, in Malik, 381) as well as a number of his other
works, Khayyam adopts the Neoplatonic scheme of emanation and
offers an analysis of a number of traditional philosophical themes
within this context.
Khayyam has been accused of believing in the
transmigration of the soul and even corporeal resurrection in this
world. This is partially due to some of the inauthentic
Rubā‘iyyāt that have been attributed to him.
       Khayyam’s
philosophical treatises indicate that he did believe in life after
death, and in this regard his views were in line with traditional
Islamic eschatological doctrine. Khayyam the poet, however, plays
with the notion of life after death in a variety of ways. First, he
casts doubt on the very existence of a life beyond our earthly
existence; second, he says that based on our very experience in this
world, all things seem to perish and not return. Some of his poems play
with the idea of the transmigration of the soul (taṇāsukh).
This is more symbolic than actual; in numerous poems he tells us that
we turn to dust and it is from our dust that other living beings rise.
Khayyam’s comments regarding the possibility of life
after death may well have been an indirect criticism of the orthodox
jurists who spoke of the intricacies of heaven and hell with
certainty.7
The problem of theodicy, which Khayyam handles both
philosophically and poetically, is one of the most prevalent themes in
his quatrains, yet his approach differs in each medium. It is an
irony that while in his philosophy Khayyam offers a rational
explanation for the existence of evil, in his
Rubā‘iyyāt he strongly condemns the presence of evil
and finds no acceptable justification for its presence. One may argue
that such an inconsistency bears witness to the fact that the
philosophical treatises and the Rubā‘iyyāt are not
authored by the same person. While this remains a possibility, it is
also reasonable that these seemingly contradictory works might belong
to the same person. The discrepancy speaks to the human condition that
despite our rationalization of the problem of evil, on a practical and
emotional level we remain fundamentally bewildered by the unnecessary
presence of so much pain and suffering.
Qāḍī Abū Naṣr, a statesman and
scholar from Shirāz, posed the following question to Khayyam:
It is therefore necessary that the Necessary Being be the cause
of the emergence of evil, opposition and corruption in the world.
This is not worthy of Divine status. So how can we resolve
this problem and the conflict so evil will not be attributed to the
Necessary Being? (Ḍarurat al-taḍād
fi'l-‘ālam wa'l-jabr
wa'l-baqā’, Malik)
 In his work “On the
Necessity of Contradiction in the World and Determinism and
Subsistence,” Khayyam offers three arguments to exonerate God from
being the origin of evil by identifying evil with non-existence or
absence. God, Khayyam argues, has created the essences of
all the contingent beings, which are good in and of themselves since
any being, ontologically speaking, is better than 
 non-being.8
Evil therefore represents an absence, a non-being for
which God cannot be blamed.
Both his Western and Eastern expositors consider Khayyam
to be a determinist (jabrī). However, his views on the
subject matter are far more complex, as he demonstrates in On Being and
Necessity, a work devoted almost entirely to the issue. It is
noteworthy that instead of the traditional use of the term
“determinism” (jabr), Khayyam uses the concept of
necessity (taklīf) to denote determinism or predestination.
In his work “On the Necessity of Contradiction in the World, and
Determinism and Subsistence,” Khayyam indicates that determinism is
close to his philosophical perspective provided it is not taken to its
extreme: 
As to the question of his Highness [Qāḍī
Nasawī] concerning which of the two
groups (determinists or free will) are closer to truth I say
initially
and in the first sight, perhaps the determinists are closer to
truth provided we do not enter into their nonsensical and absurd
[claims] for
those are far from truth. (Ḍarūrat
al-taḍād fi'l-‘ālam wa'l-jabr
wa'l-baqā‘, 169 )
Khayyam identifies three types of determinism:
By “Universal-cosmic determinism” Khayyam means we
have been thrown into this world by accident, which creates in us a
sense of bewilderment and existential anxiety. Khayyam
expresses this when he says:
With Earth’s first Clay They did the Last Man knead, And there of
the Last Harvest sow'd the Seed: And the first Morning of
Creation wrote What the Last Dawn of Reckoning shall
read. (Rubā‘iyyāt, FitzGerald 1859, p. 41)
In the cosmic and universal sense, our presence in this world and
our entry and exit is predetermined, a condition that Khayyam
bemoans throughout his Rubā‘iyyāt.
The second sense of determinism is Socio-economic, which is rarely
addressed by Muslim philosophers. Khayyam observed:
God created the human species such that it is not possible for
it to survive and reach perfection unless it is through reciprocity,
assistance, and help. Until food, clothes, and a home that are
the essentials of life are not prepared, the possibility of the
attainment of perfection does not exist. (Ḍarūrat
al-taḍād fi'l-‘ālam wa'l-jabr
wa'l-baqā‘, 143). 
       Finally there is “ontological
determinism,” which relies on a Neoplatonic scheme of emanation
which Khayyam considers to be “among the most significant
and complex of all questions,” since “the order of the
world is in accordance to how the wisdom of God decreed it”
(Fi'l- kawn wa'l-taklīf, 145). He continues,
“Necessity is a command which is issued from God Most High, so
people may attain those perfections that lead them to happiness”
(Fi'l- kawn wa'l-taklīf, 143). This Greek concept of
happiness, restated by Fārābī as “For every being
is made to achieve the ultimate perfection it is susceptible of
achieving according to its specific place in the order of being,”
(Al-Fārābī 1973, 224 ) implies that at least our
ontological status is pre-determined.
In a complex discussion, Khayyam presents his views on the
relationship between the subject, predicate, and attributes using a
mixture of original insight and Aristotelian precedent. Dividing the
attributes into two parts, essential and accidental, he discusses
essential and accidental attributes and their subdivisions such as
abstract (i‘tibārī) and existential
(wujūdī) (Risālah fi'l-wujūd,
102). Continuing the argument in “The Necessity of
Contradiction, Determinism, and Subsistence”
(Ḍarūrat al-taḍād fi'l-‘ālam
wa'l-jabr wa'l-baqā‘, 164), Khayyam proposes that
conceiving essential attributes necessitates the presence of a priori
(badawī) concepts such as “animality which is an
essential attribute of man.”
Khayyam’s ontological views can be formulated in
the following ways:9
Khayyam in Risālah fi'l-wujūd writes that
“existence is abstract (secondary) (i‘tibārī) by way of
emanation.” In addition, section seventeen of this
treatise, entitled “Existence is an Added Concept to
Essence” states, “The traces of existence can be found in
all things such as accidents and there is no doubt that existence is a
concept added to essence, that is intelligible (Ḍarūrat
al-taḍād fi'l-‘ālam wa'l-jabr
wa'l-baqā‘, 111). Clearly Khayyam supports the
principality of essence. By relying on reductio ad absurdum, he
concludes that if essence were to be secondary, it would have to exist
prior to itself, which is impossible. Khayyam states
“essence is primary and nothing else,” because
“essence was non-existent and then became existent.” He
goes on to argue “essence does not need existence [to exist] and
[its existence] is not in relation to an existent since [if] essence
prior to existing was non-existing (ma‛dūm), then how can
something need something else [in order to exist] prior to its
existence?” (Ḍarūrat al-taḍād
fi'l-‘ālam wa'l-jabr
wa'l-baqā‘, 125).
This may lead the reader to believe that Khayyam was the
first Muslim philosopher to support the theory of the principality of
essence, but a more careful reading reveals an interesting twist:
namely, that Khayyam’s understanding of how essences came to
be casts doubt on his belief in the principality of essence. Towards
the end of the Risālah fi'l-wujūd he uses the
Neoplatonic scheme of emanation to explain the origin of essences and
states: “Therefore, it became clear that all
substances
 (dhāt)10
and essences (māhiyyah) emanate
from the essence of the First Exalted Origin, in an orderly fashion,
may glory be upon Him.” The traditional Neoplatonic scheme,
at least in Ibn Sīnā’s version, clearly considers this
succession to be existential, whereby levels of existence emanate from
the One. Khayyam replaces essence with existence here and
the question is whether he equates them and thereby deviates from his
teacher Ibn Sīnā. Khayyam furthermore explains that
“they [essences] are all good in themselves and there is no evil
in them in any form or fashion” (Ḍarūrat
al-taḍād fi'l-‘ālam wa'l-jabr
wa'l-baqā‘, 130). This deviates from the standard
definitions of an essence and is much closer to Plato’s forms
than the traditional notion of māhiyyah.
       It appears that Khayyam equates
existence and essence as having emanated from God in an orderly
fashion, but there is no explanation of how essence becomes primary and
existence secondary. In fact, if existence did not exist how
could essences come to be? They would have to come to be without
Being-be there to receive them, as it were. Either essence or existence
emanated from God separately, in which case their priority and
posterity are not essential as is the relationship between father and
son, or their priority is accidental. The latter is not the type
of priority that Khayyam has in mind; if essence is to be
essentially prior to existence, they both could not have been emanated
from God and one should be a byproduct of the other, i.e., an
ontological level of reality.     
In another work, The Brightening of the Intellect on the
Subject of Universal
 Knowledge,11
Khayyam
offers three reasons why existence is not added to essence and
therefore is primary. A summary of his reasons is as follows:
To refute the primacy of essence over existence, Khayyam
offers an argument based on the relationship between subject and
predicate. He argues that “Existence exists and does not
need another existence;” (Risālah fi'l-wujūd)
but, cognizant of the counterargument, he also states that one may
object by saying that the same argument holds true with regard to
essence. So one can say, “A man is a man through man-ness and
man-ness does not need another man-ness to be man-ness”
(Risālah fi'l-wujūd).
Although the distinction between the principality of
wujūd (aṣālat al-wujūd)
and the principality of māhiyyah (aṣālat
al-māhiyyah) can be found among early Muslim philosophers, the
subject matter became particularly significant in later Islamic
philosophy, especially through the School of Iṣfahān and the
work of its most outstanding figure, Mullā Ṣadrā.
This is important for our discussion since Umar Khayyam may
simply have presented the arguments for and against the priority and
posterity of essence and existence without attaching much significance
to their philosophical consequences, as was the case in later Islamic
philosophy.
Khayyam’s philosophical works are the least studied
aspects of his thought, and were not even available in published form
until a few years ago. They permit a fresh look at overall
Khayyamian thought and prove indispensable to an understanding of
his Rubā‘iyyāt. In his philosophical works,
Khayyam writes as a Muslim philosopher and treats a variety of
traditional philosophical problems; but in his
Rubā‘iyyāt, our Muslim philosopher morphs into an
agnostic Epicurean. A detailed study of Khayyam’s
philosophical works reveals several explanations for this dichotomy,
the most likely of which is the conflict between pure and practical
reasoning. Whereas such questions as theodicy, the existence of
God, soul and the possibility of life after death may be argued for
philosophically, such arguments hardly seem relevant to the human
condition given our daily share of suffering.
It is in light of the distinction between “is” and
“ought,” the “ideal” and the
“actual,” that discrepancies between Khayyam’s
Rubā‘iyyāt and his philosophical views should be
understood. Khayyam’s Rubā‘iyyāt are
the works of a sober philosopher and not that of a hedonistic poet.
Whereas Khayyam the philosopher-mathematician justifies
theism based on the existing order in the universe, Khayyam the
poet, for whom suffering in the world remains insoluble, sees very
little evidence to support theism or any type of eschatological
doctrine.
Here with a Loaf of Bread beneath the Bough, A Flask of Wine, a
Book of Verse—and Thou Beside me singing in the
Wilderness—And Wilderness is Paradise
enow. (Rubā‘iyyāt, FitzGerald 1859, 30)
Although Umar Khayyam’s Rubā‘iyyāt have
been admired in the Persian speaking world for many centuries, they
have only been known in the West since the mid 19th century, when
Edward FitzGerald rendered the Rubā‘iyyāt into
English.
The word Ruba‘ī
(plural: Rubā‘iyyāt), meaning
“quatrain,” comes from the word al-Rabi‘,
the number four in Arabic. It refers to a poetic form which consists
of a four-lined stanza and two hemistiches for a total of four parts.
Also known as tarānah (snatch)
or dobaītī (two-liner), its short and simple form
provides a type of “poetic punch line.”
The overwhelming majority of the literary works on the
Rubā‘iyyāt have been devoted to the monumental task of
determining the authentic Rubā‘iyyāt from the
inauthentic ones. In our current discussion, we shall bypass that
controversy and rely on the most authoritative
Rubā‘iyyāt in order to provide a commentary on
Khayyam’s critique of the fundamental tenets of religion.
The salient feature of his critique address the following:
The Rubā‘iyyāt’s overarching theme is the
temporality of human existence and the suffering that one endures
during a seemingly senseless existence. Clearly, such a view based on
his observation of the world around him is in sharp contrast with the
Islamic view presented in the Quran: “I (Allah) have not created
the celestial bodies and the earth in vain.” (Quran, 38:27 )
Umar Khayyam was caught between the rationalistic tradition
of the Peripatetics deeply entrenched in the Islamic religious universe
and his own failure to find any meaning or purpose in human existence
on a more immediate and experiential level. Khayyam the poet
criticizes the meaninglessness of life whereas Khayyam the
philosopher remains loyal to the Islamic Peripatetic tradition which
adheres to a theocentric world view.
Using the imagery of a kuzah (“jug”) and clay throughout
the Rubā‘iyyāt, Khayyam alludes to the temporality
of life and its senselessness:
I saw the potter in the market yesterday
Pounding and pounding upon a piece of clay
“Behold,” said the clay to the potter
Treat me gently for once like you, now I am clay (translation by the
author.)
Khayyam fails to see a profound meaning in human existence; his
existential anxiety is compounded by the fact that we are subject to
our daily share of suffering, a concept that runs contrary to that of
the all merciful and compassionate God of Islam.
The problem of suffering has an ominous presence in the
Rubā‘iyyāt, which contains both Epicurean and Stoic
themes. On theodicy, Khayyam remarks:
In what life yields in this Two-door monastery
Your share in the pain of heart and death will tarry
The one who does not bear a child is happy
And he not born of a mother, merry (translation by the author.)
And also:
Life is dark and maze-like, it is
Suffering cast upon us and comfort in abyss
Praise the Lord for all the means of evil
Ask none other than He for malice (translation by the author.)
It is an irony that while Khayyam complains about theodicy and
human suffering throughout his Rubā‘iyyāt, in his
philosophical works he offers a treatise almost entirely devoted to a
philosophical justification of the problem of evil. It is noteworthy
that theodicy as a theological and philosophical problem in Islam never
received the attention it did in Western intellectual tradition. In
early Islamic history theodicy was briefly discussed by a number of
theologians, but the subject matter was soon dropped, partially because
the orthodox theologians saw it as questioning God’s wisdom.
For Khayyam the poet, traditional metaphysics, or what he calls
“the tale of the seventy-two nations,” is merely a flight
of fancy for the human condition, which he describes as a
“sorrow laden nest.” The art of living in the
present, a theme dealt with in Sufi literature, is a type of wisdom
that must be acquired, since living for the hereafter and heavenly
rewards is conventional wisdom more suitable for the masses.
On this Khayyam asserts:
Today is thine to spend, but not to-morrow,
Counting on morrow breedeth naught but sorrow;
Oh! Squander not this breath that heaven hath lent thee,
Nor make too sure another breath to borrow (Whinfield 2001,
30; modified by the author.)
And also
What matters if I feast, or have to fast?
What if my days in joy or grief are cast?
Fill me with Thee, O Guide! I cannot ken
If breath I draw returns or fails at last. (Whinfield 2001, 144)
Khayyam’s emphasis on living in the
present, or as Sufi’s say “Sufi is the Son of time,”
along with his use of other Sufi metaphors such as wine, intoxication
and love making, have been interpreted by some scholars as merely
mystical
 allegories.12
Although a mystical
interpretation of the Rubā‘iyyāt has been
advocated by some, it remains the view of a minority of scholars.
The complexity of the world according to Khayyam the
mathematician-astronomer necessitates the existence of a creator and
sustainer of the universe; and yet on a more immediate and existential
level, he finds no reason or meaning for human existence. This leads to
the theme of doubt and bewilderment, since reason necessitates that
every design should have a designer—and yet one fails to find a
designer or a purpose for the very existence of the design. 
Humans, Khayyam tells us, are thrown into an existence they
cannot make sense of:
The sphere upon which mortals come and go,
Has no end nor beginning that we know;
And none there is to tell us in plain truth:
Whence do we come and whither do we go. (Whinfield 2001, 132)
The inconsistency between a seemingly senseless existence and a
complex and orderly world leads to existential and philosophical doubt
and bewilderment. The tension between Khayyam’s
philosophical writings in which he embraces the Islamic Peripatetic
philosophical tradition, and his Rubā‘iyyāt where he
expresses his profound skepticism, stems from this paradox. In his
Rubā‘iyyāt Khayyam embraces humanism and
agnosticism, leaving the individual disoriented, anxious and
bewildered; whereas in his philosophical writings he operates within a
theistic world where all things are as they should be. Lack of
certainty with regard to religious truth leaves the individual in an
epistemologically suspended state where one has to live in the here and
now irrespective of the question of truth.
Since neither truth nor certitude is at hand
Do not waste your life in doubt for a fairyland
O let us not refuse the goblet of wine
For, sober or drunken, in ignorance we stand (translation by the
author.)
The Rubā‘iyyāt casts doubt on Islamic eschatological
and soteriological views. Once again the tension between
Khayyam’s poetic and philosophical modes of thought
surfaces; experientially there is evidence to conclude that death is
the end. 
Behind the curtain none has found his way
None came to know the secret as we could say
And each repeats the dirge his fancy taught
Which has no sense-but never ends the lay (Whinfield 2001,
229)
In the Rubā‘iyyāt, Khayyam portrays the
universe as a beautiful ode which reads
“from dust we come and to dust we return,” and
“every brick is made from the skull of a man.” While
Khayyam does not explicitly deny the existence of life after
death, perhaps for political reasons and fear of being labeled a
heretic, there are subtle references throughout his
Rubā‘iyyāt that the hereafter should be taken
with a grain of salt. In contrast, in his philosophical writings we see
him argue for the incorporeality of the soul, which paves the path for
the existence of life after death. The irreconcilable conflict
between Khayyam’s observation that death is the inevitable
end for all beings, and his philosophical reflections in favor of the
possibility of the existence of life after death, remains an insoluble
riddle.
Khayyam is known as a determinist in both the East and the
West, and deterministic themes can be seen in much of the
Rubā‘iyyāt. But if we read his
Rubā‘iyyāt together with his philosophical writings,
the picture that emerges may be more rightly called “soft
determinism.”   One of Khayyam’s best known
quatrains in which determinism is clearly conveyed asserts:
The Moving Finger writes; and, having writ, Moves on: nor all
your Piety nor Wit Shall lure it back to cancel half a Line,
Nor all your Tears wash out a Word of it
(Rubā‘iyyāt, FitzGerald 1859, p. 20)
In his philosophical treatise “On the Necessity of Contradiction
in the World, and Determinism and Subsistence” Khayyam adheres
to three types of determinism. On a universal or cosmic level, our
birth is determined in the sense that we had no choice in this matter.
Ontologically speaking, our essence and our place on the overall
hierarchy of beings appears also to be predetermined. However, the
third category of determinism, socio-political determinism, is manmade
and thus changeable.
At first they brought me perplexed in this way
Amazement still enhances day by day
We all alike are tasked to go but Oh!
Why are we brought and sent? This none can say. (Rubā‘iyyāt, Tirtha 1941,
18)
Thus a reading of the Rubā‘iyyāt in conjunction with
Khayyam’s philosophical reflections brings forward a more
sophisticated view of free will and determinism indicating that
Khayyam believed in free will within a form of cosmic determinism.
Khayyam uses the concept of “wine and intoxication”
throughout his
Rubā‘iyyāt in three distinct ways:
The pedestrian use of wine in the Rubā‘iyyāt, devoid
of any intellectual significance, emphasizes the need to forget our
daily suffering. The mystical allusions to wine pertain to a type of
intoxication which stands opposed to discursive thought. The
esoteric use of wine and drinking, which has a long history in Persian
Sufi literature, refers to the state of ecstasy in which one is
intoxicated with Divine love. Those supporting the Sufi interpretation
of Rubā‘iyyāt rely on this literary genre. While
Khayyam was not a Sufi in the traditional sense of the word, he
includes the mystical use of wine among his allusions.
Khayyam’s use of wine in the profound sense in his
Rubā‘iyyāt is a type of Sophia that provides a sage
with philosophical wisdom, allowing one to come to terms with the
temporality of life and to live in the here and now.
Those imprisoned by the intellect’s need to decipher
Humbled; knowing being from non-being, they proffer
Seek ignorance and drink the juice of the grape
Those fools acting as wise, scoffer. (modified by the author)
Khirad (wisdom) is the type of wisdom that brings about a
rapprochement between the poetic and discursive modes of thought, one
that sees the fundamental irony in what appears to be a senseless human
existence within an orderly and complex physical universe. For
Khayyam the mathematician-astronomer, the universe cannot be the
result of a random chance; on the other hand, Khayyam the poet
fails to find any purpose for human existence in this orderly
universe.
As Spring and Fall make their appointed turn,
The leaves of life one aft another turn;
Drink wine and brood not—as the Sage has said:
“Life’s cares are poison, wine the cure in turn.”
(Sa‘idī 1994, 58 )
In several respects Khayyam’s mathematical writings are
similar to his texts in other genres: they are relatively few in
number, but deal with well-chosen topics and carry deep implications.
Some of his mathematics relates in passing to philosophical matters (in
particular, reasoning from postulates and definitions), but his most
significant work deals with issues internal to mathematics and in
particular the boundary between geometry and algebra.
Khayyam seems to have been attracted to cubic
equations originally through his consideration of the following
geometric problem: in a quadrant of a circle, drop a perpendicular from
some point on the circumference to one of the radii so that the ratio
of the perpendicular to the radius is equal to the ratio of the two
parts of the radius on which the perpendicular falls. In a short,
untitled treatise, Khayyam leads us from one case of this problem
to the equation 
 x3 + 200x = 20x2 + 2000.13
An
approximation to the solution of this equation is not difficult to
find, but Khayyam also generates a direct geometric solution: he
uses the numbers in the equation to determine intersecting curves of
two conic sections (a circle and a hyperbola), and demonstrates that
the solution x is equal to the length of a particular line segment in
the diagram.
Solving algebraic problems using geometric tools was not new; in
the case of quadratic equations methods like this date back at least
as far as the Greeks and probably to the Babylonians.  Predecessors
such as al-Khwārizmī (early 9th century) and
Thābit ibn Qurra (836–901 CE) already had solved quadratic
equations using the straightedge and compass geometry of
Euclid’s Elements.  Since negative numbers had not yet been
conceived, Muslim mathematicians needed to solve several different
types of quadratic equations: for
instance, x2 = mx + n
was fundamentally different from
x2 + mx = n. For
cubics, there are fourteen distinction types of equation to be
solved. In his “Treatise on Demonstration of Problems of
Algebra”14
Khayyam notes that four of these fourteen have been solved and says
that al-Khāzin (d. 961/971) was one of the authors, having solved
a problem from Archimedes' treatise On the Sphere and
Cylinder that al-Māhānī (fl.  ca. 860) had
previously converted into a cubic.
In the Algebra, Khayyam sets out to deal systematically with
all fourteen types of cubic equations. He solves each one in sequence
again through the use of intersecting conic sections. In an algebra
where powers of x corresponded to geometrical dimensions, the solution
of cubic equations was the apex of the discipline. Nevertheless, even here Khayyam was able to advance algebra by considering its unknowns as dimension-free abstractions of continuous quantities.15 Khayyam also
considers circumstances under which certain cubic equations have more
than one solution. Although he does not handle this topic perfectly,
his effort nevertheless stood out from previous efforts.
A geometric solution to a cubic equation may seem peculiar to modern
eyes, but the study of cubic equations (and indeed much of medieval
algebra) was motivated by geometric problems. Khayyam was
nevertheless explicitly aware that the arithmetic problem of the cubic
remained to be solved. He never produced such a solution; nor did
anyone else until Gerolamo Cardano in the mid-16th century.
The process of reasoning from postulates and
definitions has been basic to mathematics at least since the time of
Euclid. Islamic geometers were well versed in this art, but also spent
some effort examining the logical foundations of the method. They were
unafraid to revise and improve upon Euclid’s starting points, and
they rebuilt the Elements from the ground up in several ways.
Khayyam’s Explanation of the Difficulties in the Postulates
of
 Euclid16
deals with the two most important
issues in this context, the parallel postulate and the definition of
equality of ratios.
Euclid’s fifth “parallel” postulate states that if
a line falls on two given lines such that the two interior angles add
up to less than two right angles, then the given lines must meet on
that side. This statement is equivalent to several more easily
understood assertions, such as: there is exactly one parallel to a
given line that passes through a given point; or, the angles of a
triangle add up to two right angles. It has been known since the 19th
century that there are non-Euclidean geometries that violate these
properties; indeed, it is not yet known whether the space in which we
live satisfies them. The parallel postulate, however, was not subject
to doubt at Khayyam’s time, so it is more appropriate to
think of Islamic efforts in this area as part of the tradition of
improving upon Euclid rather than as the origin of non-Euclidean
geometry. Khayyam’s reconstruction of Euclid is one of the
better ones: he does not try to prove the parallel postulate. Rather,
he replaces it with two statements, which he attributes to Aristotle,
that are both simpler and more self-evident: two lines that converge
must intersect, and two lines that converge can never diverge in the
direction of convergence. Khayyam then replaces Euclid’s
29th proposition, the first in which the parallel postulate is used,
with a new sequence of eight propositions. Khayyam’s
insertion amounts to determining that the so-called Saccheri
quadrilateral (one with two altitudes equal in length, both emerging at
right angles from a base) is in fact a rectangle. Khayyam believed
his approach to be an improvement on that of his predecessor Ibn
al-Haytham because his method does not rely on the concept of motion,
which should be excluded from geometry. Apparently Naṣīr
al-Dīn al-Ṭūsī agreed, since he followed
Khayyam’s path a century or two later.
Book II of Explanation of the Difficulties in the Postulates of
Euclid takes up the question of the proper definition of
ratio. This is an obscure topic to the modern reader, but it was
fundamental to Greek and medieval mathematics. If the quantities
joined in a ratio are whole numbers, then the definition of their
ratio poses no difficulty. If the quantities are geometric magnitudes,
the situation is more complex because the two line segments might be
incommensurable (in modern terms, their ratio corresponds to an
irrational number). Euclid, following Eudoxus, asserts
that A/B = C/D when, for
any magnitudes x and y, the magnitudes xA
and xC are both (i) greater than, (ii) equal to, or (iii)
less than, the magnitudes yB and yD
respectively. There is little wonder that Khayyam and others were
unhappy with this definition, for while it is clearly true, it does
not get at the heart of what it means for ratios to be equal.
An alternate approach, which may have existed in ancient Greece but is
only known for certain to have existed from the 9th century
CE, is the “anthyphairetic” definition (Hogendijk 2002
). The Euclidean algorithm is an iterative process that is used to
find the greatest common divisor of a pair of numbers. It may be
applied equally well to find the greatest common measure of two
geometric magnitudes, but the algorithm will never terminate if the
ratio between the two magnitudes is irrational. A sequence of
divisions within the algorithm results in a “continued
fraction” that corresponds to the ratio between the original two
quantities. Khayyam, following several earlier Islamic mathematicians,
defines the equality of A/B and
C/D according to whether their continued fractions are equal.
One may wonder why the proponents of the anthyphairetic definition
felt that it was more natural than Euclid’s approach. There is no
doubt, however, that it was preferred; Khayyam even refers to the
anthyphairetic definition as the “true” nature of
proportionality. Part of the explanation might be simply that the
Euclidean algorithm applied to geometric quantities was much more
familiar to medieval mathematicians than to us. It has also been
suggested that Khayyam’s preference is due to the fact that
the anthyphairetic definition allows a ratio to be considered on its
own, rather than always in equality to some other ratio.
Khayyam’s achievement in this topic was not to invent a new
definition, but rather to demonstrate that each of the existing
definitions logically implies the other. Thus Islamic mathematicians
could continue to use ratio theorems from the Elements without having
to prove them again according to the anthyphairetic definition.
Book III continues the discussion of ratios; Khayyam sets
himself the task of demonstrating the seemingly innocuous proposition
A/C = (A/B) (B/C),
a fact which is used in the Elements but never proved. During this
process he sets an arbitrary fixed magnitude to serve as a unit, to
which he relates all other magnitudes of the same kind. This allows
Khayyam to incorporate both numbers and geometric magnitudes
within the same system. Thus Khayyam thinks of irrational
magnitudes as numbers themselves, which effectively defines the set of
“real numbers” that we take for granted today. This step
was one of the most significant changes of conception to occur between
ancient Greek and modern mathematics.
We know that Khayyam wrote a treatise, now lost, called
Problems of Arithmetic involving the determination of n-th roots
(Youschkevitch and Rosenfeld 1973 ). In his Algebra Khayyam
writes that methods for calculating square and cube roots come from
India, and that he has extended them to the determination of roots of
any order. Even more interestingly, he says that he has demonstrated
the validity of his methods using proofs that “are purely
arithmetic, founded on the arithmetic of the Elements.” If both
of these statements are true, then it is hard to avoid the conclusion
that Khayyam had within his power the binomial theorem 
(a + b)n = an + nan−1b + … + bn, which would be the earliest appearance of
this important result in medieval Islam.
Khayyam moved to Isfahan in 1074 to help establish a new
observatory under the patronage of Malikshah, the Seljuk sultan, and
his vizier, Nizam al-Mulk. There is little doubt that
Khayyam played a major role in the creation of the Malikī
calendar, the observatory’s most significant project. In addition
to the calendar, the Isfahan observatory produced the Zīj
Malikshah (of which only a fragment of its star catalogue survives); it
seems to have been one of the more important astronomical
handbooks.
Several treatises on other scientific topics are also attributed to
Khayyam: a work on music theory that uses ratios to deal with
musical intervals, another on weights and balances, and another on a
mathematical problem in metallurgy. All of his texts seem to have been
taken seriously.
The earliest extant translation of
the Rubā‘iyyāt was produced by Thomas Hyde in
the 1760s when his translation of a single quatrain appeared in
the Veterum Persarum et Parthorum et Medorum Religionis. It
was not until the 19th century, however, that the Western
world and literary circles discovered Umar Khayyam in all his
richness.
The voyage of the Rubā‘iyyāt to the West
began when Sir Gore Ouseley, the British ambassador to Iran, presented
his collection to the Bodleian Library at Oxford University upon his
return to England. In the 1840s Professor Edward Byles Cowell of
Oxford University discovered a copy of the Ruba‘iyyat
of Khayyam and translated several of
the Rubā‘iyyāt. Amazed by their profundity,
he shared them with Edward FitzGerald, who took an immediate interest
and published the first edition of his own translation in 1859. Four
versions of FitzGerald’s
Rubā‘iyyāt were published over his lifetime as new
quatrains were discovered. Realizing the free nature of his work in his
first translation, FitzGerald chose the word rendered to appear on the
title page in later editions instead of
“translation” (Lange 1968). 
While the connection between the Pre-Raphaelites and Umar
Khayyam should not be exaggerated, the relationship that Algernon
Charles Swinburne, George Meredith, and Dante G. Rossetti shared with
Edward FitzGerald and their mutual admiration of Khayyam cannot be
ignored. The salient themes of the Rubā‘iyyāt became
popular among the Pre-Raphaelites and their circle (Lange 1968).
Khayyam’s popularity led to the formation of the “Omar
Khayyām Club of London” (Conway 1893, 305) in 1892, which
attracted a number of literary figures and intellectuals. The success
of the Club soon led to the simultaneous formation of the Omar
Khayyām Clubs of Germany and America.
In America, Umar Khayyam was well received in the New England area
where his poetry was propagated by the official members of the Omar
Khayyām Club of America. The academic community discovered
Khayyam’s mathematical writings and poetry in the 1880s, when his
scholarly articles and translations of his works were published. Some,
such as William Edward Story, praised Umar as a mathematician and
compared his views with those of Johannes Kepler, Gottfried Wilhelm
Leibniz, and Isaac Newton, while others drew their inspiration from
his literary tradition and called themselves “Umarians.”
This new literary movement soon attracted such figures as Mark Twain,
who composed forty-five burlesque versions of FitzGerald’s quatrains
and integrated them with two of FitzGerald’s stanzas
entitled AGE-A Ruba‘iyat (Twain, 1983, 14). The
movement also drew the attention of T.S. Eliot’s grandfather William
Greenleaf Eliot (1811–1887), two of T.S. Eliot’s cousins, and
T.S. Eliot himself. Umar Khayyam’s Rubā‘iyyāt
seems to have elicited two distinct responses among many of his
followers in general and the Eliot family in particular: admiration
for a rational theology on the one hand, and concern with the rise of
skepticism and moral decay in America on the other.
Among other figures influenced by
the Rubā‘iyyāt of Umar Khayyam were certain
members of the New England School of Transcendentalism, including
Henry Wadsworth Longfellow, Ralph Waldo Emerson, and Henry David
Thoreau (Aminrazavi 2013; for a complete discussion on Umar Khayyam in
the West see Aminrazavi 2007, 204–278).
In the foregoing discussion, we have seen that Umar Khayyam
was a philosopher-sage (ḥakīm) and a spiritual-pragmatist
whose Rubā‘iyyāt should be seen as a philosophical
commentary on the human condition. The salient features of Umar
Khayyam’s pioneering work in various branches of mathematics
were also discussed. Khayyam’s mathematical genius not
only produced the most accurate calendar to date, but the issues he
treated remained pertinent up until the modern period.
For Khayyam, there are two discourses, each of which pertains
to one dimension of human existence: philosophical and poetic.
Philosophically, Khayyam was the last Peripatetic in the Persian
speaking world before philosophical thinking eclipsed the Eastern part
of the Islamic world for several centuries. Khayyam defended
rationalism against the rise of orthodoxy and made an attempt to revive
the spirit of rationalism which was so prevalent in the first four
centuries in Islam. Poetically, Khayyam represents a voice of
protest against what he regards to be a fundamentally unjust world.
Many people found in him a voice they needed to hear, and
centuries after he had died his works became a venue for those who were
experiencing the same trials and tribulations as Khayyam had.