Over the course of his career, Du Bois’s social philosophy
comprised contributions to social ontology, social theory, the
philosophy of the human and social sciences, and the diagnosis of
social
 problems.[1]
His analysis
of the nature of a social problem and, specifically, his diagnosis of
the Negro problem; his social constructionist accounts of race and
racial differences; his ongoing reflection on the methods, purposes,
and sometimes moral significance of social inquiry; and his elaboration
of the claim that the concept of race, operating as a mechanism of
power, structures relations of social domination, all played a critical
role in what he ultimately came to call his “evolving program for
Negro freedom” (1944, 31). The present section bears on Du
Bois’s analysis of the Negro problem and his contributions to the
philosophy of race. Section 3, below, focuses on his
contributions to the philosophy of the social sciences.
Du Bois considers the Negro Problem both objectively and
subjectively—both from the standpoint of science and from the
standpoint of lived experience.
In “The Study of the Negro Problems” (1898), one of his
earliest publications, Du Bois responded to then contemporary
discussions of America’s “Negro problem” by
conceptualizing the problem as an object of social scientific
inquiry. Sociology studies social phenomena, and the social
phenomena that interest Du Bois are the cluster of social problems
affecting American Negroes (the Negro is not a problem, in his view,
although problems affect the Negro [see Gordon, 2000]). In the
perspective of sociology, the Negro problem just is a cluster
of social problems (1898,
 77–78).[2] 
But what is a social
 problem?[3] 
Du Bois answers this question by defining a social problem as
“the failure of an organized social group to realize its group
ideals, through the inability to adapt a certain desired line of action
to given conditions of life” (1898, 78). One example is the
failure to enact the ideal of a luxurious home life due to prevailing
marriage customs. Another is the failure to enact the ideal of
economic and social development due to crime and lawlessness. 
The historical evolution of the social problems that Du Bois
identifies as Negro problems has been a “baffling adjustment of
action and condition which is the essence of progress”
(1898,
 82).[4] 
Turning to the
present, Du Bois characterizes the then current (circa 1898) Negro
problems as so many failures to enact the ideal of incorporating the
Negro masses into the group life of the American people. Du Bois
attributes these failures to two causes: white racial prejudice towards
Negroes and Negro cultural backwardness. Racial prejudice is the
conviction “that people of Negro blood should not be admitted
into the group life of the nation no matter what their condition may
be” (1898, 82). Cultural backwardness is economic
disadvantage, ignorance, and deficiency with regard to the art of
organized social life. Each of these causes accounts for one of
two distinct classes of Negro problems (1898,
 82–3).[5]
Du Bois’s social ontology and causal explanation of Negro
problems lay the basis for his research agenda. The study of the
Negro as a social group focuses on Negro problems that have
arisen independently of racial prejudice in the Negro’s social
environment. In turn, the study of the Negro’s social
environment considers Negro problems that have resulted from
racial prejudice. Du Bois’s program for studying the Negro
as a social group includes historical study, statistical investigation,
anthropological measurement, and sociological
 interpretation.[6]
In Du Bois’s view, the Negro Problem is a subjectively lived
and felt social condition, not only an object of social scientific
inquiry. In “Strivings of the Negro People” (1897b)
and The Souls of Black Folk (1903a), Du Bois adduces the
concept of double-consciousness to characterize the subjectively lived
and felt experience of the Negro problem. Ascribing double
consciousness specifically to the Negro, Du Bois characterizes it as a
“sense of always looking at oneself through the eyes of others,
of measuring one’s soul by the tape of a world that looks on in
amused contempt and pity” (1903a, 3). In Du Bois’s
view, double-consciousness obtains when blacks see themselves through
the pitying and contemptuous eyes of the racially prejudiced whites
whose racial prejudice is one of the causes of the Negro problem.
The concept of double-consciousness is the most extensively
discussed concept in the humanities and social sciences secondary
literature on Du Bois, and it has received substantial attention from
philosophers. The present, brief discussion of the concept is
intended simply to situate it within the larger context of Du
Bois’s social philosophy. For a more detailed account of Du
Bois’s understanding of double consciousness and a survey of
contemporary philosophical disputes about the content and significance
of the concept, see the entry on
 double consciousness.
In “The Study of the Negro Problems,” Du Bois predicates
his analysis of Negro problems on his analysis of social problems
as such; in another early essay, “The Conservation of
Races” (1897a), he similarly predicates his answer to the
question, “What is a Negro?” on an answer to a more
fundamental question, “What is a race?” Du Bois turns
to the human sciences to say what a race is, but also to account for
the existence of spiritually distinct races. Du Bois’s
historical-sociological definition of race overlaps his
historical-sociological explanation of the existence of
spiritually distinct races. To put the point more precisely, and
in an idiom that is familiar to contemporary philosophers, Du Bois
holds that the same sorts of historical and social factors construct
race both constitutively and
 causally.[7]
We begin by analyzing Du Bois’s explanation of the
distinctiveness of distinct races. We then turn to his definition
of race, which he introduces to counter the objection that, because
spiritually distinct races cannot be identified as races from
the perspective of the natural sciences, they cannot be identified as
races at all. After considering contemporary philosophers’
ongoing debates about Du Bois’s definition of race in
“Conservation,” we turn to Du Bois’s later treatments
of race and the notion of whiteness in Dusk of Dawn (1940),
Black Reconstruction (1935), and “The Souls of White
Folk” (in Darkwater (1920)).
In explaining and defining race, Du Bois participates in a
turn-of-the-century conversation in German philosophy about the
subjects and methods that distinguish the human from the natural
sciences—that is, the Geisteswissenschaften from the
Naturwissenschaften. Responding to Auguste Comte’s
and J.S. Mill’s efforts to reform the human sciences on the model
of the natural sciences, German scholars addressed a variety of
questions as to the human sciences’ cognitive aims, possible
methodological autonomy, and dependence on psychology. When Du
Bois arrived in Berlin in 1892, the conversation was well underway and
had already benefitted from the significant contributions of Wilhelm
Dilthey and Wilhelm Wundt several years earlier. During the 1890s there
were further contributions, in particular the writings of Georg Simmel,
Wilhelm Windelband, and Heinrich Rickert. Although Du Bois
initially presented “The Conservation of Races” as an
address to the American Negro Academy, the essay was a significant
addition to the German debate, for it marks Du Bois’s turn from
the Naturwissenschaften to the Geisteswissenschaften
to explain the differences between races and to conceptualize
racial
 identities.[8]
Although Du Bois’s essay acknowledges, as the “final
word of science, so far,” that physical differences distinguish
“at least two, perhaps three, great families of human
beings—the whites and Negroes, possibly the yellow race”
(1897a, 52), it more importantly maintains that that there exist eight,
spiritually distinct races. It also maintains that each
spiritually distinct race, as such, is causally constructed by
historical and social factors, for it asserts that each spiritually
distinct race causally owes its spiritual distinctiveness (its peculiar
message, which dictates its particular historical role) to such
factors—specifically, to the common histories, laws, religions,
habits of thought, and conscious strivings that have caused it to be
the cohesive, spiritually distinct race it is (1897, 54–56).
Du Bois also holds that the spiritual distinctiveness of a
socio-historical race cannot be explained in terms of physical,
biological facts. Like Wilhelm Dilthey, whose Introduction to
the Human Sciences (1883) had appeared a decade before Du Bois
heard him lecture in Berlin, he expressly questions the possibility of
causal explanations that reduce spiritual facts and differences to
biological facts and
 differences.[9] 
Thus, Du Bois rejects
the physio-biological reductionism characteristic of nineteenth century
racial science: the thesis that physical racial differences causally
explain the spiritual and cultural differences between racial
groups. Spiritual differences have historical and social causes
(law, religion, and so on), which Du Bois takes to be causally
independent of biological racial facts (1897a,
 54–55).[10]
Having sketched a preliminary account of the “subtle
forces” that have causally divided human beings into spiritually
distinct races, Du Bois writes that, while these races “perhaps
transcend scientific definition, nevertheless, [they] are clearly
defined to the eye of the Historian and Sociologist” (1897a,
53). 
That spiritually distinct groups may not be readily identified as
races if one adopts the perspective of the natural sciences does not
entail that they cannot be identified as races at all. Reminiscent of
Dilthey, again, Du Bois holds that the natural sciences and the human
sciences have distinct subject matters (physical facts, on the one
hand, spiritual facts on the other), and suggests that the former,
because they conceptualize human beings exclusively in physical terms,
cannot conceptualize them in terms of social and historical facts, and
thus cannot conceptualize them in terms of the social and historical
facts that define spiritually distinct groups as races (Du Bois’s
reason for claiming that social and historical facts “transcend
scientific definition”). If, however, one adopts the
perspective of the human sciences; if, in other words, one adopts the
conceptual “eyes” of the historian and the sociologist,
then one sees these social and historical facts standing “clearly
defined” to one’s point of view. From this point of
view, Du Bois proposes, it is possible to identify spiritually distinct
 races as races,[11]
and
thus to state a definition of race—or, in other words, to specify
the historical and social factors that constitute a group of human
beings as a race.
Here, Du Bois’s distinguishes between the factors that
generally (usually) characterize a race and the factors that must
always characterize a race; that is, the factors that
constitute a group of people as a race. Du Bois’s
definition proposes that a group of human beings counts as a
spiritually distinct race if, and only if, the members of the group
have a common history, common traditions and impulses, and common
(voluntary and involuntary) strivings; counting as members of a
spiritually distinct race does not require a common blood or a common
language, however, although the members of a spiritually distinct race
may indeed speak the same language or have the same blood coursing
through their veins (see Lott, 1992–93; Gooding-Williams, 1996 and 2009;
and Sundstrom, 2003). Du Bois’s definition asserts that
each spiritually distinct race is, as such, constitutively
constructed by the historical and social factors the definition
specifies as making a race a race.
It has not escaped notice that the list of historical and social
factors that Du Bois identifies as causally constructing (as
explaining) the existence and cohesiveness of spiritually distinct
races—common histories, laws, religions, habits of thought, and
conscious strivings—echoes the list of factors he identifies as
constitutively constructing (as defining) a group of human beings as a
spiritually distinct race—common history, traditions, impulses,
and strivings (see Gooding-Williams, 2009, 51). To be sure, the
lists are not identical. Still, we can reasonably assume that Du
Bois means them to capture the same content, supposing that the
traditions and impulses indicated in the second list include legal and
religious traditions as well as persistent habits of thought. Du
Bois holds not only that historical and social factors constitutively
and causally construct spiritually distinct races, but, likewise, that
the same kinds of historical and social factors constitutively
and causally construct spiritually distinct races.
What, then, is a Negro? To be a Negro, Du Bois replies, is 1)
to be a member of one of three biologically distinct races, and 2) to
be a member of one of eight constitutively and causally constructed
spiritually distinct races. The Negro is spiritually
distinguished from other spiritually distinct races by its distinctive
message, the content of which, Du Bois argues, is not yet fully
articulated (1897, 55–56).
Contemporary philosophers have devoted considerable attention to Du
Bois’s explanation and definition of race in “The
Conservation of Races;” indeed, they have given more attention to
Du Bois’s definition than to his treatment of any other
philosophical issue. Nearly all that attention can be traced to
Kwame Anthony Appiah’s engagement with Du Bois in “The
Uncompleted Argument: Du Bois and the Illusion of Race” (Appiah,
1985), an expanded version of which Appiah published as the second
chapter (“Illusions of Race”) of In My Father’s
House (Appiah, 1992).
Appiah’s critique of Du Bois (see Appiah, 1985 and
Appiah,
 1992[12])
argues for three, key
claims: 1) that Du Bois’s definition of race fails to state
criteria that serve to individuate his eight, spiritually distinct
races; 2) that, notwithstanding Du Bois’s intention to
conceptualize race in socio-historical terms, the criteria he in fact
uses to individuate spiritually distinct races comprise a physical,
biological component—specifically, the idea of a common ancestry;
and 3) that, notwithstanding his ongoing,
post-“Conservation” efforts to substitute “a
sociohistorical conception of race for the biological one,” the
logic of his argument “leads naturally to the final repudiation
of race as a term of difference” (Appiah, 1985, 34–35). 
Appiah endorses this conclusion, stating that “[t]he truth is
that there are no races,” and that “the notion [of race]
that Du Bois required, and that underlies the most hateful racisms of
the modern era, refers to nothing in the world at all” (Appiah,
1992, 45).
For the most part, philosophical criticism of Appiah’s reading
of Du Bois has targeted his analysis of Du Bois’s definition and
his antirealism about race. In an early response to Appiah,
Lucius Outlaw (1996, 28) argues that Du Bois’s definition of race
is the articulation of a cluster concept, and not, as Appiah presumes,
the statement of a set of conditions individually necessary and jointly
sufficient to constitute a group of people as a
 race.[13] 
In addition, Outlaw (1996, 21–22, 28)
defends, and attributes to Du Bois, a version of racial realism,
according to which biological ancestry and physical characteristics
play a role in defining race.
Other critics of Appiah’s reading of Du Bois have been less
inclined than Outlaw to defend or to attribute to Du Bois a definition
of race involving biological characteristics; rather they have tended
to argue that, Appiah’s arguments to the contrary, Du Bois
succeeded in advancing a plausible, non-biological, socio-historical
definition of race. Paul Taylor (2000), for example, takes issue
with Appiah’s claim that Du Bois’s appeal to “common
history” as a criterion of individuation is circular, arguing
that Appiah misconstrues Du Bois’s understanding of what it means
for two individuals to have a history in
 common.[14] 
Ronald Sundstrom (2003) also defends Du
Bois’s socio-historical definition, arguing that, on a
metaphysical pluralist reading, it can do the work of individuation
that Appiah says it cannot do. For Taylor and Sundstrom, Du Bois
was a racial realist who cogently defended the thesis that race is a
social kind.
More recently, Chike Jeffers and Robert Bernasconi have productively
re-oriented the philosophical discussion of “Conservation”
away from debates stemming from Appiah’s interpretation of
the
 essay.[15] 
On
Bernasconi’s account, these debates have tended to anachronism,
and so tended to overlook the context-specific intentions animating Du
Bois’s essay. In Jeffers’s view, the Appiah-inspired
debates have missed a key distinction shaping Du Bois’s social
constructionism. 
According to Bernasconi, recent philosophical discussions of Du
Bois’s explanation and definition of race “have tended to
distort its meaning by imposing an alien question on it” (2009,
519). Rather than read “The Conservation of Races” in
light of contemporary arguments about racial eliminativism (about
whether, in Appiah’s words, race should be repudiated as a term
of difference) and the proper referent of the concept of race,
Bernasconi places Du Bois’s essay in its immediate political and
historical setting. Specifically, he emphasizes Du Bois’s
engagements with the thought of Edward Wilmot Blyden, Alexander
Crummell and Frederick Douglass and argues that the intended point of
the essay was “to give hope to blacks at a time when scientists
were questioning their future on the basis of suspicions about the
impact of race mixing on their capacity to survive the struggle for
existence” (2009,
 536).[16] 
With Bernasconi’s intervention, debate
about Du Bois’s 1897 essay has turned to the metaphilosophical
question of the relative value of anachronistic (presentist) and
antiquarian (historicist) approaches to the study of the history of
African American philosophy (see, e.g., Taylor, 2013 and
Gooding-Williams, 2017).
According to Jeffers (2013), the Appiah-inspired discussion of Du
Bois has ignored the distinction Du Bois draws between political and
cultural versions of the thesis that race is
constitutively
 constructed.[17]
The political
version of the thesis, which Du Bois rejects, Jeffers argues, holds
that “‘racialized subordination’…constitutes
its [race’s] very existence” (2013,
 413).[18] 
The cultural version, which Du Bois
endorses, Jeffers argues, holds that the cultural factors mentioned in
Du Bois’s definition (traditions, ideals of life, and so on)
constitutively construct races as “distinct
cultures” (2013, 411). Jeffers describes the cultural
version of socio-historical constructionism that he attributes to Du
Bois as Du Bois’s “cultural theory of
 race.”[19]
Jeffers advances criticisms of Du Bois’s definition of race
and, unlike most other philosopher commentators, of his causal
explanation of the existence of spiritually and culturally distinct
races. Regarding the latter, he questions the reliability of Du
Bois’s general, historical account of the genesis of the social
factors to which Du Bois attributes the existence of these races
(Jeffers, 2013, 417). Regarding the former, he adduces an
important conceptual point: namely, that Du Bois neglects to justify
the assumption that the historical and social facts that define and
distinguish the spiritually distinct groups that the historian and the
sociologist identify as races should be thought to constitute
(constitutively to construct) those groups as races.
 Perhaps they serve simply to constitute them as cultural
entities, or, as Du Bois himself sometimes writes, as nations (Jeffers,
2013, 416). Absent that assumption, neither the historian nor the
sociologist is entitled to identify the clearly defined, spiritually
distinct groups he or she observes as races. And, absent
that assumption, Du Bois is hardly entitled to present the definition
that he bases on what the historian and the sociologist observe as
answering the question, “What, then, is a
 race?”[20]
Notwithstanding his criticisms of Du Bois, Jeffers, following Outlaw
(1996), endorses and defends Du Bois’s “strong commitment
to the preservation and cultivation of black cultural difference”
(Jeffers, 2013,
 419).[21] 
Jeffers has also shown that Du Bois maintains that commitment
throughout his intellectual career (Jeffers, 2017).
Philosophers interested in Du Bois’s thinking about race in
writings he essayed after the publication of “The Conservation of
Races” have tended to focus on Dusk of Dawn
(1940). In this connection, both Paul Taylor (2000, 2004a, 2004b,
and 2014) and Robert Gooding-Williams (2014) have elaborated detailed
accounts of the notion of race that Du Bois sketches in the book he
subtitled “An Essay Toward an Autobiography of a Race
Concept.” In a related vein, Joel Olson (2004), Shannon
Sullivan (2006), and Terrance Macmullen (2009) have examined Du
Bois’s conceptualization of whiteness, giving particular
attention to Dusk of Dawn but also to Du Bois’s earlier
works. Olson reads Dusk of Dawn as advancing an argument
Du Bois initiates in Black Reconstruction (1935). 
Sullivan and Macmullen read it as advancing an argument Du Bois
initiates in “The Souls of White Folk” (see
Darkwater (1920)).
In chapter 6 of Dusk of Dawn, entitled “The White
World,” Du Bois imagines a dialogue between himself and a
fictional interlocutor, Roger Van Dieman. Near the conclusion of
the exchange, Du Bois says that “[r]ace is a cultural, sometimes
an historical fact,” to which Van Dieman responds “But what
is this group [the black race] and how do you differentiate it”
(1940, 77). Du Bois rejoins his interlocutor, remarking that he
recognizes “it [the black race] quite easily and with full legal
sanction; the black man is a person who must ride Jim Crow in
Georgia” (1940, 77).
Here, Du Bois seems to reject biological concepts of race, and while
he asserts that race is a cultural and sometimes an historical fact,
his reference to the Jim Crow car suggests that he is no longer
conceptualizing the Negro or any race as a group united by a distinct
spiritual message. But if the cultural and sometimes historical
fact of race is neither a biological nor a spiritual fact, what sort of
fact is it?
On Taylor’s account, Du Bois means to answer this question by
proposing that race is an institutional fact. Following
John Searle (1995), Taylor understands institutional facts, like
marriage and money, to be ontologically subjective and
epistemologically objective (2000, 110; 2004a, 109; 2004b, 91). 
Realizing that “collective intentionality can bring certain facts
into being” (2000, 110), Taylor’s Du Bois, like Searle,
understood race to be constitutively constituted by human mental
states
 (2004, 109).[22]
Gooding-Williams interprets Dusk of Dawn as defending a
genealogical concept of race. Taking Du Bois’s subtitle as
indicative of his larger philosophical aims, he argues that Du
Bois’s essay toward the autobiography of a race concept is a mode
of conceptual analysis that historicizes the concept of race. Due
to the affinity of Du Bois’s philosophical strategy to Friedrich
Nietzsche’s approach to the analysis of concepts,
Gooding-Williams describes that strategy as
“genealogical.”
Nietzsche thought that making sense of the concept of punishment
must be a matter of unpacking the dense, synthesis of meanings
(purposes, functions) that, over time, have been willfully interpreted
into and forcibly imposed on specific procedures for inflicting harm
(Nietzsche, 1998, 50–54). More generally, he understood that conceptual
analysis can take the form of genealogy—that is, of historical
inquiry that separates the distinct meanings that have been joined
together and even conflated through episode after episode of
reinterpreting one and the same, more or less stable set of phenomena
(procedures, complexes of habits, feeling, ways of perceiving, and
so
 forth).[23] 
In sum,
Nietzsche held that historically formed concepts, like our notion of
punishment, “are like ropes held together by the intertwining of
strands, rather than by a single strand running through the whole
thing” (Clark, 1994, 22). To analyze such concepts, he argued,
“is not to find necessary and sufficient conditions for their use
but to disentangle the various strands that have become so tightly
woven together by the process of historical development that they seem
inseparable” (Clark, 1994, 22)
On Gooding-Williams’s account, Du Bois 1) treats differences
in the color of men as the more or less stable set of phenomena
undergirding the concept of race, and 2) characterizes the concept of
race as an intricate web of manifold and often conflicting
interpretations of those differences formed over the course of his
lifetime. Autobiography, a narrative form of historical inquiry, is the
vehicle through which Du Bois genealogically analyzes that web of
interpretations, for to reconstruct the story of his life is, in his
view, to disentangle these interpretations, one from the other, in
order to show that and how they have been exemplified in his life
(Gooding-Williams, 2014,
 166–167).[24]
Thus, Du Bois worries that what he has called a “race
concept” is not, strictly speaking, a concept, for he sees that
it is not the sort of concept that can be defined by specifying a set
of non-contradictory and hence logically coherent conditions for its
proper application. Contradiction can inhabit the race concept,
because Du Bois, like Nietzsche, allows that historically formed
concepts may comprise discordant interpretations of the meaning of one
and the same set of phenomena. The race concept is
“illogical,” but is not for that reason without the
efficacy characteristic of “forces,” “facts,”
and “tendencies” (Du Bois, 1940, 67). Indeed, the
efficacy of the concept is such that, internal inconsistencies
notwithstanding, it has dominated Du Bois’s life. Du
Bois’s exemplification of the race concept is his subjection to
it. Reminiscent, again, of Nietzsche, he holds that historically
formed concepts can function as mechanisms of power and control
(Gooding-Williams, 2014,
 167).[25]
According to Joel Olson (2004), Du Bois’s understanding of
whiteness belongs to the political theory of race he begins to sketch
in Black Reconstruction. Specifically, Du Bois
conceptualizes whiteness as a privileged position of social standing
that has 1) afforded white workers a public and psychological wage
compensating them for their low economic wages; and 2) formed the basis
of a cross-class, political alliance uniting white workers and
capitalists against black workers (black slaves included). More
generally, he maintains that whiteness has historically functioned as a
mechanism of power for recruiting white workers to police and reinforce
the economic exploitation of black workers. On Olson’s
account, Du Bois explains the “splendid failure” of
Reconstruction and the genesis of the American racial order through his
analysis of the cross-class political alliance of white workers and
capitalists (Olson, 16, 30).
In Dusk of Dawn, Du Bois further develops his understanding
of whiteness by interpreting racial oppression as, in Olson’s
words, “a political problem of dark and white worlds arrayed
against each other, with the white world determined to subordinate the
dark one” (Olson, 22). Placing the conceptual opposition
between white and dark (or non-white) worlds at the center of his
analysis, Du Bois especially emphasizes the role whiteness plays in
legitimizing the “domination of white Europe over black Africa
and yellow Asia” (Du Bois, 1940, 48; see, also, Du Bois, 1940,
85–87; and Olson 26, 155, fn.60).
“The Souls of White Folk” can be read as Du Bois’s
central contribution to the moral psychology of white supremacy; that
is, as his account of the affective, motivational, and cognitive
dispositions that constitute white supremacism as a morally vicious
character trait—including, e.g., the dispositions passionately to
hate black folk; to slander and murder black folk; and to believe that
white folk are inherently better than black
 folk.[26] 
In “The White World”
chapter of Dusk of Dawn, Du Bois complicates this earlier
psychological portrait of the white supremacist, stressing the deeply
ingrained persistence of her or his racist behavior. Du Bois
argues, for example, that “the present attitude and action of the
white world…is a matter of conditioned reflexes; of long
followed habits, customs and folkways; of subconscious trains of
reasoning and unconscious nervous reflexes” (Du Bois, 1940,
87). Productively building on Du Bois’s moral psychology,
Shannon Sullivan (2006) and Terrance Macmullen (2009) have recently
brought Du Bois into conversation with John Dewey to develop
pragmatist, habit-centered accounts of the workings of white
privilege.
In “A Program for a Sociological Society” (ca. 1897), an
early essay belonging to the same period as “The Study of the
Negro Problems” and “The Conservation of Races,” Du
Bois places the emergence of the science of sociology in historical
perspective. Prior to the industrial revolution, he argues, there
was but one science that studied the phenomenon of human action:
namely, political economy. Political economy focused on the
production, distribution, and exchange of goods under stable social
conditions, but gave no attention to the intensification of problems of
crime, disease, poverty, prostitution, and ignorance that came with
“the new concentration of industrys [sic], crowded into centers
of population.” Sociology addresses these problems,
demanding a “wider inquiry into the causes and scope of human
action.” More generally, “[s]ociology is…the name
given to that vast field of inquiry into human action as manifested in
modern organized life.”
But what is the point of sociological inquiry—that is, of a
sociological science of human action? Du Bois distinguishes
between the immediate and the mediate aims of scientific inquiry; that
is, between the aims of science itself and the uses of scientific
results by “merchants, physicians, men of letters, and
philanthropists”—indeed, by “all men” (Du Bois
1897, 89; see also Du Bois, ca.1897, 1–10). For Du Bois, the
immediate aim of science is knowledge; the mediate aims may vary, but
social reform is the mediate aim upon which Du Bois focuses throughout
his career (see Green and Driver, 312–313; Lewis, 1993, 225–26; Reed,
47; and, especially, Bright, 5–7). But how can scientific
knowledge advance social reform? Du Bois sketches at least three
distinct answers to this question, each of which corresponds to a
different conception of the object of social
scientific
 knowledge.[27] 
Knowledge
of social laws and regularities can help the reformer to settle on
effective plans of action; knowledge of the scope and limits of chance
can help her to hedge her bets—that is, to guard against the
possibility that her plans of action will fail; finally, knowledge of
moral facts can help the reformer to caution her fellow citizens
against the disaster and sorrow that await them should they persist in
an immoral course of action.
In an early statement (Du Bois, ca. 1897), Du Bois maintains that the
organization of modern society is a function of social laws and
regularities that sociology identifies through detailed, statistical
research that “generalizes[s]” a “mass of
facts,” showing how various social phenomena, including, e.g.,
the “degree of poverty, the prevalence of suicide, [and] the
extent and kinds of crime,” tend “to a certain rhythm and
regularity which we call the social group” (ca. 1897,
4). Knowledge of these social rhythms, regularities and, sometimes,
laws (sociology studies “human action which by its regularity
gives evidence of the presence of laws”) is the “first
step” in modern social reform (ca. 1897, 3, 8). Such knowledge
can contribute to social reform, Du Bois’s examples suggest, for
it enables the reformer to explain causally the conditions she wishes
to transform and rationally to chart plans to alter those conditions:
e.g., the death rate of children in the slums, the treatment of
prisoners, and pauperism (ca. 1897,
9–11).[28] Such knowledge, presumably, empowers Du Bois
in his capacity as a social reformer to explain the existence of the
Negro problem and rationally to identify means to eradicate the Negro
problem (see 2.1 above and 4.1.1 below).
In “Sociology Hesitant” (ca. 1905), perhaps his most
theoretically rich contribution to the philosophy of the human
sciences, Du Bois takes issue with Comte’s and Spencer’s
collectivist
 holism[29]—the
thesis that society is a concrete whole
(for Du Bois, a “mystical whole”) formed of discrete
units—and he again defends the view that society comprises the
“deeds of men,” as well as the “law, rule, and
rythm” [sic] governing those deeds (ca. 1905, 274). For Du
Bois, sociology is the science of human action, not the science of
society as such, or the science of society as a whole.
Why, Du Bois asks, did Comte “hesitate so strangely”
before the prospect of treating human action as the proper object of
sociological inquiry? The answer, Du Bois claims, is the
“Great Assumption…that in the deeds of men there lies
along with rhythm and rule…something
incalculable”—an assumption in light of which the prospect
of launching a science that “would discover and formulate the
exact laws of human action…seemed to be and was preposterous”
(ca. 1905, 274). Comte wavered before what Du Bois calls
“Paradox:” on one hand, “The evident rhythm of human
action;” on the other, “The evident incalculability of
human action” (ca. 1905, 275). Where Comte wavers, however,
Du Bois sallies forth, writing “[w]hy not…flatly face the
Paradox? frankly state the Hypothesis of Law and the Assumption of
Chance and seek to determine by study and measurement the limits of
each” (ca. 1905, 276).
Human conduct is subject to the “primary” rhythms of
physical law, as well as to the “secondary” rhythms of
social regularities; social regularities exhibit “nearly”
the same uniformity as physical law, and they are also “liable to
stoppage and change” (ca. 1905, 278). Aspiring to unite the
Geisteswissenschaften and the
Naturwissenschaften—“the science of man and
physical science”—Du Bois characterizes sociology as
“assuming the data of physics and studying within these that
realm where determinate force is acted on by human wills, by
indeterminate force” (ca. 1905, 277–278).
Physical laws and social regularities alike limit the scope of
chance, which is to say that they limit the scope of
“indeterminate” force, or “undetermined”
choice, or, as Du Bois likewise puts the point, of “free”
and “inexplicable” will (ca. 1905, 276–278). In
presupposing chance, sociology presupposes free will. 
Sociology’s attempt to measure chance and free will is its
attempt to measure the degree to which physical and social regularities
limit and constrain the range of choice and action that is
“undetermined by and independent of actions gone
before”(ca. 1905, 278).
Some forty years after Du Bois wrote “Sociology
Hesitant,” he appears to allude to the earlier, then unpublished
essay; indeed, he reflects at length on the argument of the essay,
suggesting that it marked the beginning of a shift in his “whole
attitude towards the social sciences” (1944, 56):
Then, too, for what Law was I searching? In accord with what
unchangeable scientific law was the world of interracial discord around
me working? I fell back upon my Royce and James and deserted
Schmoller and Weber. I saw the action of physical law in the
actions of men; but I saw more than that: I saw rhythms and tendencies;
coincidence and probabilities; and I saw that, which for want of
another word, I must in accord with strict tenets of Science, call
Chance. I went forward to build a sociology, which I conceived as
the attempt to measure the element of Chance in human conduct. 
This was the Jamesian pragmatism, applied not simply to ethics, but to
all human action, beyond what seemed to me, increasingly, the distinct
limits of physical law.
My work assumed from now on a certain tingling challenge of risk; what
the “Captain of Industry” of that day was experiencing in
“kick,” from money changing, railway consolidation and
corporation floating, I was, in what appeared to me on a large scale,
essaying in the relations of men of daily life (1944,
 57–58).[30]
Du Bois’s references to Weber, Schmoller, Royce, James, and
Jamesian pragmatism tie his earlier critique of Comte to an engagement
with what James dubbed “the dilemma of determinism” (James,
1884). Weber was methodologically agnostic with regard to
the dispute between metaphysical determinists and indeterminists,
arguing that neither position entailed consequences bearing on the
research practices of the historical and cultural sciences, and taking
Schmoller to task for his profession of faith in metaphysical
determinism (see Weber, 1905a, 197–196, 278; Ringer, 1997, 57–58,
91). Thus, Du Bois breaks with both his German teachers in
insisting that chance—again, incalculable actions (and choices)
undetermined by and independent of actions gone before—exists in
the world and in explicitly endorsing “the assumption of
chance” as a principle of sociological
 method.[31] 
Du Bois’s contention that the
individual is free to the extent that her choices escape explanation in
terms of physical and social laws and regularities echoes Royce’s
argument that, because “the individual as such is never the mere
result of law,” no causal explanation can
“predetermine” what she “uniquely wills”
(Royce, 1899, 467–468). Du Bois misleads, however, when he
retrospectively suggests that the argument of “Sociology
Hesitant” aligned him with James. 
To be sure, Du Bois’s language and analysis owe a
debt to James’s “The Dilemma of Determinism”
(1884) and, in particular, to James’s conceptualization of the
will’s independence (its ability to choose courses of action not
fixed “by parts of the universe already laid down” (1884,
150)) in terms of the concept of chance—a debt Du Bois
acknowledges when he describes his view as “Jamesian
pragmatism.” James explains the ethical implications of his
indeterminism when he takes issue with Schopenhauer, “who
enforces his determinism by the argument that with a given fixed
character only one reaction is possible under given
circumstances” (1879, 13). Schopenhauer forgets, James
argues, that “in these critical ethical moments, what
consciously seems to be in question is the very
complexion of the character” (1879, 13). As a sociologist,
Du Bois’s purports to have applied Jamesian pragmatism beyond the
sphere of ethics, to “all human action,” but it is
precisely here that he breaks with James; for notwithstanding his
defense of indeterminism, James is skeptical of the possibility of
measuring the degree to which the will is free (James, 1890,
572). In addition, James insists that the science of psychology
must methodologically reject the assumption of chance. Psychology
“abstracts from free-will without necessarily denying its
existence” (James, 1892,
 457).[32]
Du Bois was no less interested in determining (again, “by
study and measurement”) the limits of law than he was in
determining the limits of chance. Law, he believed, marked the
limit of chance, and chance, he believed, marked the limit of law.
Knowledge of social laws and regularities can contribute to social
reform by enabling the social reformer causally to explain social
problems and rationally to chart plans to solve those problems. 
Knowledge of the element of chance—or, more exactly, of the scope
and limits of chance in organized, modern social life—can
contribute to social reform by enabling the reformer to gauge the
extent to which implementing his ideas would entail experimenting
with (“essaying”) plans of action that, due to the
play of chance, carry a significant risk of failure—plans that he
could not confidently endorse, despite his knowledge of the social laws
and regularities shaping modern social life. Just as knowledge of
the scope and limits of chance could provide the “Captain of
Industry” who speculates in currency and trades in floated,
corporate stock a reason to modify his investment decisions, so too
could it provide the reformer a reason to modify his plans of action
and similarly to meet the “tingling challenge
of
 risk.”[33]
In “The Propaganda of History,” the final chapter of
Black Reconstruction (1935), Du Bois maintains that
“scientific” historiography—that is, historiography
that “set[s] down” the record of “human
action” with “accuracy and faithfulness of
detail”—can serve the ends of social reform; it can be
used, he writes, “as a measuring rod and guidepost for the
future of nations” (Du Bois, 1935, 584). Du Bois’s
argument for this claim proceeds through a defense of four theses: 1)
that the study of history, so far as it belongs to the science of
human action, cannot model itself exclusively on the natural sciences;
2) that accuracy in chronicling and explaining human action requires
that the historian rely on the method of interpretive
understanding—what Max Weber called
Verstehen; 3) that, contra Weber, accurate, empirically sound
historiography reports moral knowledge; and 4) that the knowledge of
morality and moral responsibility yielded by the scientific study of
human history (by accurate historiography) can contribute to social
reform, for the philosopher and the prophet can use that knowledge to
guide mankind in the solution of social problems (1935, 591).
Du Bois criticizes histories that discuss slavery with moral
“impartially,” depicting America as helpless and the south
as blameless, while explaining the difference in development, North and
South, as “a sort of working out of cosmic social and economic
law” (1935, 585). An example of this sort of history is Charles
and Mary Beard’s The Rise of American Civilization,
which treats the clash between north and south as if it were a clash
between winds and waters. In the Beard’s “sweeping
mechanistic interpretation” of history, Du Bois writes,
“there is no room for the real plot of the story, for the clear
mistake and guilt of rebuilding a new slavery of the working class in
the midst of a fateful experiment in democracy; for the triumph of
sheer moral courage and sacrifice in the abolition crusade; and for the
hurt and struggle of degraded black millions in their fight for freedom
and their attempt to enter democracy. Can all this be omitted and
half suppressed in a treatise that calls itself scientific?”
(1935, 585).
At issue here, again, as in “The Conservation of Races”
and “Sociology Hesitant,” is the relation between the human
sciences and the natural sciences.  For the Du Bois of
Black Reconstruction, historians who model their inquiry
exclusively on the natural sciences (historians like the Beards) seek
to identify the causal uniformities (“cosmic” laws)
governing human events, which events they conceptualize by analogy to
the behavior of the winds, waters and other forces of nature. The
problem here, Du Bois believes, is not with the effort to identify the
causal uniformities governing human events. Rather it is with the
tendency in that effort to neglect the human meaning of human events,
and thus to treat those events as inhuman, natural forces that lend
themselves to a purely “mechanistic” explanation—by
which Du Bois means explanation in terms that make no reference to the
meanings that the human subjects who participate in those events
attach to them.
If history is to be a science of human action and not to pretend to
be a science of nature, then, Du Bois believes, it must take account of
the subjective meanings of actions and events. Du Bois implies
that the historian cannot truly tell the story of “the mightiest
effort of the mightiest century” (the struggle of enslaved blacks
to achieve democracy) without taking account of the
“psychology” of the agents whose actions sustained that
effort—for to take psychology into account is to take subjective
meaning into account (1935, 586). More generally, Du Bois insists
that the historian of slavery ask: “Just what did [slavery] mean
to the owner and the owned”(1935, 585). 
To understand slavery, knowing what it meant to the owned is no less
important than knowing what it meant to the owners. In demanding that
the historian of slavery attend to the slaves’ stories about
slavery in order to know what slavery meant to the slaves, Du Bois
presupposes the fundamental, methodological tenet that the
historian’s primary charge is what Max Weber called
Verstehen, or “interpretive understanding,”
not mechanical explanation. According to Weber, the
sciences of human action, including history and sociology, “speak
of ‘action’ insofar as the acting individual attaches
subjective meaning to his behavior—be it overt or covert”
(1922, 38, 41). One of the aims of Verstehen, he argues,
is rationally to make sense of the motivation prompting an action by
placing that action “in an intelligible and more inclusive
context of meaning”—as when, for example, we interpret a
woodchopper’s chopping of wood as an act undertaken to secure a
wage; or, alternatively, to provide a supply of firewood for the
woodchopper’s use (1922, 42).
Du Bois stresses the importance of interpretive understanding
because he is committed to the view that moral judgment is a critical
component of historiography. Thus, while Du Bois methodologically
aligns himself with Weber in stressing the importance of interpretive
understanding to the scientific study of history, he methodologically
rejects Weber’s claim that “concern on the part of history
to judge of historical actions as responsible before the conscience of
history…would suspend its character as empirical science”
(Weber, 1905b,
 123).[34]
Unlike Weber, Du Bois is a moral realist who believes that
historical inquiry can afford us knowledge of moral
facts—knowledge, that is, of the proper distribution of moral
responsibility and of the extent to which actions are right or
wrong. But to obtain that knowledge, historians must understand
human action in terms of subjective meanings, for they require some
such understanding of human action to render intelligible their
application of the vocabulary of moral evaluation—for Du Bois, a
vocabulary that includes the language of “guilt,” of
“moral courage and sacrifice,” and of “the degraded
black millions.” Du Bois argues that a necessary condition
of the possibility of acquiring knowledge of moral facts through the
historian’s practice of the science of human action is a
Verstehen-centered approach to that practice—or, more
exactly, an approach that explains human actions in terms of
subjects’ motives. Du Bois sketches a similar line of
argument, five years later, in Dusk of Dawn (1940, 70).
For Du Bois, the function of the historian, “posing” as
a scientist of human action, is “to make clear the
facts…to know, as far as possible…the things that
actually happened in the world” without regard to her personal
desires and wishes (1935, 591). But the function of the
philosopher and the prophet, he argues, is “to interpret these
facts” —that is, to consider them in the perspective of our
desire to guide mankind to undertake the social reforms needed to
address social problems (1935, 591). 
A prophet, a Jeremiah, for example, might well adduce facts of moral
wrongdoing and guilt to alert his fellow citizens that their actions
risk God’s wrath. And a philosopher, a philosopher of
history, for example, might adduce those facts in order to instruct
them as to the meaning, writ large, of the plot that the historian has
chronicled—precisely as Du Bois instructs his fellow citizens
that the story of slavery and reconstruction he has chronicled (in his
capacity as an historian) exhibits “the clear mistake and
guilt” that characterizes the “plot” of Aristotelian
tragedy (1935, 585, 595). In both cases, the point would be the
same: namely, to use moral knowledge to warn one’s fellow
citizens of the fateful consequences (God’s wrath, tragedy) that
await them lest they refuse to heed the lessons of the past and
change—reform—their ways.
Du Bois’s political philosophy belongs to the Afro-modern
tradition of political thought, an impressively rich body of non-ideal
political theory that is bound together by certain thematic
preoccupations—e.g., the political and social organization of
white supremacy, the nature and effects of racial ideology, and the
possibilities of black emancipation— and that includes the
writings of Ottabah Cugoano, David Walker, Edward Blyden, Martin
Delany, Frederick Douglass, and Alexander Crummell (Gooding-Williams,
2009). Du Bois’s most famous book, The Souls of Black
Folk (1903a), is his earliest contribution to that
tradition. Du Bois’s subsequent contributions to political
philosophy and political theory appear in several different places and
have been variously taken up by contemporary scholars.
Souls is Du Bois’s still influential answer to the
question, “What kind of politics should African Americans conduct
to counter white supremacy?” Historically rooted in the
segregationist era of Jim Crow, Souls authority has reached
well beyond its origins, so much so that its compelling ideas and
arguments continue to be taken up by contemporary theorists of black
politics.
In Souls, Du Bois contends that a politics fit to respond
to the American, Jim Crow version of racial apartheid must satisfy two
conditions. The first relates to Du Bois’s description of
African Americans as “masses:” to wit, to his
characterization of African Americans as an aggregate of uncultured,
pre-modern slaves or former slaves. The second relates to his
description of African Americans as a “folk:” that is, to
his characterization of African Americans as a group united by a
collectively shared ethos, or spirit. 
For Du Bois, a politics suitable to counter Jim Crow had to uplift
the black masses—to assimilate them to the constitutive norms of
modernity—and to heed the ethos of the black folk. In
short, it had to be a politics that embraced and promoted the core
values of modern life while expressing the spiritual identity of the
folk. Du Bois envisions black elites—the so-called
“talented tenth” (1903b)—as deploying a politics of
expressive modernization to uplift the black masses. Elite
control of black politics can be authoritative and effective, he
argues, only if it expresses a collective spirit that unites black
people. 
The young Du Bois’s political philosophy rests on the social
philosophy he outlines in “The Conservation of Races” and
“The Study of Negro Problems.” In arguing that talented
tenth elites could enjoy political legitimacy and efficacy only if
their actions expressed a distinctive message that spiritually
distinguished the Negro from other spiritually distinct races and that
united all African Americans, he presupposes his earlier answer to the
question, “What is a Negro?” In arguing that talented
tenth elites needed to attack racial prejudice and cultural
backwardness alike in order to uplift and modernize the black masses,
he presupposes his earlier, causal analysis of Negro problems
(Gooding-Williams, 2009, chapter 1).
Du Bois’s extended critique of Booker T. Washington’s
political thought (see Souls, chapter 3) likewise presupposes
his earlier, causal analysis of Negro problems. Du Bois’s
argument immediately drew attention, for when Du Bois published
Souls Washington had securely established himself “as an
educational statesman, the primary spokesman of black America, and the
leader of a large network of disciples—the ‘Tuskegee
Machine’—who edited newspapers, owned businesses, and
directed schools modeled on Tuskegee”(Blight and
Gooding-Williams, 1997, 16).
Washington held that if blacks endeavored to help
themselves—to discipline their bodies, to cultivate
entrepreneurial virtues (e.g. thrift, spirit of industry, and economy),
and to acquire the knowledge of a trade—they would thrive in the
capitalist market and, due to their business success, bring an end to
Jim Crow and win the franchise. In short, he believed that black
self-help efforts were sufficient to engender business success, and
that business success was sufficient to persuade whites to extend to
blacks the civil and political rights they required for incorporation
into the mainstream of American society (Washington,
 1901).[35]
Contra Washington, Du Bois argued that self-help efforts, while
necessary for black social progress, were not sufficient. Assuming that
both racial prejudice and cultural backwardness cause Negro problems,
Du Bois claims that a self-help politics that attends to the
backwardness of the Negro group itself without attacking racial
prejudice is doomed to fail. Washington had argued that there was
no need to attack prejudice for the present, because self-help efforts
that contended with entrepreneurial-economic backwardness (for Du Bois,
a form of cultural backwardness) would suffice to defeat it. Du
Bois rejects this argument on the grounds that the persistent,
prejudice-sustained denial of rights to blacks undermines their
self-help efforts and prospects for business success. 
Washington’s program amounts to a partial, one-sided attack on
the Negro problems. In Du Bois’s view, black uplift and
social progress required that black political elites attack both prongs
of the Negro problem—racial prejudice no less than
backwardness. It also required institutions of higher learning to
train these elites. Thus, Du Bois takes Washington to task for
promoting an educational philosophy that emphasized vocational
education at the expense of higher, liberal arts education (Du Bois,
1903a, chapter 3).
In Souls, Du Bois sketches a biographical portrait of his
mentor, Alexander Crummell, and a fictional portrait of a tragic hero,
John Jones, to show how double-consciousness can compromise black elite
political
 leadership.[36]
Specifically, Du Bois represents double-consciousness as a form of
alienation that estranges black elites from their followers, thereby
eroding their ability to promote ends expressing the collectively
shared spirit of the black folk and undermining their legitimacy and
efficacy as leaders (Du Bois, 1903a, chapters 1, 12–13;
Gooding-Williams, 2009, chapter 3).
The early Du Bois’s defense of a black elite-led politics of
expressive modernization has exerted considerable influence on post-Jim
Crow political philosophical appraisals of black American
politics. Indeed, it is all but impossible to grasp the point of
those appraisals without taking account of their engagements, both
explicit and implicit, with key elements of Du Bois’s early
political thought. For extended discussion of the issues central
to the post-Jim Crow inheritance of Du Bois’s early political
thought, see, especially, Reed, 1999 and Gooding-Williams, 2009,
chapter 6.
As Lawrie Balfour has argued, Du Bois wrote
“prolifically” on a broad array of topics, so that his
writings can usefully be read as an extended series of essayistic,
experimental efforts to address the various issues that engaged him
(2011, 17–18). The reception of Du Bois by contemporary political
theorists attests to the extraordinary, topical scope of his political
thought, especially as it evolved after the publication of
Souls.
In several post-Souls writings, Du Bois returns to the
theme of black political leadership. In Dusk of Dawn,
for example, he reaffirms his belief that “the Talented
Tenth” should determine “the present field and demand for
racial action and the method by which the masses may be guided along
this line” (1940, 159). And several years later, after
critically reflecting on his earlier thinking about group leadership,
he proposes a “new idea for a Talented Tenth” (1948,
168). Whether or not Du Bois ultimately rejected his earlier
conception of elite black leadership (Du Bois, 1903b) is an issue of
scholarly dispute. Joy James holds that Du Bois eventually
repudiates the idea of a black intelligentsia vanguard (James,
1997). Cornel West contends that Du Bois’s later revisions
of his concept of the talented tenth were “piecemeal”
(West, 1996, 71). Adolph Reed, by way of a meticulous reading of
Du Bois’s later writings and speeches, argues that Du Bois
advanced an elite-centered notion of black politics throughout his
intellectual and activist career (Reed, 1997). Tommie Shelby and
Paul Taylor provide especially nuanced reconstructions of Du
Bois’s evolving understanding of black political leadership
(Shelby, 2007, chapter 2; Taylor, 2010, 907–910.).
An important and still underappreciated strand of Du Bois’s
post-Souls political thought is his engagement with Marxist
social and political theory. A key text, here, is Black
Reconstruction (1935), Du Bois’s monumental critique of the
Dunning School’s interpretation of
 Reconstruction.[37] 
Like Joel Olson (2004; see
2.2.4.3 above), Cedric Robinson (1983) and Anthony Bogues (2003) have
argued that Black Reconstruction should be read as historical
and political theory, not simply as revisionist historiography. 
On Robinson’s reading, Du Bois developed “a theory of
history, which by its emphasis on mass action was both a critique of
the ideologies of American socialist movements and a revision of
Marx’s theory of revolution and class struggle” (Robinson,
277). Bogues agrees that Du Bois breaks with Marx and Marxist
orthodoxy, and adds that, like other black radical theorists, Du Bois
reorients the radical critique of modernity away from “issues of
political obligation, sovereign self and citizenship…to
questions of domination, oppression, and politics as a practice of
freedom” (Bogues, 93). Building on Du Bois and on Robinson’s
engagement with Du Bois, the historian, Walter Johnson (2016) has more
recently argued that the history of slavery and racial capitalism
provides a standpoint from which “to rethink our idea of
justice” (Johnson, 29).
Feminist theorists’ appraisals of Du Bois’s political
thought have been mixed, ranging from criticisms of his masculinist
failure to regard black women as intellectuals and race leaders (e.g.
Carby, 1998 and James, 1997) to praise for his advocacy of
women’s equality and his contributions to our understanding of
the oppression of black women (e.g., James, 1997 and Griffin,
2000). 
Feminist theorists’ commentary on Du Bois’s political
thought has tended to concentrate on chapter 7 of Darkwater
(1920),  “The Damnation of Women.” 
Women are damned, Du Bois proposes, for “only at the sacrifice of
intelligence and the chance to do their best work can the majority of
women bear children” (1920, 78–79). While Farah Griffin
interprets “Damnation” in the perspective of a still
persistent “politics of protection” that threatens the
autonomy of black women, arguing that Du Bois recognized the limits of
that politics (2000, 34–36), Lawrie Balfour reads the essay as
contributing to a “feminist theory of citizenship” (2011,
99–100). Taking issue with Balfour, Shatema Threadcraft argues
that “Damnation” reprises and elaborates
Souls’ masculinist treatment of manliness as an
appropriate norm of citizenship (2017, 92–94).
Considering Du Bois in light of black feminist and more general
forms of contemporary intersectionality theory (which considers
intersections between race, gender and class), Ange-Marie
Hancock examines Souls, Darkwater, and Dusk of
Dawn to identify insights in Du Bois’s thinking that link
“his political theory with that of today’s
intersectionality theorists” (2005, 82). It would be
anachronistic to describe Du Bois as an intersectionality theorist,
Hancock admits, but she still claims that Du Bois anticipates recent
intersectionality theory in arguing “that more than one category
of difference should be attacked simultaneously, and, more importantly,
that the structures of society operate such that these categories
mutually reinforce social stratification for its least empowered
inhabitants” (2005, 79).
How did Du Bois conceptualize democracy? 
Du Bois mentions democracy just once in Souls, where he
states that the “soul of democracy and the safeguard of modern
society” is “[h]onest and earnest criticism from those
whose interests are most nearly touched,—criticism of writers by
readers, of government by those governed, of leaders by those
led” (1903a, 23). Du Bois defines democracy in terms of
criticism when he attacks Booker T. Washington for “hushing
criticism” (1903a, 23). In exploring the implications of Du
Bois’s statement for the picture of black politics he defends in
Souls, Gooding-Williams raises a question as to whether elite
leadership of backwards, black masses not competent to criticize their
leaders could both satisfy Du Bois’s definition of democracy and
successfully promote an uplift agenda (Gooding-Williams, 2009, chapters
1 and 4.)
Du Bois’s most thoroughgoing contribution to democratic theory
is chapter 6 of Darkwater, “Of The Ruling of
Men.”  In that essay, Du Bois engages familiar,
Tocquevillian worries about the tyranny of the majority; envisions
democratic decision making in deliberative democratic terms; and
defends not only a broadly inclusive form of political democracy, but
the idea that modern industry should be subject to democratic decision
making—in essence, the idea of democratic socialism. His
argument for inclusiveness, for extending the right of democratic
participation to women and blacks, for example, is essentially
epistemic: “only the sufferer knows his suffering
and…no state can be strong which excludes from its expressed
wisdom the knowledge possessed by mothers, wives, and
daughters…The same arguments apply to other excluded
groups” (1920, 69; see, also, Bright, 2017, 14–15). 
In Black Reconstruction, no less than in “Of the
Ruling of Men,” Du Bois characterizes democracy in economic as
well as political terms; that is, as the legitimate transfer of
political and economic power from the ruling classes to the working
masses. Cornel West interprets Black Reconstruction as
promoting a Deweyan notion of creative democracy (West, 1988). 
Gooding-Williams (1991) disputes that interpretation, arguing that it
obscures the connotations of class struggle that attach to Du
Bois’s account of black workers’ efforts to reconstruct
democracy. In Color and Democracy, which Du Bois
published just more than a decade after Black Reconstruction,
he writes that “[m]ore important than political democracy is
industrial democracy; that is, the voice which the actual worker,
whether his work be manual or mental, has in the organization and
conduct of industry” (1946,
 300).[38] 
The ongoing importance of Du Bois’s contributions to
democratic theory has been well established by the recent work of
Lawrie Balfour and Tommie Shelby. 
In her essays on Darkwater, Dusk of Dawn, and other
writings, for example, Balfour subtly brings Du Bois’s political
thought into conversation with the work of contemporary political
theorists. To reorient democratic theory in dark times, Balfour argues,
we would do well to think politically with Du Bois. To that end,
she examines the political-theoretical ramifications of Du Bois’s
literary choices; his use of history to highlight the implication of
America’s slave past in its post-Civil Rights present; his
depiction of African American lives as exemplary representatives of
democratic possibility; and his globally expansive political
imagination, which, Balfour argues, reveals the racial politics of
recent defenses of cosmopolitanism and civic nationalism (Balfour,
2010,
 2011).[39]
In Shelby’s view, Du Bois took African-Americans to be the
bearers of a world-historical mission to perfect the ideals of American
democracy. Du Bois endorsed black political solidarity, Shelby
argues, as a temporary and, possibly, long-term strategy for
establishing a multiracial, culturally pluralist American polity that
embodied those ideals. Shelby follows Du Bois in maintaining that
black political solidarity in the pursuit of a racial justice that is
consonant with American democratic and liberal ideals requires a
motivational foundation that unites self-interest, moral principle, and
racial identification (Shelby, 2007, 6–7, 67, 87). 
In chapter 1 of Dusk of Dawn, Du Bois describes his thought
regarding the causes of the oppression of the darker races as evolving
through three stages—roughly, from thinking that racial
oppression was caused by ignorance; to thinking that it was caused by
ignorance and ill-will; to thinking that it was caused by
ignorance and ill-will and a conjunction of economic
motives and unconscious, irrational acts and reactions. 
Corresponding to each stage, Du Bois tells us, was an increasingly
complex account of the political strategies the darker races require to
upend racial oppression. Where ignorance is the problem, science
and education is needed to fight racial injustice; where ill-will is
the issue, the black world must fight for its freedom, relying on
truth, boycott, propaganda and mob frenzy as instruments of sudden and
immediate assault. Where, finally, economic interest and/or
unconscious, irrational motive sustain racial oppression, “not
sudden assault but long siege was indicated; careful planning and
subtle campaign with the education of growing generations and
propaganda” (1940, 2–3).
Prior to 1940, some consideration of each of these causes of
oppression and related strategies of resistance is evident in Du
Bois’s writings. Still, Dusk of Dawn is remarkable
for the prominence it gives to the role of unconscious and irrational
psychological forces in accounting for the existence and perpetuation
of racial oppression. Du Bois attributes this new emphasis to the
“new psychology” of the “Freudian era.” 
His “study of psychology under William James” had prepared
him for the Freudian turn, he remarks, and its “meaning and
implications…had begun slowly to penetrate his thought”
(1940, 148). 
Contemporary political theorists have, for the most part, tended to
ignore Du Bois’s Freud-inspired account of racial
oppression. An exception is Shannon Sullivan, for whom Du Bois
suggests “a powerful psychoanalytic-pragmatist model for
surveying the unconscious operations of white domination”
(Sullivan, 2006, 23). A second exception is Ella Myers, who has
begun to build on Du Bois’s arguments to reflect on the visceral
and affective registers of antiblack racism (Myers,
 2017).[40] 
Robert Gooding-Williams
(2011) has adapted Du Bois’s idea of a “long siege”
against racial oppression—against what Du Bois also calls
“the strongholds of color caste”—to a critical
analysis of some recent discussions of racial politics (1940, 148).
Paul Taylor has persuasively sketched a general framework for
understanding Du Bois’s philosophy of art. According to
Taylor, Du Bois endorses an expressivist picture of the world, the key
to which “is a determination to think of things as determinate
but provisional expressions of an evolving world.” On this
view, “the world unfolds into new forms the way a seed unfolds
into a tree…by clarifying, over time, what was inchoate and
implicit: by actualizing in history what formerly existed only in
potentia.” Considered in the perspective of
Marx’s and Dewey’s revisions of Hegel’s expressivism,
Taylor’s Du Bois envisions ethical life as a
work-in-progress—that is, as an ongoing project of holistic
self-cultivation, of individuals artistically forming themselves by
creatively responding to the histories, languages, and economic
structures that constrain them (Taylor, 2016, 91–93).
Du Bois’s articulation of his commitment to the ideal of
holistic self-cultivation is perhaps most explicit when, in amplifying
his criticism of Booker T. Washington, he defends the importance of
liberal arts education (Gooding-Williams, 2009, 133–139). 
Explicitly echoing Matthew Arnold, Du Bois advocated liberal arts
education as a means to self-cultivation or, as he sometimes writes,
self-development, through “getting to know…the best that
has been said and thought in the world” (Arnold, 1869,
5). Self-development through the acquisition of culture is
the purpose of the education elites require to uplift the masses. 
The Negro college, Du Bois writes, “must develop men…Above
our modern socialism, and out of the worship of the mass, must persist
that higher individualism which centres of culture protect; there must
come a loftier respect for the sovereign human souls that seeks to know
itself and the world about it; that seeks a freedom for expansion and
self-development” (1903a, 52).
For the Du Bois of Souls, the art that sovereign souls
appreciate is high art—or, in other words, art that shares with
the sovereign souls that appreciate it the property of holistic
self-development. In “The Sorrow Songs,” the final
chapter of Souls, Du Bois represents the group spirit that
unites black Americans as clarifying its distinctive message through
the medium of the folk song. Considered in historical
perspective, the musically embodied spirit of the black folk, as it
actualizes itself through time, in folk song after folk song, acquires
a spiritually comprehensive breadth that overcomes racial prejudice and
provincialism. To these songs, which manifest a developing folk
spirit and that constitute an evolving tradition of black musical art,
Du Bois contrasts a “mass” of spiritually inert minstrel
songs, gospel hymns and coon songs (1903a, 124). In essence, he
argues that, no less than Wagner’s operas, which he admired, the
spiritually-inspired black folk song belongs to the canon of high art
from which the low arts of the minstrel song and the like are
excluded.
On this view, Du Bois’s early political expressivism is of a
piece with his broadly expressivist philosophy of art, for it asserts
that, to be legitimate and effective, black political leaders must take
their bearing not from the uninspired mass of popular song that the
masses might enjoy, but from the spirit and spiritual message embodied
in the black folk song (Gooding-Williams, 2009, 139–147).
Du Bois’s essay, “Criteria of Negro Art” (1925),
is his most important contribution to the philosophy of art. The
essay is Du Bois’s clearest statement of his disagreement with
the philosopher and Dean of the Harlem Renaissance, Alain Locke, about
the relation between art and propaganda. Against Locke’s
view that genius and talent “must choose art and put aside
propaganda,” Du Bois held “that all art is propaganda and
ever must be” (Locke, 1928, par. 1; Du Bois, 1926, par.
29). At issue in Du Bois’s “great debate” with
Locke is the role of the arts “in creating respect for a people
suffering from humiliation and self-loathing” (Harris, 15).
Du Bois claims that artists rely on beauty to communicate truth and
goodness (in all its aspects of justice, honor, and right)—in the
first case to promote universal understanding, and in the second to
gain sympathy and human interest. The “apostle of
Beauty,” he writes, “thus becomes the apostle of truth and
right not by choice but by inner and outer compulsion. Free he
is, but his freedom is ever bounded by Truth and Justice” (par.
28).
Considering these claims in the perspective of Du Bois’s
expressivism, Taylor plausibly interprets Du Bois as arguing that,
because artists “are dialectically enmeshed in wider webs of
meaning concerning the true and the just, and must create themselves as
individuals by working out their orientation to these networks,”
all art is propaganda. On this account, no work of art can
reasonably claim to derive its content from “a distinct and
inviolate domain of aesthetic value,” for all art derives its
content from a public domain of ethico-political value to which the
artist must creatively respond. The artist is at once
outwardly and inwardly compelled by the webs of meaning that encumber
her, for while these webs of meaning impose themselves from
“without,” the artist suffers them as parameters
constituting her “within” as a subject. The freedom
that the apostle of truth and right can claim in relation to these
parameters is akin to self-legislation—it is the freedom she
enjoys in creatively responding to them, in working out her
relationship to them and, in effect, making them her own (Taylor, 2016,
96–99). 
By exercising her freedom, finally, by creating beautiful works of
art that promote the ends of sympathy and universal understanding, the
artist may undertake to widen the ethical and cognitive horizons of her
intended addressees, and thus to expand their capacity for judgment.
 In writing a book like Souls, for example, Du Bois
undertook to widen his white counterparts’ capacities to
sympathize with and evaluate the suffering in the souls of black
Americans (Rogers, 2012, 193–198).
What is the nature of beauty such that it can achieve these ends
through the communication of truth and goodness? Du Bois never
states a clear answer to this
 question.[41] 
But he offers clues to an answer in
“Of Beauty and Death,” chapter 9 of
Darkwater.  In that essay, his most sustained reflection
on the nature of beauty, Du Bois contrasts beauty to “ugliness
and hate and ill…with all their contradiction and
illogic;” beauty, he writes, “is fulfillment. It
satisfies. It is always new and strange. It is the
reasonable thing” (1920, 120). Perhaps Du Bois’s
point is an expressivist one: that beauty satisfies by clarifying our
ideas of truth (at once consistent and reasonable) and goodness (the
opposite of hate and ill); that is, by embodying those ideas in novel
and unsettling works of art.
We conclude this entry by noting that an ongoing feature of scholarly
debate about Du Bois is sometimes contentious disagreement as to his
proper place in intellectual history and/or the history of
philosophy. A brief survey of the variety of interpretive
orientations that usefully have been brought to bear in appraising Du
Bois as a philosopher, or as a thinker, suggests that, in studying his
writings, we might do well to heed Nietzsche’s suggestion that
the multiplication of perspectives can often enhance our knowledge of
the subject matter under consideration (Nietzsche, 1887, 85).
The relevant categories tend to be geographic, racial, thematic, or
some combination of the three. Du Bois’s philosophical books and
essays have been read as contributions to American thought (Zamir,
1995) and to American political thought (Reed, 1997). More
narrowly and more broadly, they have been read as statements
of Afro-American exceptionalist thought (West, 1982); as key
constituents of the black nationalist tradition (Moses, 1978); as
important additions to the black natural law tradition (Lloyd, 2016);
as a part of the history of African American prophetic political
critique (Marshall, 2011); and as critical contributions to Africana
and Afro-Modern thought (Gordon, 2008; Gooding-Williams, 2009).
 Intending to correct the tendency evident in these works to
position Du Bois as an American, black American, Africana, and/or
Afro-modern thinker, Appiah (2014) has highlighted the late
19th century, German intellectual milieu that shaped Du
Bois’s thinking. Contra Appiah, Tommy Curry (2014) has
argued that we lose sight of the philosophical substance of Du
Bois’s thought if, like Appiah, we scant the influence of other
African American writers on his thinking.
Among critics wishing to situate Du Bois within a well-defined,
western philosophical tradition, the main tendencies have been to
characterize Du Bois either as a pragmatist (see West, 1989, Taylor,
2004b, and Kahn, 2009) or as an Hegelian of sorts. Much of the
literature following this second line of interpretation has considered
Du Bois’s writings, and especially Souls, in the
perspective of Hegel’s Phenomenology of Spirit (see,
e.g., Gooding-Williams, 1987 and 1991; Zamir, 1995; and, most
recently, Shaw, 2013). In this connection, Paul Taylor (2004b)
has persuasively argued that we need not choose between an Hegelian Du
Bois and a pragmatist Du Bois. More recently, Nahum
Chandler has proposed to read Du Bois neither as an Hegelian, nor as a
pragmatist, but in parallel to several of his European contemporaries,
including Husserl, Weber, Durkheim, Boas and Freud (Chandler,
2014).
To be sure, it would be false to claim that all of the
above-mentioned interpretive perspectives have yielded genuine insight
and illumination. But more have than have not, a fact that
primarily attests to the range, depth, and fecundity of Du Bois’s
philosophical thought.