William David Ross was born on 15 April 1877 in Thurso,
Scotland. He spent the bulk of the first six years of his life in
Travancore, India, where his father, John Ross, was the Principal of
the Maharaja's College. Ross returned to Scotland for his
formal education. He attended the Royal High School in Edinburgh and
Edinburgh University. In 1895, he graduated from the latter with
first-class honours in classics. He then went to Balliol College,
Oxford, where he obtained first-class honours in classical honour
moderations in 1898 and in literae humaniores in 1900. He was
then appointed lecturer at Oriel College, Oxford and at the same time
he was elected to a fellowship by examination at Merton College. In
1902, he dropped the latter when he was elected tutor in philosophy
and fellow at Oriel College, a position which he held until 1929. Ross
joined the army in 1915, and by the time World War I ended he was
Deputy Secretary in the Ministry of Munitions, with the rank of
Major. He left the army with an OBE. Following the war he remained in
public service on a part-time basis, and for his efforts he was made a
KBE in 1938. From 1923 to 1928 he was the Deputy White's Professor of
Moral Philosophy while John Alexander Stewart was ill.  When the
position became vacant in 1927, Ross refused to stand because he
thought H. A. Prichard a better moral philosopher and because
(interestingly) he said that he would ‘prefer working on
metaphysics, ancient and the most modern’ (Clark 1971, 534). Two
years later, in 1929, he became Provost of Oriel College, a position
he held until he retired in 1947. In 1927, he was elected Fellow of the British
Academy, and he served as its president from 1936 to 1940. During this
time he played a role in helping foreign scholars fleeing
less liberal climates in Europe. In World War II he again played an
essential role in the public service, serving on an Appeal Tribunal
for Conscientious Objectors (1940–41) and on the National Arbitration
Tribunal (1941–1952). He served as Vice-Chancellor of Oxford from 1941
to 1944. Following the war, in 1947, he became President of the Union
Académique Internationale, and, until 1949, the Chairman
of the Royal Commission on the Press. In his retirement Ross continued
his work in philosophy. He died in Oxford on 25 May 1971.
Ross's contributions to various
administrative positions and to public service were of no small
importance. But it is his work in philosophy which is the basis of his reputation. He made numerous contributions to the translation and
interpretation of Aristotle and to moral philosophy. In
his lifetime, Ross was considered a major figure in the study of Aristotle (Wiggins 2004). He was the General Editor of the
Oxford Aristotle translation series, first with J. A. Smith and then
alone, and to this series he contributed translations of
Aristotle's Metaphysics and his
Nicomachean Ethics. Ross edited a number of
Aristotle's works in Greek for the Oxford Classical Texts series,
including the Rhetoric, Physics, De Anima,
and Politics, and he produced editions of the Metaphysics, Physics, Parva Naturalia, Analytics and De Anima with long introductions and detailed commentaries. On the basis of this work he produced two full-length books, Aristotle and
Plato's Theory of Ideas (1951). In ethics, Ross wrote only a small number of articles. His books The Right and the Good
and Foundations of Ethics comprise his main 
offerings in this area. To these he added a critical commentary on Immanuel
Kant's Groundwork,
Kant's Ethical Theory: A Commentary on the
Grundlegung zur Metaphysik der Sitten, and a
chapter on Aristotle's ethics in
Aristotle.
In the introduction to the sixth edition of Aristotle, J. L. Ackrill maintains that Ross ‘made his mark in public life and as a university teacher and administrator, and he wrote influential books on ethics. But it is as the leading Aristotelian of the first half of the
century that he will be most remembered’ (AT ix). Indeed, many argue that Ross was one of the most influential Aristotelians of the twentieth century. Although some of Ross's translations now have formidable competitors, they are still highly regarded, and his editions of Aristotle's work with commentaries continue to be an important source for scholars working in ancient philosophy. One should not, however, overlook the fact that he now has an equally strong reputation in ethics. Despite the fact that Ross received rather short shrift from rival moral philosophers in the last century (e.g., Warnock 1960; Rawls 1971; Raphael 1981), his moral philosophy is now considered a serious contender and in recent years many of Ross's main
moral and meta-ethical doctrines have received sustained defenses (see, e.g., Hurka 2004; Stratton-Lake 2002a, 2002b, 2011a, 2011b; McNaughton 1988, 1996; Shaver 2007; Audi 1996, 2004; Gaut 2002; Parfit 2011). Therefore, it is not unreasonable to think that Ross's legacy will depend both on his work in ethics and on his work in ancient philosophy.
Ross was part of a group of thinkers dubbed the British
Intuitionists. H. A. Prichard was its main figure, and Ross was heavily
influenced by his views (see
Prichard 1912, 1932). He was also influenced by G. E. Moore (Moore
1903, 1912). Ross subjected Moore's ideal
utilitarianism to sustained attack. But he was more sympathetic to
Moore's methodology for soliciting intuitions about
goodness and with some of Moore's ideas about the
nature of intrinsic value and moral semantics. Finally, he could not
have helped being influenced by Aristotle's
treatment of ethical topics. He was in particular impressed with
Aristotle's methodology.
Ross writes that the ‘moral convictions of thoughtful and
well-educated people are the data of ethics just as sense-perceptions
are the data of a natural science’ (RG 41). The verdicts that
this body of moral convictions comprises represent ‘the moral
reflection of many generations, which has developed an extremely
delicate power of appreciation of moral distinctions’ (RG
41). These moral distinctions are employed to test moral theories;
these are cases of knowledge that the philosopher neither proves nor
disproves (RG 20–21n1, 40). Ross takes the requirement to capture
these main common-sense convictions to be more important than
simplicity or systematisation (RG 19; FE 83). This puts him at odds
with moral philosophers who take the systematization, the explanation,
and the correction of common-sense morality as the main function of
moral philosophy. Henry Sidgwick, for instance, claims that ‘the
philosopher seeks unity of principle, and consistency of method’
and that the role of the moral philosopher is to ‘enunciate, in
full breadth and clearness, those primary intuitions of Reason, by the
scientific application of which the common moral thought of mankind
may be at once systematised and corrected’ (Sidgwick 1907
373–374).
The precise degree to which Ross and Sidgwick are in disagreement is
less than clear. Ross sometimes writes as though what he cares about is
the opinions of the ‘thoughtful and
well-educated’ (RG 41) or, what comes to the same
thing, what ‘we’ think (RG 40; FE
102, 104, 134, 172). At others times he suggests that what he cares
about is the opinions of the ‘plain
man’ (RG 17, 20–21n1, 28, 57; FE 186, 187, 188; KT
31). If the opinions of the thoughtful and well-educated are distinct
from those of the plain man, and Ross (with some justification) cares
more about the former than the latter, he may have a
moral view that is closer on the matter of reform (though not of
system) to Sidgwick's. This is not without certain
costs. Ross faults rival moral views for not being close enough to what
‘plain men’ think about moral
questions. If he is open to revising a substantial portion of the moral
views that are ‘commonly
recognized’, then he loses part of his case against
rivals. He does acknowledge that there are errors in our moral thinking
and that we are not required to accept ‘as absolute
all the claims that are commonly recognised’ (FE
190; also 2–3; RG 41), though he thinks that most disputes concern
media axiomata rather than fundamental moral principles (FE
18–19, 190). However, he seems to invite more drastic possibilities. He
notes that inquiry into the ‘historical origin
of…[our moral] beliefs and
practices’ may show that ‘the
most strongly felt repulsions towards certain types of conduct are
relics of a bygone system of totems and fetishes, their connexion with
which is little suspected by those who feel them’
(RG 13). This may lead to significant revision (Singer 2005). Whatever
the case may be, the precise nature of Ross's view
will emerge only after a thorough account of its content is provided.
About this data a number of questions emerge. What is its metaphysical
status? How is it known? What is its precise content? The answers that
Ross offers to these questions and his sensitivity to the dictates of
common-sense morality together make up his unique contribution to moral
theory.
Armed with an account of the main convictions of common-sense
morality, Ross attacked ideal utilitarianism and Kantianism, though
ideal utilitarianism, the view that the only basic moral requirement is
to maximally promote a plurality of intrinsic goods, was his
main
 opponent.[1]
Ross's basic complaint about his rivals is that
each, in a different way, ‘over-simplifies the moral
life’ (FE 189). Both Kant and ideal utilitarians
fail to capture some salient element of the ‘main
moral convictions of the plain man’ (RG 20–21n1).
Ross contends that Kant oversimplifies the moral life in a number of
distinct ways. First, Kant is wrong to think that
‘the rightness or wrongness of an individual act can
be inferred with certainty from its falling or not falling under a rule
capable of being universalised’ (FE 189; also KT
25). Second, Kant is wrong to think that there is only one motive that
has value, and that the moral life consists in a
‘contest between one element which alone has worth
[i.e., the good will] and a multitude of others which have none; the
truth is rather that it is a struggle between a multiplicity of desires
having various degrees of worth’ (FE 206; also KT 3,
18, 93). Third, Kant is wrong to think that moral rules have
‘absolute authority admitting of no
exception’ (FE 313; also 134, 173; KT 24, 95). The
ideal utilitarianism of both Moore and Hastings Rashdall is guilty of a
number of distortions of common-sense thinking (Moore 1903, 1912;
Rashdall 1907, 1913; Skelton 2011). First, it wrongly assumes that
there is a ‘general character which makes right acts
right’, that of maximising a plurality of intrinsic
goods (RG 16). Second, in virtue of presupposing that there is only one
thing that we ought all things considered to do it distorts our
understanding of moral deliberation. For example, when deciding whether
to fulfil a promise we think much more of the fact that in the past we
have made a promise than of the consequences we might realise by
fulfilling it (RG 17). Third, ideal utilitarianism wrongly implies that
the only morally significant relation ‘in which my
neighbours stand to me is that of being possible beneficiaries by my
action’ (RG 19; OJ 125).
Out of these criticisms emerges a distinct moral position,
emphasizing the complexity of moral life. In a review of Foundations
of Ethics, C. D. Broad writes that The Right and the Good
was ‘much the most important contribution to ethical
theory made in England for a generation’ (Broad 1940
228). The best explanation of Broad's praise is that
the book presents a unique and compelling form of deontology, according
to which there are a plurality of both moral requirements and intrinsic
goods. There is no one master principle that explains why the
particular things that we believe are wrong/right are in fact
wrong/right. Instead, there are a number of basic moral requirements
which cannot be reduced to some more fundamental principle. These are
relied upon in making decisions about what we ought to do all things
considered, though there is no sense in which this is deduced from
principles. There is no one intrinsic good/evil that explains why the
particular things we think are good/evil are in fact good/evil.
Instead, there are a number of goods which cannot be reduced to some
more fundamental good. These are relied upon in making decisions about
the goodness or badness of a state of affairs all things considered,
though there is no sense in which this is deduced from these claims. It
is his articulation of this particular view that makes
Ross's work a lasting philosophical
contribution.
There is some dispute as to the precise number of principles to
which Ross subscribes. It seems that he holds that there are five
duties each of which rests on a separate and distinct ground and each
of which specifies a factor which counts in favour of or against an act
(Stratton-Lake 2002a, 2011a; Pickard-Cambridge 1932b; McNaughton 1996;
cf. Jack 1971). Ross believes that we have a duty of fidelity,
that is, a duty to keep our promises (RG 21; FE 76–77; KT 21); a duty
of reparation or a duty to act to right a previous wrong we have
done (RG 21; FE 76; KT 21); a duty of gratitude, or a duty to
return services to those from whom we have in the past accepted
benefits (RG 21; FE 76; KT 21); a duty to promote a maximum of
aggregate good (RG 25, 27, 30; FE 67, 99, 130, 252, 257, 271, 313;
KT 21); and finally a duty of non-maleficence, or a duty not to
harm others (RG 21; FE 75, 130n1, 272).
He does not see these duties as equally important. He holds that the
duty of non-maleficence is more important than the duty to promote a
maximum of aggregate good (RG 21, 22; FE 75, 130n1), and he suggests
that the duties of fidelity, reparation, and gratitude are in general
more weighty than the duty to promote the good (RG 19, 30, 41–42; FE
77, 76, 90, 187). Unlike the duty to promote the good, the duties of
fidelity, reparation and gratitude rest on personal relations with
others, which generate special rather than general duties (FE 76, 186).
It is important to Ross that we can stand in the obligation-generating
relations ‘of promisee to promiser, of creditor to
debtor, of wife to husband, of child to parent, of friend to friend, of
fellow countryman to fellow countryman, and the
like’ (RG 19; also 22; FE 76; OJ 124, 126). Rival
views, as noted, ignore these morally significant relations, or the
‘highly personal character of
duty’, at their peril (RG 22). Finally, although he
does not say it, his view would surely be that the duty of
non-maleficence is weightier than the duties of reparation, gratitude,
and fidelity: it is (unless much is at stake) wrong to harm others in
order to fulfil these duties.
Ross's major innovation is that these principles
state prima facie rather than absolute obligations. This is an
idea that simply had not occurred to critics of deontological theories
(e.g., Mill 1863; Sidgwick 1907; Moore 1903, 1912; Rashdall 1907,
1913), and therefore represented at the time a major advance in the
dialectic existing between utilitarians and non-utilitarians. Ross
claims that ‘prima
facie’ is an unfortunate phrase on which to
rely (RG 20; FE 84–85). It suggests that these only appear to be duties
which further reflection might reveal to be illusory. This is not the
view: these principles express real facts (RG 20; FE 85). There is a
further worry, for these are not really duties of any kind (FE 84–85;
RG 20). He thinks instead that these principles simply specify factors
or features of a situation that speak in favour of or against, morally
speaking, an act or what to set ourselves to
 do.[2]
The fact that an act fails to fulfil a promise is a fact that counts
against it, morally. The fact that an act promotes a maximum of
aggregate good is a fact that counts in favour of it, morally. One way
to state what Ross has in mind, though this is controversial, is to say
that each principle specifies a fact that counts as a moral reason for
or against an act (Stratton-Lake 2002a xx, 2011a; also KT 21). Ross
suggests another, equally plausible view, that each of the principles
specifies a responsibility (FE 85). Therefore, we have responsibilities
to express gratitude, to compensate for past wrongs, to promote the
good, and so on. These responsibilities are what we are required to
draw on to determine what we ought all things considered to
do.
Is this list of responsibilities complete? Ross intimates that this
list is the best representation of the core commitments of
common-sense morality (RG 20; FE 190). He is confident that we have
these responsibilities. He states, for example, that
‘the existence of an obligation arising from the
making of a promise is so axiomatic that no moral universe can be
imagined in which it would not exist’ (FE 77; also
KT 42). He is not entirely confident that there exist only these
responsibilities; he offers this list ‘without
claiming completeness or finality for it’ (RG 20;
also 23). His view is not meant to be hostile to the idea that we might
recognise a ‘new duty’ in light
of new circumstances (FE 189). However, he does hold that
‘the general principles which it [i.e.,
intuitionism] regards as intuitively seen to be true are very few in
number and very general in character’ (FE 190). He
seems to think that most disputes about the above list would
revolve around what should be added rather than what should be
subtracted or reduced, since the responsibilities listed above are
‘authentic…duties’
(RG 23). But if new circumstances can lead to the recognition of new
duties, why may they not lead to the recognition that there are fewer
duties than we might otherwise have supposed? This seems to be the nub
of the issue between Ross and his ideal utilitarian foes.
Ideal utilitarians and others are keen to argue that
Ross's view is problematic because it is not
systematic enough. In Some Problems in Ethics, H. W. B. Joseph
suggested that views like Ross's go wrong, since
‘our obligations are not a heap of unrelated
obligations’ (Joseph 1931 92; also 67–68). Forty
years later, Rawls registered the same complaint: without some account
of how the plurality of normative principles are to be weighed against
one another using ‘reasonable ethical criteria, the
means of rational discussion have come to an end. An intuitionist
conception of justice [and by extension ethics] is, one might say, but
half a conception' (Rawls 1971 41).
Ross is moved in part by this sort of worry. He initially lists what
appear to be seven responsibilities, including a responsibility of
justice (a responsibility to bring about ‘a
distribution of happiness between other people in proportion to
merit’ (RG 26)) and a responsibility of
self-improvement (a responsibility to improve oneself in respect of
virtue and knowledge (RG 21)). He argues that these can be subsumed by
the responsibility ‘that we should produce as much
good as possible’ (RG 27; also 30; FE 288–89). But
beyond this reduction Ross will travel no further:
‘loyalty to the facts is worth more than a
symmetrical architecture or a hastily reached
simplicity’ (RG 23; also FE 83; OJ 125). Indeed, he
has a very strong case against many of his critics, including Moore,
Rashdall, and Joseph, since they adopt a form of value pluralism for
similar reasons. He has a further argument against Rawls.
Rawls's theory contains two principles of justice,
lexically ordered. His first principle outlining a set of basic rights
takes priority over his second principle outlining the correct
distribution of social benefits and burdens. Rawls does not think it is
ever right to violate rights in order to produce just distributions.
This gets him a theory that is as systematic as his classical average
utilitarian rival and more systematic than Ross's
theory, but Ross can argue that Rawls achieves system at the expense of
absolutism, which many acknowledge to have counterintuitive
results.
But it is not clear that Ross has a lock on the best representation
of common-sense morality. It is relatively clear that most hedonistic
utilitarians are reformers of common-sense morality (e.g., Bentham
1789; Mill 1863, 1843; Sidgwick 1907). These philosophers may not be
moved (at the level of moral foundations) by claims that their view
conflicts with common-sense morality. For their aim in part is to
revise it. Ross gives hedonism short shrift because he thinks it
obvious that pleasure is not the only thing that is intrinsically
valuable (RG 17, 99; FE 65). He often argues that ideal utilitarianism,
like hedonistic utilitarianism, can be dismissed because it is at odds
with common-sense morality (RG 17–19, 38). Yet, it is far from clear
that ideal utilitarianism is reformist like hedonistic or classical
utilitarianism. The better way to represent the dispute between ideal
utilitarians and Ross is over which view best represents common-sense
moral thinking. It is certainly the case that the main proponents of
ideal utilitarianism took themselves to be aiming to best represent
common-sense morality (e.g., Rashdall 1907; Pickard-Cambridge 1932b
152; Johnson 1953).
As Ross conducts it, the main dispute between the two revolves
around the issue of whether ideal utilitarians can make sense of the
obligation to keep one's promises.
Ross's view is that ‘to make a
promise is not merely to adapt an ingenious device for promoting the
general well-being; it is to put oneself in a new relation to one
person in particular, a relation which creates a specifically new
prima facie duty to him, not reducible to the duty of
promoting the general well-being of society’ (RG
38). He employs the following example to illustrate his initial case
(RG 34–35). Suppose that by fulfilling a promise to Edward you will
produce 100 units of good for him but that by breaking the promise and
doing something else that you have not promised to do you will produce
101 units of good for James. The ideal utilitarian view entails that it
is wrong to fulfil the promise: we must benefit James. But this is not
the verdict of common-sense morality. According to Ross, it takes a
much greater disparity in value between the two to justify begging off
on the promise (RG 35; FE 77, 90). In reply, the ideal utilitarian
argues that the common-sense verdict may be captured by noting that
breaking promises erodes mutual confidence and that keeping promises increases
mutual confidence (RG 38). These goods and evils tip the balance in
favour of keeping the promise. But Ross thinks this a lame response.
There will no doubt be cases where all the benefits of breaking the
promise will outweigh (though only very slightly) all the costs
associated with breaking it, and in this case the ideal utilitarian
will have to admit that it is obligatory to break the promise (RG 38).
Ross thinks that this is not the verdict of common-sense morality.
In a set of engaging essays, W. A. Pickard-Cambridge pressed Ross on
the issue of whether ideal utilitarianism was actually as at odds with
common-sense morality as Ross suggested (Pickard-Cambridge 1932a,
1932b, 1932c). Pickard-Cambridge first argues that there are strong
direct and indirect reasons for taking promises very seriously
(Pickard-Cambridge 1932b 153–157).  He further argues that
ideal utilitarianism accounts better for our intuitions about the
following kinds of cases:
In response to (1), Ross argues that we must insist on
‘some common sense in the interpretation of the
promise’ (FE 94; also 95, 96). Both Peter and Chuck
assume that if by 3:00 Peter is rendered unable ever to use his violin, then the promise is null and void. But the ideal utilitarian may see a weakness here and urge that she can provide an
interpretation and that her interpretation and its explanation fits
more easily with common-sense morality. Peter and Chuck assume what
they do because no good would otherwise come from insisting on the
promise being fulfilled.
In reply to (2), Ross contends that the promise ‘arose out of conversation with the miser, which was conducted under the implied contract to tell each other the truth’ (FE 97). Therefore the promise is null and
void. The difficulty with this reply is that to secure it Ross has to contend that the implied contract stipulates that we are to tell each other the whole truth or all of the truth, and it is not clear that this requirement is one to which the plain man subscribes. It is not obvious that when I sell you something I am required to tell you all the truths about the item for sale. The ideal utilitarian is in a better position to explain why in the case of the miser the implied contract to tell the truth requires that one not state that one is a beggar when one is not and why it does not require us to tell all of the truth in other cases. The contract is specified this way because this produces good outcomes. 
In reply to (3), Ross contends initially that if Anne has
‘a very delicate sense of honour’,
then she ought to consider paying the poor man on account of her
carelessness in agreeing unconditionally in the first place (FE 97).
This is not plausible. There is no reason to enrich an already rich person
simply because of carelessness (of this sort). Ross further argues that
what is promised is not that Anne pay $100.00; rather, what is promised
is that she pay a poor man $100.00, and since the man in question is no
longer poor, there is therefore no need to fulfil the promise (FE
97–98). But what drives this interpretation of the promise? The ideal
utilitarian may argue that the reason we interpret the promise this way
is that doing so promotes the good. Furthermore, the ideal utilitarian
can argue that even without thinking of this interpretation of the
promise we still believe that we have no or only very weak reasons to
pay, and that they can offer the best explanation of this fact. They
can also explain why this is (as Ross notes) a difficult issue to
decide: there are utilitarian reasons on either side.
Pickard-Cambridge further argues that ideal utilitarianism gives the
best explanation of the strength of a promise (1932b 159–163). Ross
agrees that some promises are more binding than others, e.g., the
promise to visit a sick friend is stronger than the promise to attend
the theatre with friends (FE 100). He suggests that the former is
stronger because of the value of what is being promised (FE 100). In
discussing his view that a casual promise is less binding and a recent
promise is more binding he adds that this is due to the fact that the
way in which and the time at which a promise has been made
‘intensify the promiser's
awareness of its existence and the promisee's
expectation of its fulfilment’ (FE 101). These
responses seem to play right into the hands of the ideal utilitarian:
the promise is more binding in the first case because of the greater
value at stake and in the second case because the expectation and the
disappointment are greater, all of which are goods of the sort that the
ideal utilitarian claims we need to balance in deciding what we ought
all things considered to do.
Ross has one final reply to Pickard-Cambridge, using the following
example. A is dying. He entrusts his property to B,
on the strength of B's promise to give it
to C. C does not know of A's intentions or
B's promise.  B's activities will not
disappoint A or C, nor will his activities
negatively effect the general mutual confidence. Suppose
that D could make better use of the property
than C. It follows on ideal utilitarianism that B
ought to give the property to D. Ross thinks this breach of
trust ‘outrageous’ (FE 105). 
The version of ideal utilitarianism to which Pickard-Cambridge subscribes seems to entail that B has no reason to fulfil the promise to A. This is a problem for the view. However, Ross's own view seems to imply revision in this case. He argues that ‘when we consider ourselves bound…to fulfil a promise, we think of the fulfilment of the promise as the bringing into existence of some
source of pleasure or satisfaction for the person to whom we have made
the promise’ (RG 162). This suggests that the rightness
of the promise depends on it producing some pleasure or satisfaction
for A. But since A is dead when B fulfils
the promise no pleasure or satisfaction can be brought into existence
for A, implying that B has no obligation by Ross's
lights to fulfil the promise. Ross might drop this requirement and
suggest only that the fulfilment of a promise be ‘bonific’
for someone (e.g., C) (RG 36). This seems to put him at odds with the plain man in other cases. Consider a
death-bed promise with a different content, that A be buried
with C, his wife. Suppose that this promise is not
bonific. Ross will have to say that there is no reason to fulfil
it. Hence, he'll have to advocate revision to common-sense
morality. Perhaps he can argue that his revision is more conservative
than the revisions required by ideal utilitarianism. But this is a
very thin difference, and may not be enough to give Ross the edge.
Given these worries and the fact that ideal utilitarianism seems quite
close to the plain man or common-sense morality in many of the other
important cases, that it would entail that it is right to break the
promise in the initial case above can hardly be considered a death blow.
The ideal utilitarian may not be satisfied with this outcome. Perhaps the more
appropriate route for her is not to opt for revision
to common-sense morality. For this may in the end give Ross a
philosophical advantage, especially if he drops the claim that it is a
necessary condition of act of promise keeping being right that it be
‘bonific’ or promote some good and if he can find satisfactory replies to Pickard-Cambridge's objections.  Instead, perhaps the
better strategy is to suggest that they can capture the importance of
promise keeping to common-sense morality by holding that promise
keeping is intrinsically valuable or at least that promise breaking is
intrinsically evil (Johnson 1953, 1959; Ewing 1957, 1959; Brennan
1989; Shaver 2011). The general strategy is to subsume all of Ross's
non-utilitarian duties in this way. This is a compelling response. To
assess it, it is important to examine his theory of value.
In RG, Ross contends that four things are intrinsically good:
justice (happiness apportioned to merit),
 pleasure[3],
knowledge and virtue (or, ‘virtuous disposition and
action, i.e. action, or disposition to act, from any one of certain
motives, of which at all events the most notable are the desire to do
one's duty, the desire to bring into being something
that is good, and the desire to give pleasure or save pain to
others’ (RG 134)) (RG 134–141). Virtue, knowledge
and pleasure are states of mind, while justice is a relation between
states of mind (RG
 140).[4]
 These values are not of the same
importance. Ross holds that virtue is the most important and that some
virtuous motives are more important than others (e.g., the desire to do
one's duty is more valuable than the desire to
promote others’ pleasure) (RG 152, 153, 164, 166).
Knowledge is the next most important of the
 values.[5]
Knowledge is more important than right opinion, since the former has
certainty which the latter lacks (RG 138–139, 146), and
‘knowledge of general principles is intellectually
more valuable than knowledge of isolated matters of
fact’ (RG 147). The least most valuable is 
pleasure (RG 152). It is not clear where to place justice in this
hierarchy, since Ross says only that it is
less valuable than virtue (RG 153–154). It is not implausible to think
that it should be placed between (virtuous) knowledge and 
pleasure, and therefore that the values are ranked as follows: virtue,
(virtuous) knowledge, justice and pleasure.
In FE, Ross defends a slightly different view. He appears to maintain again
that there are four values: virtue, intellectual and aesthetic
activities, justice and (others’) pleasure (FE 19, 73, 180, 262,
278, 288–289). In RG, Ross maintains that all intrinsic values
are valuable in the same way: the goodness of good things is intrinsic
to them (RG 115, 118, 132; also KT 11–12; OJ 119). But in FE he
revises this view. He contends that virtue and intellectual activities
are ‘fit objects of admiration’ or objects ‘worthy
of admiration’ (FE 282–283). The goodness of these things
is a ‘quality intrinsic to them’ (FE 278). The values of
justice and pleasure are ‘worthy objects of satisfaction’
or things in which it is right to take satisfaction or an interest (FE
275, 278, 282, 283, 289). The goodness of these things is not
intrinsic to them; rather, it is a relational property, which depends
on our rightly taking an interest or rightly finding (some kind of)
satisfaction in them (FE 278). This appears to follow from the fact
that ‘while it is self-evident that the only ground on which a
thing is worthy of admiration is that it is good in itself, it is not
self-evident that the only ground on which a thing is worthy of our
interest or liking is that it is good in itself’ (FE
 279).[6]
 This distinction allows Ross to explain why only innocent pleasures or
pleasures that are not undeserved or taken in the misfortune of others
or in lust or in cruelty are good (RG 136–137; FE
271–272), and why only the pleasure of others is good and hence
why we think that we have to promote only them (FE 74–75, 272,
276, 279, 283,
 322).[7]
 The reason that only innocent pleasure is
valuable is that only it is worthy of satisfaction, and the reason
that only the pleasure of others is valuable is that only it is an
object of ‘sympathetic satisfaction’ (FE 276). One's own
pleasure is not an object of sympathetic satisfaction, since one
cannot feel sympathy for oneself; instead, one's own pleasure is
merely an
inevitable object of satisfaction (FE 75).
That in FE Ross holds that there are four goods is controversial. It has
been suggested that in FE Ross rejects the view that pleasure is
intrinsically good (Stratton-Lake 2002a xli–xlii, 2002b 130). This is hard to accept. He
repeatedly claims that the pleasure of others is 
good (FE 278, 279, 282, 283, 322; KT 11–12; AT
 232).[8] 
He thinks we have a duty to promote the pleasure of others
and that the basis of this judgement is that their pleasure is good (FE
283, 284, 288). Finally, it really would be contrary to the plain
man's view and to reflective thinking to deny that pleasure is a good and that pain is an
evil.[9]

The view that Ross thinks that justice is good is also
less clear. He often states that there are only three non-instrumental
goods (FE 19, 180, 262, 278; KT 11–12; OJ 119, 120, 121). In early
writings, he claims that justice is a requirement of duty not a value
(OJ 123). However, since he suggests quite clearly at one point that he
thinks that justice is good in the same sense that the pleasure of
others is good it is not unreasonable to think that he holds that
justice is a good (FE 288–289). He also suggests at one point that promise
keeping is good in the same way that justice and pleasure are good (FE
289). But he more often rejects the claim that promise keeping is good
(FE 141, 142), suggesting that not all things that are objects worthy of
satisfaction are valuable.[10]
It is now possible to assess the second ideal utilitarian reply to
Ross mentioned above. Some ideal utilitarians contend that his
objections to the view may be overcome by arguing that promise keeping,
reparation, and gratitude are non-instrumentally valuable. The most
plausible argument of this variety states that Ross must accept that
promise keeping is valuable (or at least that promise
breaking is evil) because he accepts that knowledge and justice are
valuable and there is no real distinction between these values and the
value of keeping promises or the disvalue of breaking promises (Shaver 2011). The
characterisation provided above of Ross's theory of
value provides him with a defence. He seems to insist on any occasions that only states of
mind or relations between states of mind have value.
Promise keeping, reparation, and gratitude are not merely states of mind or relations between states of mind. Therefore, they cannot be good. 
One worry is that knowledge is not merely a state of consciousness.
In RG, Ross insists that knowledge has intrinsic value. He sometimes
suggests this in FE. However, his considered view is that it is not
knowledge but intellectual and aesthetic activities that have value (FE
19, 27, 73, 180, 262, 266, 267, 278, 282–283, 284, 290, 296; also OJ 119,
120, 121; KT 11-12). It is not unreasonable to think that Ross moved away from
thinking that it is knowledge that has value and to thinking that it
is intellectual (and aesthetic) activity that has value
because only the latter is properly called a state of consciousness. This might be problematic for Ross. If he rejects the idea that knowledge is intrinsically
valuable while accepting that intellectual activities are
intrinsically valuable, he cannot account for the fact that knowledge
appears to be more important than justified opinion (Shaver 2011). But Ross can
argue that knowledge is more important because of its instrumental
properties, e.g., it helps us better promote justice or morality or
pleasure. A fortiori the claim that it is intellectual
activities that are intrinsically good explains why some instances of knowledge are
more important than others. Ross says that ‘different
instances of this [intellectual] activity are good in proportion as
they are conducted according to these principles’ (FE 270),
i.e., principles discovered by logic. Because more philosophical or
more general knowledge requires greater and more sophisticated use of
‘the principles discovered by logic’ (FE 270), it is
better. The value of the intellectual activities explains the value of
the knowledge.
But what about the fact that justice is an intrinsic value? It is
not a state of consciousness; it is a relation between states of
mind(RG 140). If Ross is willing to accept this as
a good, why not accept that promise keeping, and so on, are good? It
might be that he can still insist that justice is different from
promise keeping, reparation, and gratitude because it is compounded from states of consciousness and that is why it and not these other things
are good. However, perhaps the better reply is simply
to drop justice from his list of values. He repeatedly 
contends that it is only states of mind that have value (OJ 118; RG
122, 106–107, 140; FE 259, 270; KT 21), and justice is not a state of
mind. He can insist on this view and block the ideal utilitarian
response. He is open to characterising justice as a requirement of duty
rather than a value (FE 319), and he loses little by dropping it as a
value. Further, he might argue that understanding justice as a moral
requirement is the best way to think of it if one wants to capture what
we
 think.[11]
In this case, the burden of proof is on
the ideal utilitarian.
Ross relies quite heavily on the Moorean isolation method to defend
his value theory (Moore 1903). His value theory came under much less
scrutiny than did his deontic theory, and therefore he did not see fit
to consider monistic responses to it. This may in part be due to the
fact that there is agreement amongst his main rivals—Moore,
Rashdall, Pickard-Cambridge, Ewing, and Johnson—that value
pluralism is true. This may also be due in part to the fact that he
considered the main monistic rival—that is, hedonism—a
dead end (RG 98; FE 65). But hedonism lives on (Feldman 2004; Mendola
2006; Crisp 2006; Bradley 2009). Therefore, it may be that Ross's
value theory is in for a challenge that neither he nor his ideal
utilitarian critics anticipated.
To get a taste of what this challenge may look like consider the
following hedonistic reply to Ross's argument for
the idea that virtue is intrinsically valuable. Hedonists hold
pace Ross that while it is obvious that virtue is
instrumentally good and vice is instrumentally bad, it is far from
clear that the former is intrinsically good and the latter is
intrinsically bad. In response, Ross asks us to imagine two
worlds, W1
and W2. W1
and W2 include the same quantity of
pleasure. However, W1 contains agents that are
virtuous, who act from or who are disposed to act from the right
motives, while W2 contains agents who are vicious,
who act from or who are disposed to act from the wrong motives. Is
not W1 preferable to W2? Ross
thinks it is, and he says that what explains this is that virtue is
intrinsically good (RG 134).
But the hedonist has a reply. The situation envisaged is impossible,
for surely W1 would have more pleasure
than W2 because typically virtuous people produce
more pleasure than vicious people. Indeed, would not a world with
virtuous people be more likely to continue to be filled with pleasure
and lack the possibility of descending into chaos than a world with
vicious people? Is not this ultimately the reason why we desire or
prefer it? In response, Ross reminds us that not all pleasure springs
from the actions of virtuous people and not all pain springs from
actions of vicious (RG 134). Some issues from ‘the operation of
natural laws’ (RG 134). Suppose, then, that there are two
worlds, W1
and W2. W1 contains virtuous
people and W2 contains vicious people, and that
the two worlds contain equal amounts of pleasure, because
although W1-type worlds usually contain more
pleasure than W2-type worlds,
W1's extra virtue-generated pleasure is offset by
‘a much greater incidence of disease’, making the worlds
equal in pleasure. Ross contends that it is still the case that the
virtuous world, W1, is better
than W2.
This is a good response, but the hedonist has a rejoinder. Would not
W1 be on the whole better (hedonistically
speaking) in the long run because of the virtuous people? Would
not W1 be a place where it is more likely to be
the case that a cure is found or where it is more likely that pain is
treated effectively and sympathetically or where it is more likely to
remain stable enough to handle the disease and illness? Ross may rely
on strategies that are similar to the ones he adopts against the ideal
utilitarian's attempt to show that she can explain the importance of
promise keeping (RG 38).  But it is clear that proponents of Ross's
view of value may well have to contend with arguments of this variety
given the recent resurgence of hedonism.
How do we acquire moral and axiological knowledge? Ross maintains
that ‘both in mathematics and in ethics we have
certain crystal-clear intuitions from which we build up all that we can
know about the nature of numbers and the nature of
duty’ (FE 144). Our knowledge of the basic moral and
axiological propositions which are the object of our moral intuitions
is non-inferential (OJ 121, 123; RG 29, 146; FE 144, 172, 262, 320).
They are non-inferentially knowable because they are self-evident or
knowable on the basis of an understanding alone (RG 20n1, 29; FE 320).
For example, that we have a responsibility to keep our promises is
self-evident. It is by a process of reflection on this proposition that
we come to apprehend that we have this responsibility. Ross thinks we
can trust our moral apprehensions, and since apprehension is a matter
of knowledge, and knowledge implies certainty, he is certain that we
have the above responsibilities and that certain things are
intrinsically valuable (RG 146, 29, 30; KT 42; cf. Audi 2004).
That our responsibilities are self-evident does not entail that they
are obvious to everyone who reflects on them. Ross maintains that a
responsibility is self-evident ‘not in the sense
that it is evident from the beginning of our lives, or as soon as we
attend to the proposition for the first time, but in the sense that
when we have reached sufficient mental maturity and have given
sufficient attention to the proposition it is evident without any need
of proof, or of evidence beyond itself. It is self-evident just as a
mathematic axiom, or the validity of a form of inference, is
evident’ (RG 29; also 12, 32; KT 42). The analogy with
mathematics is instructive, for we acquire our moral knowledge in the
same way we acquire knowledge of mathematical axioms. We apprehend that
2+2 = 4 by apprehending that 2+2 matches makes 4 matches and that 2+2
balls makes 4 balls, and so on. We apprehend the algorithm in the
particular cases after repeated exposure to particular instances of its
application, by a process of intuitive induction (FE 170). We apprehend
that it is prima facie right to keep promises by apprehending
that it is prima facie right to fulfill this or that
particular promise. ‘What comes first in time is the
apprehension of the self-evident prima facie rightness of an
individual act of a particular type. From this we come by reflection to
apprehend the self-evident general principle of prima facie
duty’ (RG 33; also FE 170).
How do we decide what we ought to do, all things considered, in
some particular circumstance? What is the relationship between the
responsibilities we have and the ‘actual or absolute duty to do
one particular act in particular circumstances’ (RG 28)? Our
self-evident responsibilities are not ‘principles by the
immediate application of which our duty in particular circumstances
can be deduced’ (FE 84; also 169; OJ 122, 127). Rather, one
determines what one ought to do all things considered, that is, one's
actual duty or one's duty proper, by reference to ‘all
the morally significant kinds it [the act] is an instance of’
(RG 20; italics in original; also FE 84, 186; OJ 126–127). What
one has most responsibility to do or what is most suitable all things
considered ‘belongs to an act in virtue of its whole nature and
of nothing less than this’ (RG 28; also 33, 132).
We never know what we ought to do all things considered. Instead, we
have a ‘considered opinion’ or
‘probable opinion’ regarding what
we ought all things considered to do in a particular situation (RG 19,
30, 31, 33; FE 189, 190, 191; OJ 122, 123, 127). An example will help
us here. Imagine that I can help my neighbour with his gardening
project and this will produce a lot of good for both of us. I have also
promised you that I will meet you to discuss an assignment, but this
produces less good than helping my neighbour. Ross says that in this
case we have to balance the two responsibilities. He thinks that
typically the requirement to keep one's promises is
more stringent than the requirement to benefit other people (RG 19). In
such situations what you ought to do is that thing
‘of all those possible for the agent in the
circumstances, [that has]…the greatest balance of
prima facie rightness, in those respects in which they are
prima facie right, over their prima facie wrongness,
in those respects in which they are prima facie
wrong’ (RG 41; also RG 46). The act which is
one's actual duty or duty proper is the one for
which one is most responsible or to which the weightier of
one's responsibilities attach (FE 85; RG 41–42).
‘This sense of our particular duty in particular
circumstances, preceded and informed by the fullest reflection we can
bestow on the act in all its bearings, is highly fallible, but it is
the only guide we have to our duty’ (RG 42). In the
end, the decision regarding what to do, to use
Aristotle's phrase, ‘rests with
perception’ (RG 42; OJ 127; Aristotle1109b23,
1126b4). It is important to note that all of the responsibilities have
a valence, positive or negative, and this valence persists even when a
responsibility is outweighed by weightier responsibilities.
This epistemology has been attacked from a variety of different
angles. One main worry is that there is very little agreement in
intuitions, and this suggests that there is no fact of the matter as to
what has value or what one is responsible for. Ross concedes that there
is a lot of disagreement. His response begins by noting that a lot of
moral diversity rests not on ‘disagreement about
fundamental moral principles, but partly on differences in the
circumstances of different societies, and partly on different views
which people hold, not on moral questions but on questions of
fact’ (FE 18). He thinks that most of the
differences concern media axiomata, i.e., attempts to apply
general principles to particular circumstances, which rest on different
circumstances or different factual beliefs (FE 18–19). About these, he
says that intuitionists must have an open mind (FE 190).
There are many differences that cannot be explained away in this
fashion, however (FE 19). There are differences as to the
‘comparative worth of different
goods’ (FE 19) and as to the stringency of the
responsibilities Ross endorses (FE 186–188). These disagreements should
not, he thinks, undermine our confidence that there is objective moral
truth. It is very hard to see a resolution to these problems. He says
that despite changes in scientific theories there is a sense that
science progresses toward the truth. The same is true in ethics. There
is no reason to ‘doubt that man progresses fairly
steadily towards moral truth as he does towards
scientific’ (FE 20). The difficulty with this
response is that whereas in scientific matters there is an independent
way of establishing progress, there is no such independent or seemingly
independent way of establishing this in ethics. Recent research in the
social sciences on moral judgement should not leave us confident
(Greene 2008; Singer 2005).
The problems with Ross's moral epistemology are
compounded by the fact that he thinks that the principles of his
framework best reflect the main elements of common-sense moral
thinking, and that this is necessary to an acceptable moral theory.
This threatens to make his position appear parochial (Hare 1971). He is
aware of this worry. He replies by noting that the number of principles
that intuitionism endorses is small in number and general in content
and that this leaves room to reject much of what is commonly taken to
be right (FE 190). This seems like the right kind of move to make.
However, it puts him in a rather awkward position. If it really is true
that the number is small and that it is possible therefore to reject
much of what is commonly recognized to be morally required, then the
position has a more reformist edge, and to the extent that it is
reformist it is more rather than less like the other views that Ross
rejects. In this case, it makes it much more difficult for him to fault
his rivals for not capturing common-sense morality. If he attempts to
move more toward the plain man's view, then although
he can more easily raise objections to ideal utilitarianism and other
views, he is much more likely to lose his critical element and
therefore fend off the charge of parochialism. The point may be made
another way. The more general and less robust his list of
responsibilities and goods the less likely the charge of parochialism
may stick, but it is also less likely that the view is as close to
common sense as he suggests, in which case that his opponents deviate
from it to some extent is not a mark against them or at least cannot be
used by Ross as a mark against them.
Like many in his time, Ross took pains to undermine various
definitions of moral terms. He draws a distinction between
naturalistic and non-naturalistic definitions. The former are
‘definitions which claim to define an ethical term without using
any other ethical term’ (FE 6). The latter are definitions which
attempt ‘to define one ethical term by the aid of another’
(FE 6; cf. 42).  Ross rejects all naturalistic definitions of moral
terms, including ‘right’ and (intrinsic)
‘good’. In RG, he argues (following Moore 1912 and
Sidgwick 1907) that the moral terms ‘right’ and
‘ought’ are incapable of definition: ‘right’
is an ‘irreducible notion’ (RG 12). In FE, he suggests
again that ‘right’ is indefinable (FE 42), though he is
sympathetic to the idea that ‘right’ is definable in terms
of ‘suitable’ (FE 52–55). On this view, ‘this
act is right’ means ‘this act has “the
greatest amount of suitability possible in the
circumstances”’ (FE 53; also 55). This is not a naturalist
definition, since ‘suitability’ is itself a ‘unique
and indefinable’ ethical notion (FE 146; also 159). In RG, Ross
appears to reject all naturalistic attempts to define
‘good’ (RG 78ff.). He is in particular keen to impugn
views that provide relational accounts of ‘good’; that is, views that define it in terms of some relation to a mental state, e.g., desire. His view appears to be that ‘goodness is a quality which
can no more be defined in terms of anything other than itself, than
can the quality of the sensation which we describe as being one of
“seeing yellow”’(RG 86). In FE, he seems to affirm
the view that ‘good’ is indefinable (FE 262), though again
he seems sympathetic to a non-naturalistic definition, according to
which ‘good’ is definable in terms of
‘admirable’ or ‘commendable’ (FE 271, 283).
He says that this sense of ‘good’ applies only to things
that are intrinsically good in the sense of being objects worthy of
admiration, and (as noted above) only virtue and
intellectual activity are worthy of admiration (FE 283). The notion
of ‘good’ as applied to the goods of pleasure and justice
can be defined relationally. These goods are not objects worthy of
admiration but rather fit objects of satisfaction. Both notions of
good are in a sense definable, but the definitions are non-natural: in
both cases ‘good’ is defined in terms of
‘worthiness’ or ‘rightness’ (FE 279, 282).
Ross suggests a number of arguments against various (naturalistic and
non-naturalistic) definitions of moral terms. He relies in part on the
following kind of argument, which is directed at Moore (RG 8). If
‘right’ and ‘being productive of the greatest good
in the circumstances’ mean the same thing, then it is not the
case that it is intelligible that the proposition ‘the
“right act” just is “the act productive of the greatest
good in the circumstances”’ should have been denied and
maintained ‘with so much fervour; for we do not fight for or
against analytic propositions’ (RG 8).  It is intelligible that
these propositions should have been denied and maintained with so much
fervour. Therefore, it is not the case that ‘right’ and
‘productive of the greatest good in the circumstances’
mean the same thing. This argument can be generalised to reject the
usual suspects, e.g., ‘right’ means ‘approved of by
me’ or ‘right’ means ‘approved of by the
majority of society’, and so on. But it is not the best
argument, since we may well fight over analytic propositions,
especially when they are opaque or unobvious.
Ross seems to acknowledge this sort of worry. He writes that
‘the fact that we accept some definition as correct shows that
the term did somehow stand for a complex of elements; yet the fact
that we are for some time in doubt about whether the term is
analysable, and if so, what the correct analysis is, shows that this
complex of elements was not distinctly present to our mind before, or
during, the search for a definition’ (RG 92–93). In reply, he
says that the only way to rebut the claim that ‘right’ and
‘good’ are definable (naturalistically) is to examine
‘all the definitions that possess any initial
plausibility’ (RG 93). To these we should apply two tests (FE
259; RG 93). First, we should determine whether ‘the definition
applies to all things to which the term applies, and to no
others’ (FE 259; also RG 93). Second, we should ask whether the
proposed definition expresses ‘explicitly what we had implicitly
in mind when we used the term’ (FE 259; also RG 93). Using these
tools, Ross rejects (among others) the position that ‘this act
is right’ means ‘all or most men…react to the act
with a feeling of approval’ (FE 24). We often judge that an act
is right even when we know that we are alone in holding this view (FE
25).
These are not the only arguments on which Ross relies. Against the
claim that ‘right’ means ‘awakes in me the emotion
of approval’ (FE 22), he argues that it is unable to explain
‘the possibility of difference of opinion on the rightness of
acts’ (FE 24). On this view, if I say ‘incest is
impermissible’ and you say ‘incest is permissible’
we are not disagreeing, since all I am saying is ‘incest awakes
in me the emotion of disapproval’ and all you are saying is
‘incest awakes in me the emotion of approval’, two
statements that appear to be ‘perfectly compatible’ with
each other (FE 24). But we want to say that the two statements are not
compatible. Ross gives the same argument against the claim that
‘X is good’ means ‘I have a certain feeling
toward X’. If I say ‘X is good’
and you say ‘X is bad’, then you are saying that
you have a certain (negative) feeling toward X and I am
saying that I have a certain (positive) feeling toward X, two
statements that seem to be compatible with each other. Yet, he urges,
‘if anything is clear, it is that we do suppose ourselves to be
making incompatible statements about the object’ (RG 83).
Ross also appears to reject various analyses of moral terms in order
to preserve a certain way of conducting moral philosophy (Shaver 2007
286, 295). He notes that ‘there is a system of moral truth, as
objective as all truth must be, which, and whose implications, we are
interested in discovering’ (RG 15; also 20, 29; KT 60). The
discovery of these truths is not a matter of scientific
(empirical) investigation. Ethical truths are not discovered by
‘mere observation’ (FE 7; also 168). Instead, they are
‘grasped by an intuitive act of human reason’ (FE 3).
‘The use of the senses, and the physical sciences, give us no
propositions in which ‘right’ or ‘obligatory’
occurs as a term’ (KT 87). There are ‘two types of
predicate—those that can be discovered by experience to belong
to their subjects, and those that can be discovered by insight, and
let us grant that rightness belongs to the second class’ (KT
81). In science, ‘sense-experience…furnishes…real
data’ (RG 40). In ethics, ‘no such appeal is possible. We
have no more direct way of access to the facts about rightness and
goodness and about what things are right or good, than by thinking
about them’ (RG 40; emphasis added; also 82). To entrench
this idea he draws analogies between mathematic and logical knowledge
and ethical knowledge (RG 29, 30, 32; KT 42, 85; FE 320). He is fan of
synthetic a priori truths in ethics (and elsewhere) (FE 35–36;
also 320). Since it might be possible to arrive at ethical knowledge
by means of (mere) experience if moral terms were reducible to natural
terms, this provides Ross with an incentive to show that no such
reduction is possible. He wants in short to protect a moral
methodology that prizes appeal to what ‘we’ think, the
thoughts of the ‘best and most enlightened’ (FE 172),
consensus amongst experts (OJ 119–120; FE 191) and various kinds
of thought experiments. Indeed, it has been suggested that through the
use of these tools it is possible to demonstrate that though
‘right’ is not synonymous with a natural property it
nonetheless refers to some natural property, e.g., what has the
greatest balance of justice, beneficence, fidelity, and so on, over
injustice, non-maleficence and infidelity, and so on (Shaver 2007
289). (This may be controversial if such notions as
‘justice’ are incapable of complete naturalization. If
complete naturalization is not an option, then Ross may be forced to
endorse a less palatable metaphysics.)
Ross holds that the basic claims of morality express ‘facts
which are self-evidently necessary’ (FE 320; also 262). Are
these objective facts of a special kind? The standard suggestion is
that for Ross moral facts are non-natural facts or non-natural
properties (Stratton-Lake 2002a xxi; Frankena 1963 86–87; 1973 103). It
is not clear that he actually holds this view. He says very little
about the nature of moral facts except (perhaps unhelpfully) to
compare them to mathematical and logical facts. He does not appear to
infer from the fact that naturalistic definitions of moral terms fail
that therefore the terms refer to distinct properties. His focus is
almost entirely on definitions of ‘right’ and (intrinsic)
‘good’. His concern is with what ‘we have in
mind’ not with properties (FE 13, 42), though, problematically,
he often refers to ‘good’ as a ‘quality’ or
‘characteristic’ or ‘property’ (RG 82, 87, 88,
110, 122; FE 278, 279). He writes that ‘the difference between
goodness or value and such attributes as yellowness is there whereas
the latter are differentiae…of their possessors, the
former is a property (i.e. a consequential attribute) of
them’ (RG 121; italics in original). It is not clear that Ross
intends this view to be an inference from his arguments against
naturalistic or other analyses. That he offers no explicit argument to
this effect suggests that he likely did not intend the inference
(cf. Stratton-Lake 2002a), and he nowhere rules out that moral
properties are natural properties. At any rate, he does not need to
make this inference to achieve the aims he has in rebutting the
various definitions he discusses. The arguments he uses are sufficient
to preserve (in his view) plausible moral semantics, moral
disagreement, and his moral methodology. This should please the
adherents of this view, though it still leaves Ross with the task of
making sense of the nature of moral truth if it is not to be
understood as correspondence to the moral facts.
Ross's appeal to self-evidence and his defence of
the synthetic a priori may seem problematic to many, though
recent defences of these views suggest that their fortunes are
improving (Stratton-Lake 2002a, 2002b; Audi 1996, 2004; Crisp 2002; Parfit 2011). To
defend himself, Ross might simply eschew appeal to self-evidence and
certainty with respect to intuitions about general principles and
replace them with appeal to moral beliefs of high reliability or to
considered convictions about moral claims (Griffin 1996; Rawls 1971;
Hooker 2000). This seems to give him what he needs methodologically.
The appeal to considered convictions allows him the ability to say, for
example, that we know directly that pain is bad and that it is wrong to
harm others without good reason; in addition, he can avoid the defects
of coherence theories of justification (FE 141). This (importantly)
puts him on the same level as almost all moral theorists working today.
It is less clear that Ross is able to divest himself of synthetic a
prior truths. But if his endorsement of the synthetic a
priori truths is one way of securing the standard way of doing
moral philosophy, which involves appeal to thought-experiments,
intuition, what we think, and so on, it is more difficult to reject. It
is more difficult to reject still if we accept such claims in areas
outside ethics and if we are not keen on (radical forms of)
empiricism.
Ross's contemporary importance in ethics rests on the fact
that he articulates one of the most plausible forms of deontology. He
outlines a view that attempts to avoid the alleged deficiencies of
utilitarianism without embracing the alleged excesses of Kantianism.
Indeed, it serves as an important source of inspiration for those dissatisfied
with these positions. That these are found by many to be
uninspiring explains the recent resurgence of Ross's
view in ethics and applied ethics (Audi 2004; Beauchamp and Childress
2008; Stratton-Lake 2011b). Ross also outlines a moral epistemology that is distinct from
the coherentist reflective equilibrium that has held sway over moral
philosophy for the last forty years. He relies on the idea that at the
core of ethics there are certain self-evident propositions that are
made true by moral facts, and which can be discovered by reflection on
what we think about moral and axiological questions. Those dissatisfied
with the standard model for doing moral philosophy but who at the same
time find themselves attracted to the idea that ethical theories should
capture the main elements of common-sense morality do well to consult
Ross's unique contribution to moral
epistemology.