As with so many important medieval figures, we know little about
William's early years. According to one manuscript source, he was
born in Aurillac, in the province of Auvergne in south-central France.
His birth date is unknown, but since he was a professor of theology at
the University of Paris by 1225, a position rarely attained before the
age of 35, he is not likely to have been born later than 1190, and
scholars have placed his probable birth date some time between 1180 and
1190. He may have come from a poor background, as the Dominican,
Stephen of Bourbon (died c. 1261), tells a story of William begging as
a young child (Valois 1880, 4). He was a canon of Notre Dame and a
master of theology by 1223, and is mentioned in bulls of Pope Honorius
III in 1224 and 1225.
The story of his elevation to the episcopacy in 1228 paints a
picture of a man of great determination and self-confidence. The
previous year the Bishop of Paris, Bartholomeus, had died, and the
canons of the chapter of Notre Dame met to select his successor. The
initial selection of a cantor named Nicholas did not secure unanimous
agreement and was contested, in particular, by William. Nicholas
excused himself, and the canons went on to choose the Dean of the
Cathedral. William again contested the election and went to Rome to
appeal to the Pope to vacate it. He made a favorable impression, for
the Pope, impressed by his “eminent knowledge and spotless
virtue,” as he put it (Valois, 11), both ordained him priest and
made him Bishop of Paris, a position he retained until his death in
1249.
It was not long before the Pope would have regrets. In February 1229
a number of students were killed by the forces of the queen-regent,
Blanche of Castile, when they intervened in a drunken student riot
during Carnival. Outraged, the masters and students appealed to
William for redress of their rights, but William failed to take action.
The students and masters went on strike, dispersing from Paris and
appealing to Pope Gregory IX. It was apparently during this period that
William gave the Dominicans their first chair in theology at the
university. The Pope, who was to remark that he regretted “having
made this man,” rebuked William, appointed a commission to settle
the dispute, and ordered William to reinstate the striking
masters. Nevertheless, William went on to receive important
missions from the Pope in subsequent years, acting, for example, as a
papal representative in peace negotiations between France and England
in 1231.
In 1239 William was closely involved in the condemnation of the
Talmud. The Pope had asked him for his response to a list of heresies
in the Talmud proposed by a converted Jew, Nicholas. William's
response led to a papal bull ordering the confiscation of sacred books
from synagogues in 1240, and to their burning in 1242.
William died at the end of March (the exact date is unsure) in 1249,
and was buried in the Abbey of St. Victor.
William's most important philosophical writings form part of a
vast seven-part work he calls the Magisterium divinale et
sapientiale, a title Teske translates as ‘Teaching on God in
the mode of wisdom.’ The Magisterium is generally taken
to consist of the following seven works in the order given:
William did not compose the parts of the Magisterium in
their rational order, and appears to have developed his conception of
its structure as he wrote its various parts. He viewed it as having two
principal parts. The first part is comprised of De Trinitate,
De universo, and De anima. In this, the most
philosophical part of the Magisterium, William proceeds by
“the paths of proofs” or philosophizing rather than by an
appeal to the authority of revelation. He intends in this part to
combat a range of philosophical errors incompatible, as he sees it,
with the Christian faith. In On the Trinity he develops his
metaphysics, attacking, among others, errors regarding creation, divine
freedom and the eternity of the world, and follows it with a
philosophical treatment of the Trinity. William's vast work,
On the Universe, is divided into two principal parts. The
first part is concerned with the corporeal universe and is divided into
three parts, the first arguing for a single first principle and for the
oneness of the universe, the second taking up the question of the
beginning of the universe and its future state, and the third treating
the governance of the universe through God's providence. The
second principal part is concerned with the spiritual universe, and is
divided into three parts concerning, respectively, the intelligences or
spiritual beings posited by Aristotle and his followers, the good and
holy angels, and the bad and wicked angels, that is, demons. On the
Soul is concerned with the human soul. It is divided into seven
parts concerning, respectively, its existence, its essence, its
composition, the number of souls in a human being, how the human soul
comes into being, the state of the soul in the body, and the
soul's relation to God, with a focus on the human intellect.
The works comprising the second part of the Magisterium are
more expressly theological in nature and appeal to the authority of
revelation. Nevertheless, William continually recurs to his
philosophical doctrines in all his works, and even his most theological
writings contain material of considerable philosophical interest. In
particular, his treatises On Virtues and Morals and On
Faith and Laws are of great importance for his moral
philosophy.
Scholars agree that On the Trinity is the earliest work in
the Magisterium and that it was probably written in the early
1220s. Parts of other works can be partially dated by references to
contemporaneous events, though the sheer size of many individual works
suggests they were probably written over a period of years. The whole
Magisterium itself was probably written during a period
extending from the early 1220s to around 1240, with On the
Universe written in the 1230s and On the Soul completed
by around 1240.
Besides the works contained in the Magisterium, other works
of philosophical importance are De bono et malo I (On Good
and Evil), where William develops a theory of value; De
immortalitate animae (On the Immortality of the
Soul), a companion to the treatment of immortality in On the
Soul; and De gratia et libero arbitrio (On Grace and
Free Choice), a treatment of the Pelagian heresy.
In addition, William wrote some biblical commentaries, a number of
other major theological works, and a large number of sermons. For
details, see Ottman 2005.
Most of William's works have not been critically edited;
several are extant only in manuscript form. The standard edition, which
includes all the works that comprise the Magisterium, is the
1674 Orléans-Paris Opera omnia (OO). (The sermons
contained in this edition are by William Perrauld, not William of
Auvergne.)  As might be expected, the texts in this old edition
are often in need of correction; Teske has conjectured many corrections
in his translations.
The reader of William's philosophical works is struck by their
difference in character from the mainstream of philosophical and
theological writing of the early thirteenth century. Whereas
William's contemporaries tend to compose works as a series of
linked questions, each treated according to the question method (a
paradigm of which is Aquinas's later Summa theologiae),
William instead follows the practice of Avicenna and Avicebron and
composes treatises much more akin to a modern book. Indeed, William
even models his writing style to some degree on the Latin translations
of these authors. These features, together with William's
frequent use of analogies, metaphors and examples drawn from everyday
life, his long-winded, rambling prose and frequent digressions, his
harsh assessments of opponents as imbeciles or morons, and his urging
that proponents of dangerous doctrines be wiped out by fire and sword,
make for an inimitable and immediately recognizable style.
One of the costs of this style, however, is that at times it can be
hard to tell precisely what William thinks. Too often he lets metaphors
or analogies bear the argumentative burden in lieu of more careful
analysis. And while William's inventive mind could generate
arguments for a position with ease, their quality is uneven: often he
proposes problematic arguments without appearing to recognize the
difficulties they contain, as may be apparent below to the discerning
reader, while at other times he shows an acute awareness of the
fundamental problems an issue raises.
William was one of the first thinkers in the Latin West to begin to
engage seriously with Aristotle's writings on metaphysics and
natural philosophy and with the thought of Islamic and Jewish thinkers,
especially Avicenna (Ibn Sīnā, 980–1037) and Avicebron
(Solomon Ibn Gabirol, 1021/2–1057.8). The works of these thinkers,
which had been coming into circulation in Latin translations from
around the middle of the twelfth century, presented both philosophical
sophistication and theological danger. Indeed, in 1210, public and
private lecturing on Aristotle's works on natural philosophy and
commentaries on them was forbidden at Paris, and in 1215 the papal
legate, Cardinal Robert of Courçon forbade “masters in arts
from ‘reading,’ i.e., lecturing, on Aristotle's books
on natural philosophy along with the Metaphysics and
Summae of the same (probably certain works of Avicenna and
perhaps of Alfarabi)” (Wippel 2003, 66). This prohibition
remained in effect until it unofficially lapsed around 1231.
Nevertheless, it must be emphasized that personal study of these texts
had not been forbidden, and William clearly worked hard to master them.
He came to be keenly aware of the incompatibility of much of the
teaching of these works with Christian doctrine, yet at the same time
he found them to be a source of philosophical inspiration, and his
thought brims with ideas drawn from Avicenna and Avicebron. His
attitude to these thinkers is expressed well in a passage in On the
Soul, where, regarding Aristotle, he writes that:
Of course, William was also strongly influenced by Christian
thinkers. In particular, his writings are permeated by the thought of
Saint Augustine, whom William refers to as “one of the more noble
of Christian thinkers,” if perhaps in a less obvious way than by
the thought of Avicenna. Indeed, as the list in Valois 1880, 198–206, attests,
William employs a remarkable range of sources and must be reckoned one
of the most well-read thinkers of his day.
The focus of the following outline is William's views on
metaphysics and the soul, but even within these limits the vast range
of his thought has required that many issues in these areas not be
treated. In a future supplement, William's views on value theory
and morality will be addressed. Teske's English translations are
quoted whenever possible; otherwise, translations are my own.
William is the first thinker in the Latin West to develop a
systematic metaphysics based on the concepts of being (esse)
and essence (essentia). Influenced by Boethius and Avicenna,
he develops this metaphysics in his early work, On the
Trinity, as a preliminary to his account of the Trinity, and he
returns to it in other works, especially On the Universe. The
central theme of his metaphysics is that all existing things, besides
God, are composites of essence, on the one hand, and their being or
existence, on the other, which is said to be acquired or partaken from
God, the source of all being. God, in contrast, involves no composition
of essence and being, but is his being.
Inspired by Boethius's distinction in De hebdomadibus
between what is good by participation and what is good by substance,
William works these ideas out in terms of a distinction between a being
(ens) by participation and a being by substance or
essence.
By the essence of a thing William means what is signified by its
definition or species name; he often refers to essence as a
thing's quiddity (literally, “whatness”), which he
identifies with Boethius's notion of quod est or
“that which is.” He identifies a thing's being
(esse) or existence with Boethius's notion of quo
est or “by which it is.”  In the case of a being
by participation, its essence and features incidental to its essence
are distinct from its being; William describes its being as clothed by
them or as what would be left if they were stripped away. Such a being
is said to participate in or acquire its being. At times William,
following Avicenna, speaks of its being as accidental to it. He terms
the being (esse) possessed by a being by participation as
being by participation.
A being (ens) by substance, in contrast, does not
participate in or acquire being but is its very being: “there is
also the being whose essence is for it being (esse) and whose
essence we predicate when we say, ‘It is,’ so that it
itself and its being (esse) … are one thing in every
way” (Switalski 1976, 17; Teske and Wade 1989, 65). William
describes the being (esse) of a being by substance as being by
substance or being by essence.
William also notes that the term “being” (esse)
may be used to mean a thing's essence, but this sense of
“being” plays a minor role in his thought.
William argues that there must be a being by essence; otherwise, no
being could be intelligible. Thus, if there were just beings by
participation, there would have to be either a circle of beings each
of which participates in the being of what is prior to it in the
circle, with the absurd consequence that a thing would ultimately
participate in its own being; or else there would have to be an
infinite series of beings, each member of which participates in the
being of what is prior in the series. But then, for a member of the
series—say, A—to be, would be for it to have
or participate in the being of B; and for B to be,
in turn, would be for it to have or participate in the being
of C, and so on. But if this were so, the being of no member
of the series could be intelligible, since any attempt to spell it out
would result in an account of the form: A's
having B's having C's having ad
infinitum. Since being is intelligible, William concludes that
there is a being by essence.
Besides the distinctions between a being and being by participation
and a being and being by essence, William mentions sixteen other
distinctions, including the distinctions between being of need and
being of sufficiency, possible being and being necessary through
itself, false being and true being, and flowing being and lasting
being. William takes these distinctions to be coextensive with the
distinction between being by participation and being by essence. Using
a form of argument drawn from Avicenna, he argues that given the first
member of each distinction, we can prove the existence of the
second.
The distinction between possible being and being necessary through
itself, which William draws from Avicenna, plays a prominent role in
William's thought. William's notion of a possible is not
that of something that exists in some possible world, but is rather the
notion of something whose essence neither requires nor rules out its
having being. William treats such possibles as in some sense prior to
being. In the case of those that have being and thus actually exist, he
holds that the possible “and its being (esse), which
does not belong to it essentially, are really two. The one comes to the
other and does not fall within its definition or quiddity. Being
(ens) [i.e., a being] in this way is, therefore, composite and
also resolvable into its possibility, or quiddity, and its being
(esse)” (Switalski 1976, 44; Wade and Teske, 87). Some
commentators see in such remarks the idea that a real or
mind-independent distinction obtains between being and essence in
possible beings.
In contrast, the being and essence of a being necessary through
itself are not two; such a being does not participate in being but is
its being and cannot but exist.
William argues there can be only one being by substance or being
necessary through itself. Speaking from a metaphysical point of view,
he follows Avicenna and calls it the First. Speaking as a Christian, he
identifies it with God, the creator, as he thinks is indicated by
Biblical references to God as “he who is”:
“being,” he says, is a proper name of God.
The uniqueness of a being by substance is, William argues, a
consequence of its absolute simplicity, since nothing could
differentiate two or more absolutely simple beings. The absolute
simplicity of a being by substance, in turn, is a consequence of the
fact that it cannot be caused (not, at least by an external causation;
William argues that the being by substance is the Christian Trinity of
persons and he admits a kind of internal causation in the Trinity). For
everything that is caused is other than its being and thus is a being
by participation, whereas a being by essence or substance is its
being. But a composite or non-simple being must have an external
cause, and must therefore be a being by participation. Therefore, the
being by substance, that is to say, God, cannot be composite, but must
be absolutely simple.
God's absolute simplicity also entails that he is neither a
universal (i.e., neither a genus nor species), nor an individual falling
under such. For, William argues, genera and species are themselves
composite, and the individuals that fall under them have a quiddity or
definition and therefore compositeness. Nevertheless, William thinks
God is an individual, since he holds that all that exists is either a
universal or an individual (OO I, 855ab).
William appeals to God's power to show God has will and
knowledge. He argues that God must be omnipotent: he cannot be forced
or impeded and has a “two-way” power, identified by William
with what Aristotle calls a rational power. This is a power that
“extends to both opposites, namely, to make and not to
make” (Switalski 1976, 57; Teske and Wade 1989, 99), in contrast
with something, such as fire, which when “it encounters what can
be heated is not able to heat or not to heat . . . but it
necessarily has only the power to heat” (Switalski 1976, 54;
Teske and Wade 1989, 97).  However, because a two-way power
is poised between acting and not-acting, it must be inclined to acting
by something, and William thinks this can only be through a choice.
Therefore, God must have will and choice; and since “it is
impossible that there be will and choice where there is no
knowledge” (Switalski 1976, 59; Wade and Teske 1989, 101), God
must also have knowledge. William goes on to argue that God must indeed
be omniscient, since “his wisdom is absolute and free, not bound
in any way to things, nor dependent upon them” (Switalski 1976,
61; Teske and Wade 1989, 102).
William takes his claim that God has a two-way power to imply that
God could have known or willed otherwise than he did. But, as William
realizes, this raises the difficulty that if God had known or willed
otherwise, it would seem that he would have been different, and this
seems to be impossible given his absolute simplicity. In response,
William frequently emphasizes that by the very same act of knowing or
will by which God in fact knows or wills one thing, he could have known
or willed something else (OO I, 780a; Teske 2007, 105). Thus, when we
say “God knows or wills X,” we must distinguish the act of
knowing or willing, which is identical with God and utterly the same in
every possible situation, from the object X to which it is related.
According to William, everything participates in or acquires its
being from God.  But just what he means by this is less than
clear. At times, as in the following passage from On the
Universe, he seems to suggest that God is literally present in
created things as their being:
Yet William realizes that such statements may give an incorrect
impression of his thought. Thus, at one point in On the
Universe he writes that “every substance includes, if
it is proper to say so (si dici fas est), the creator's
essence within itself” (OO I, 920b), and he goes on to note that
it is difficult to state clearly the sense in which the creator is in
creatures. In other passages he emphasizes God's transcendence of
creatures: “the first being (esse) is for all things
the being (esse) by which they are … It is one
essence, pure, solitary, separate from and unmixed with all
things.” Often he appeals to an analogy with light: the first
being fills “all things like light cast over the universe.  By
this filling or outpouring it makes all things reflect it. This is
their being (esse), namely to reflect it” (Switalski
1976, 45; Teske and Wade 1989, 89). William perhaps intends in such
remarks to exploit the medieval view that a point of light
(lux) and the light emitted from that point (lumen),
though distinct, nonetheless are also in some deep sense the same.
Regarding the procession of creatures from God, Willliam is
concerned to attack a range of errors. In On the Universe 1.1
he attacks the error of the Manichees. Though he refers to Mani, the
third-century originator of the Manichee sect, he seems chiefly
concerned with the Cathars of his day. The Manichees deny God is the
ultimate source of all things and instead posit two first principles,
one good and one evil. Only in this way, they think, can we explain the
presence of both good and evil in the world. William thinks a
fundamental motivation for this view is the principle that “from
one of two contraries the other cannot come of itself” (OO I,
602a; Teske 1998a, 54), and hence that evil cannot come from good but
must stem from its own first principle. He replies that although one
contrary cannot of itself (per se) be from the other, it is
perfectly possible for it to be from the other incidentally (per
accidens), and he gives everyday examples to illustrate. Thus,
“drunkenness comes from wine. In that case it is evident that an
evil comes from a good, unless one would say that wine is not
good” (OO I, 602a; Teske 1998a, 54). Likewise, there is a
sense in which evil is ultimately from God, though incidentally and not
as something God aims at or intends as such. The evil of sin, for
example, is a consequence of God's creating creatures with free
will and permitting their misuse of it.
William offers a host of arguments against the possibility of two
first principles. On metaphysical grounds, for example, he objects that
a first principle must be a being necessary through itself, and that he
has shown that a plurality of such beings is impossible. And he gives
arguments to the effect that the notion of a creative first evil principle is
incoherent. Such a being, for example, could not do good for anything,
and hence could not have created anything, for in doing so it would
have done good for what it created.
William claims “the creator alone properly and truly is worthy
of the title ‘cause,’ but other things are merely
messengers and bearers of the last things received as if sent from the
creator” (OO I, 622a; Teske 1998a, 92). We speak of creatures as
causes, but William says this is “ad sensum”
(Switalski 1976, 79; Teske and Wade 1989, 117), that is, in respect of
how things appear in sense experience.  Both medieval and
contemporary commentators have on the basis of such remarks attributed
to William the denial that creatures are genuine causes (see Reilly
1953). Certainly he denies that any creature can exercise fully
independent causal agency, a view he thinks “the
philosophers” have adopted. But this claim is compatible
with admission of genuine secondary causes that are reliant for their
exercise of causation on the simultaneous activity of prior causes, and
ultimately on that of the first cause, God. Is William simply making
this point but using the term “cause” in a more restricted
manner than his contemporaries? A negative answer is suggested by
William's rationale for his usage. He thinks of causation as the
giving of being, and he thinks that anything that receives being, and
therefore all creatures, cannot itself give being but can merely
transmit it. Moreover, his metaphors of creatures as riverbeds or
windows through which the divine causal influence flows strongly
suggest that he really does wish to hold that creatures themselves do
not really bring anything about but are simply the conduits through
which divine causality flows.
Whether in fact William admits genuine causal agency among
creatures, he clearly thinks that God alone can create from nothing.
Thus, he rejects Avicenna's so-called “emanationist”
doctrine of creation, according to which, as he puts it, God creates
from nothing only one thing, the first intelligence (or spiritual
being), which in turn creates the next intelligence, and so on until
the tenth or agent intelligence is reached, the creator of souls and
the sensible world. William thinks one ground of this doctrine is
Avicenna's principle that from what is one insofar as one can
only come what is one (OO I, 618b; Teske 1998a, 82), and hence from
God, who is absolutely one, can at most come one thing. In fact,
William agrees with this principle, but thinks Avicenna has misapplied
it. Instead, he follows the Jewish thinker, Avicebron (whom he thought
was a Christian) and holds that creatures come from God not insofar as
he is one, but “through his will and insofar as he wills, just as
a potter does not shape clay vessels through his oneness, but through
his will” (OO I, 624a; Teske 1998a, 96).
William thinks the will is necessarily free; thus the fact that God
creates through his will means that creation is an exercise of
God's free will. This point serves to undermine another aspect of
Avicenna's doctrine of the procession of creatures from God. For
Avicenna posits not only a series of creators, but also holds that this
procession is utterly necessary: the actual world must exist and could
not have been other than it is.  William thinks this conclusion
stems from a failure to grasp God's freedom in creation. Avicenna
and others imposed “not only necessity, but natural servitude
upon the creator, supposing that he operates in the manner of
nature” (OO I, 614b; Teske 1998a, 72). Thus, they think the
universe issued from God as brightness issues from the sun or heat from
fire, and that God no more had it in his power to do otherwise than do
the sun or heat. Against this William argues that it is a consequence
of God's free creation that he had it in his power to create
otherwise than he did.
One of the most contentious doctrines presented by Greek and Islamic
philosophy to thinkers in the early thirteenth century is that of the
eternity of the world, the view that the world had no beginning but
existed over an infinite past. This view seems to contradict the
opening words of the Bible: “In the beginning God created heaven
and earth.” In response, a number of thinkers in the early
thirteenth century, including the Franciscan Alexander of Hales, argued
that Aristotle, at least, had been misunderstood and had never proposed
the eternity of the world. But William, like his Oxford contemporary,
Robert Grosseteste, would have none of this: “Whatever may be
said and whoever may try to excuse Aristotle, it was undoubtedly his
opinion that the world is eternal and that it did not begin to be, and
he held the same view concerning motion. Avicenna held this after
him” (OO I, 690b; Teske 1998a, 117).
The importance of this issue to William is indicated by the space he
devotes to it. His treatment of the question of the eternity of the
world in On the Universe 1.2 is one of the longest discussions
of the issue in the middle ages, and the first substantial treatment to
be made in the light of Greek and Islamic thought.
William thinks, in fact, that to call the world eternal in the
aforementioned sense is not to use the term “eternal” in
its strictest sense. Accordingly, he starts by explaining different
senses of the term in the first extended treatment of the distinction
between eternity and time in the middle ages. He then presents and
refutes arguments that the world has no beginning, and provides his own
positive arguments that the world must have a temporal beginning, a
first instant of its existence.
William's chief aim in his treatment of time and eternity is
to emphasize the fundamental differences between eternity and time. He
is especially concerned to attack a conception of eternity as existence
at every time, a conception he attributes to Aristotle. In his view,
eternity in a strict sense is proper to the creator alone and is his
very being, though “the name ‘eternity’ says more
than his being, namely, the privations of beginning and ending, as well
as of flux and change, and this both in act and in potency” (OO
I, 685b-686a; Teske 1998a, 109). The fundamental difference between
time and eternity is that “as it is proper and essential to time
to flow or cease to be, so it is proper and essential to eternity to
remain and stand still” (OO I, 683b; Teske 1998a, 102). William,
like other medieval thinkers, tends to describe eternity in terms of
what it is not. It has nothing that flows and hence no before or after
or parts. Its being is whole at once, not because it all exists at one
time, but because it all exists with nothing temporally before or after
it. William speaks of duration in eternity, but he holds that the term
has a different (unfortunately unexplained) sense in this context than
when applied to time.
William had read Aristotle's Physics and agrees with
Aristotle that time and motion are coextensive (OO I, 700a). Yet he
does not propose Aristotle's definition of time as the number of
motion in respect of before and after. Rather, in his account of the
essential nature of time he describes time simply as being that flows
and does not last, “that is, it has nothing of itself that lasts
in act or potency” (OO I, 683a; Teske 1998a, 102). Echoing
Aristotle and Augustine, he holds that time has the weakest being, and
that “of all things that are said to be in any way, time is the
most remote from eternity, and this is because it only touches eternity
by the very least of itself, the now itself or a point of time”
(OO I, 748a).
William introduces his account of the eternity of the world in
On the Universe by reference to Aristotle, but he devotes the
bulk of his discussion to Avicenna's arguments for this
doctrine. In parallel material in On the Trinity he
claims that at the root of Avicenna's view lies the principle
that “if the one essence is now as it was before when nothing
came forth from it, something will not now come forth from it”
(Switalski 1976, 69; Teske and Wade 1989, 108). That is, nothing new is
caused to exist unless there is a change in the cause. Thus God, a
changeless being, cannot start to create the world after not creating
it; and therefore he must have created it from eternity and without a
beginning. Therefore, the world must itself lack a beginning.
William replies that Avicenna's principle leads to an infinite
regress; for if something's operating after not operating
requires a change in it, this change will itself require a new cause,
and that new cause will itself require a new cause, and so on ad
infinitum. William instead holds that it is possible that God,
without changing in any way, start to operate after not operating. What
William means by this is that the effect of God's eternal will is
a world with a temporal beginning. In general, he holds that verbs such
as “create” express nothing in the creator himself but
rather something in things. We might put “God begins to create
the world” to have the import of: “God by an eternal
willing creates the world, and the world has a beginning.”
William emphasizes that God does not will that the world exist
without qualification, but rather that it exist with a given temporal
structure, namely, a beginning (Switalski 1976, 67–68; Teske and Wade
1989, 107). This might suggest that he thinks God might in fact have
created a world without a beginning, but chose not to do so, as Aquinas
would hold. But in fact, William argues that this option was not open
to God: a world without a beginning is simply not a creatable item.
William attempts to establish this point by a host of arguments, many
of which are found in his writings for the first time in the Latin West
and repeated by later thinkers such as Bonaventure and Henry of Ghent.
On the whole, these arguments either allege that the notion of a
created thing itself entails that what is created has a temporal
beginning or point to alleged paradoxes stemming from the supposition
of an infinite past.
For example, William argues (OO I, 696b; Teske 1998a, 133) that
because the world in itself is merely a possible, in itself it is in
non-being and non-being is therefore natural to it. Hence its
non-being, being natural to it, is prior to its being, and therefore in
being created it must receive being after non-being, and thus have a
beginning.
Among arguments involving infinity, William argues that if the whole
of past time is infinite then the infinite must have been traversed to
arrive at the present; but since it is impossible to traverse the
infinite (OO I, 697b; Teske 1998a, 136), the past must be finite. This
line of argument is frequently found in later thinkers.
William also presents arguments that the view that a continuum, such
as time, is infinite results in paradoxes (OO I, 698a-700b). These
arguments, which William develops at some length, constitute an
important early medieval engagement with puzzles relating to
infinity.
Part 1.3 of On the Universe is a lengthy treatise on
God's providence. William believes the denial of God's
providence, and in particular the denial that the good will be rewarded
and the evil punished, is an error “so harmful and so pernicious
for human beings that it eliminates from human beings by their roots
all concern for moral goodness, all the honor of the virtues, and all
hope of future happiness” (OO I, 776a; Teske 2007, 92).
According to William, God's providence or providing for the
universe differs from foreknowledge in that, unlike foreknowledge, it
embraces only goods and not also evils. William is especially concerned
to argue that God's providence is not just general in nature, but
extends to all individual creatures.
God's care for the universe and its constituents is a matter
of God's knowing and paying attention to all things. From
God's point of view, nothing happens by chance. The universe is a
teleological or goal-directed order, in which each thing has a function
or purpose established by God. God's care is his concern that
each thing fulfills its appointed function. Thus, God is not
necessarily concerned with what we might think is best for individual
things: flies get eaten by spiders, but this in fact is an end for
which they were created. In the case of human beings, however,
who are the apex of creation, their end is to experience happiness in
union with God, and God's providential care of human beings is
aimed at this.
But if this is so, why do the evil prosper and the good suffer? What
are we to make of natural disasters, of pain, suffering, death, and the
like? What, in short, are we to make of evil in the world? Although
William does not take up the logical compatibility of evil with an
all-good, knowing and powerful god, he does attempt to explain at
length how a range of particular kinds of evil are compatible with
God's providence and care for human beings. His explanation, in
general, is not novel and has roots in Augustine. He distinguishes the
evils perpetrated by free agents and for which they are therefore to
blame from other forms of evil, and argues that these other evils are
in fact not really evil but good. Pain, for example, provides many
benefits, among which is that it mortifies and extinguishes “the
lusts for pleasures and carnal and worldly desires” (OO I, 764a;
Teske 2007, 58). In many cases, what we call evil is in fact
God's just punishment, which William implies always has
beneficial effects. As for the blameworthy evils done by free agents,
William thinks that God permits these, but that it is incorrect to say
they come from God or are intended by him. They are rather the
consequence of rational creatures’ misuse of the free will with
which they were created, and the moral balance will be set right in the
future life, if not this one.
If the evils of this life appear to conflict with God's
providence, God's providence and foreknowledge themselves seem to
entail that everything occurs of necessity and hence that there is no
free will. This concern leads William to consider a number of doctrines
that aim to show that all events happen of necessity. In addition to
foreknowledge or providence, he considers the views that all events are
the necessary causal outcomes of the motion and configuration of the
heavenly bodies, or that all events result from the
“interconnected and incessantly running series of causes and the
necessary dependence of one upon another” (OO I, 785a; Teske
2007, 120); or finally, that all things happen through fate. William
rejects all these grounds for the necessity of events.
In an interesting discussion of foreknowledge, he considers the
argument that since it is necessary that whatever God foresees will
come about will come about, because otherwise God could be deceived or
mistaken, then since God foresees each thing that will come about, it
is necessary that it will come about. William replies that the
proposition “It is necessary that whatever God foresees will
come about will come about” has two interpretations,
“because the necessity can refer to individuals or to the
whole” (OO I, 778b; Teske 2007, 99). The argument for the
necessity of all events equivocates between these two readings and is
therefore invalid. William notes that the distinction he makes is
close to the distinction between a divided and composite sense, but he
is critical of those who instead distinguish an ambiguity between
a de re (about the thing) and de dicto (about what
is said) reading.
William's treatise On the Soul is one of the most
substantial Latin works on the topic from before the middle of the
thirteenth century. Although William begins this treatise with
Aristotle's definition of the soul as the perfection of an
organic body potentially having life, his conception of the soul is
heavily influenced by Avicenna and decidedly Platonic in character. He
interprets Aristotle's definition to mean that the body is an
instrument of the soul (as he thinks the term “organic”
indicates) and that “a body potentially having life” must
refer to a corpse, since a body prior to death actually has life. 
And although he calls a soul, with Aristotle, a form, unlike Aristotle
he holds that a soul is in fact a substance, something individual,
singular and a “this something” (hoc aliquid), not
at all dependent on the body for its existence.
William adopts the standard view that souls serve to vivify or give
life to bodies, and thus he posits not just souls of human beings
(i.e., rational souls), but also those of plants and animals
(vegetative and sensitive souls respectively), as they all have living
bodies. But in the case of the human soul, William also
identifies the soul with the human being, the referent of the pronoun
“I.”
Among William's many arguments for the existence of souls is
the argument that bodies are instruments of souls and the power to
carry out operations through an instrument cannot belong to the
instrument itself. Thus, there must be something other than the bodies
of living things that operates by means of bodies, and this is their
soul. In the case of the human or rational soul, he argues that its
existence follows in particular from the fact that understanding and
knowledge are found in a human being but not in the whole body or any
part of it. Since these are operations of a living substance, there
must be a living incorporeal substance in which they are, and this is
what people mean when they speak of their soul.
These arguments serve not only to show the existence of souls, but
also that they are substances. In the case of the human soul, William
argues, the operations of understanding and knowing must be treated as
proper operations of the soul, and this requires that the soul itself
be a substance. To the objection that the soul itself does not
literally understand or know but is instead that thanks to which a
human being can understand and know, William will argue that the soul
and human being, which he equates with the referent of the pronoun
“I,” are one and the same thing. More generally, the
substantiality of souls—and not just of human souls—is
indicated by the fact that bodies are their instruments.
William argues at length that a soul cannot be a body, a conclusion
he applies not just to human or rational souls, but also to those of
plants and animals. In the case of human souls, he uses, among others,
Avicenna's “flying-man” argument to establish this
point, arguing that a human being flying in the air who lacks and never
had the use of his senses would know that he exists but deny that he
has a body. Therefore “it is necessary that he have being that
does not belong to the body and, for this reason, it is necessary that
the soul not be a body” (OO II suppl., 83a; Teske 2000, 91).
More generally, William argues that no body could perform the
soul's function of giving life to the body. For example, if a
body were to give life, it would itself have to be a living body, and
thus it would itself have to have a soul that rendered it alive. This
soul, in turn, would have to be a living body and thus have its own
soul, and so on ad infinitum. Thus, the doctrine that souls
are bodies leads to an infinite regress.
Perhaps the most striking aspect of William's teaching about the soul
is his identification of the human soul with the human being and his
denial that the human body constitutes in whole or part the human
being. Instead, William describes the body variously as a house, the
soul its inhabitant; as a prison, the soul its captive; as a cloak,
the soul its wearer, and so on. Nevertheless, the definition of a
human being—he perhaps has in mind the Platonic conception of
the human being as “a soul using a body”—involves
a reference to the body, and it this, William thinks, that has led
people to believe that the body is a part of a human being. But this
is an error akin to thinking that because a horseman is defined by
reference to a horse, the horse must therefore be a part of the
horseman. William is aware, of course, that at times we do seem to
ascribe to ourselves, and thus to the human being, the acts of the
body or things that happen to the body, but he holds that these are
non-literal modes of speaking, akin to a rich man's complaint that he
has been struck by hail, when in fact it was his vineyard that was
struck.
William, as usual, offers numerous arguments for the identification
of the soul and human being. He argues that the body cannot be a part
of a human being, since the soul and body no more produce a true unity
than, for example, a carpenter and his ax, and a human being is a true
unity. And he notes that since the soul is subject to reward and
punishment in the afterlife for actions we correctly attribute to the
human being or ourselves, it must be identified with the human being.
He also points to cases where our use of names or demonstratives
referring to human beings must be understood as referring to their
souls, and concludes that this shows that human beings are their
souls.
According to William, souls are among the simplest of created
substances. Nevertheless, like all created substances, they must
involve some kind of composition. This composition cannot be a bodily
composition, of course, since they are not bodies and thus cannot be
divided into bodily parts. According to Avicebron, as well as some of
William's contemporaries, souls are composite in the sense that
they are composites of form and matter, though not a matter that
involves physical dimensions, but rather what some called
“spiritual matter.” This view is part of the doctrine now
termed “universal hylomorphism,” according to which every
created substance is a composite of form and matter (see Weisheipl
1979). William is one of the first to reject this doctrine; he is later
followed by Aquinas. In support of his rejection, in On the
Universe he makes one of his rare references to Averroes, citing
with approval his claim that prime matter is a potentiality only of
perceptible substances and hence is not found in spiritual substances.
He also argues that there is no need to posit matter in angels or souls
in order to explain their receptivity in cognition, as some had thought
necessary (OO I, 851b-852b). Rather, souls and other spiritual
substances are “pure immaterial forms” without matter.
William also denies a real plurality of powers in the soul. He holds
instead that each power of the soul is identical with the soul and not
a part of it. When we speak of a power of the soul, we are really
speaking of the soul considered as the source or cause of a certain
kind of operation. Thus, the power to understand characteristic of a
human or rational soul is the soul considered as a source or cause of
the operation of understanding.
What sort of composition, then, is to be found in souls and other
spiritual beings? William holds that every being other than God
Here William uses Boethius's language of quod est and
quo est to make the point that in souls, as in all created
substances, there is, to use Avicennian terms, a composition of being
and essence, a doctrine to be developed by Aquinas.
Besides rejecting universal hylomorphism, William also rejects the
doctrine of a plurality of souls in a human being. This doctrine, which
was popular among Franciscan thinkers, holds that the body of a human
being is informed not just by a single soul, the rational soul, but
also by a vegetative and a sensitive soul. This multiplicity of souls,
it is held, serves to explain how human beings have the vital
operations characteristic of plants and animals in addition to
peculiarly human ones, and also explains the development of the
fetus's vital functions. Against this doctrine, William claims to
have shown earlier in On the Soul that not only the operation
of understanding, but also the sensitive operations of seeing and
hearing “are essential and proper to the soul itself” (OO
II suppl., 108b; Teske 2000, 164) and “hence, it cannot be denied
except through insanity that one and the same soul carries out such
operations.” Rather than posit a multiplicity of souls, William
holds that higher souls incorporate the kinds of operations attributed
to lower ones. The rational soul is infused into the body directly by
God when the fetus reaches a suitable stage of organization, and the
prior animal or sensitive soul in the fetus ceases to be. In this case
too a view along similar lines was to be developed by Aquinas.
Scholars have noted, however, that while William rejects a plurality
of souls in the human body, he does subscribe to a version of the
doctrine of a plurality of substantial forms in the sense that he
treats the human body as itself a substance independent of its
association with the soul, and hence having its own corporeal form,
while also being informed by the human or rational soul, which renders
it a living thing. (For details see Bazán 1969.)
According to William, the immortality of the human soul would be
evident if not for the fact that the soul has, as it were, been put to
sleep by the corruption of the body stemming from the punishment for
sin. In our current state, however, William thinks the human
soul's immortality can be shown by means of philosophical
arguments, to which he devotes considerable attention, both in On
the Soul and in a shorter work, On the Immortality of the
Soul.
He believes the error that the soul is naturally mortal
“destroys the foundation of morality and of all religion”
(Bülow 1897, 1; Teske 1991, 23), since those who believe in the
mortality of the soul will have no motive for acting morally and
honoring God. Thus, he notes that if the soul is not immortal, the
honor of God is pointless in this life, since in the present life it
“involves much torment and affliction for the soul”
(Bülow 1897, 3; Teske 1991, 25) and receives no reward.
From a metaphysical point of view, William argues that the soul does
not depend on the body for its being, and therefore the destruction of
the body does not entail the non-existence of the soul. The rational
soul's independence from the body is due to the fact it is a
self-subsistent substance whose proper operations do not involve or
require a human body.
Since William takes the souls of plants and animals to be
incorporeal substances, it might be thought that he would treat them as
immortal too. But William holds that these souls cease to exist upon
the death of the plant or animal. This is because all their proper
operations, unlike those of the rational soul, depend on the body, and
thus there would be no point for their continued existence after the
destruction of the body.
Characteristic of human souls, or human beings, are the intellective
and motive powers, that is to say, the intellect and will. William
thinks that of these, the will is by far the more noble power, and he
is accordingly puzzled by the fact that neither Aristotle nor Avicenna
have much to say about it. These authors do, however, discuss the
intellective power at great length, and William accordingly devotes
considerable attention to combating errors he sees in their teachings
on the intellect.
William develops his account of the will using the metaphor of a
king in his kingdom. The will “holds the position in the
whole human being and in the human soul of an emperor and king,”
while “the intellective or rational power holds the place and
function of counselor in the kingdom of the human soul”  (OO
II suppl. 95a; Teske 2000, 126, 129). William treats acts of 
will—expressed in the indicative mood by “I will”
(volo) or “I refuse” (nolo)—as a kind
of command that cannot be disobeyed, as distinguished from mere likings
expressed in the form “I would like” (vellem) or
“I would rather not’ (nollem). He holds that as a
king must understand in order to make use of his counselors’
advice, so the will must not simply be an appetitive power but must
also have its own capacity to apprehend. Likewise, the intellect must
have its own desires. But he notes in On Virtues, that like a
king the will need not heed the advice of its counselor; it may instead
“give itself over to the advice of its slaves, that is, the inner
powers and the senses”; in so doing it “gives itself over
into becoming a slave of its slaves and is like a king … who
follows the will and advice of senseless children” (OO I,
122a).
William frequently emphasizes the difference between voluntary
action and the actions of brute animals. Animals operate in a
“servile” manner, in the sense that they respond to their
passions without having control over these responses. A human being, in
contrast, has power over the suggestion of its desires; its will is
“most free and is in every way in its own power and
dominion” (OO II suppl., 94a; Teske 2000, 123). This is why human
beings, unlike animals, can be imputed with blame or merit for their
deeds.
According to William, the freedom of the will consists in the fact
that the will “can neither be forced in any way to its proper
and first operation, which is to will or refuse, nor prevented from
the same; and I mean that it is not possible for someone to will
something and entirely refuse that he will it or to refuse to will
something, entirely willing that he will it” (OO I, 957aA). In
other words, William defines force and prevention of the will in terms
of higher-order volitions and refusals: for the will to be forced is
for it to refuse to will X and nonetheless be made to
will X, and for it to be prevented is for it to will to will
X and be made to refuse X. In a number of works,
William argues that neither force nor prevention of the will is
possible: if someone refuses to will X, this must be because
he takes X to be bad and thus he must refuse X
rather than will it; and if someone wills to will X, this
must be because he takes X to be good, and thus he must
will X rather than refuse it.
William's discussions of the intellective power are driven by a
concern to attack errors he sees in his contemporaries and Greek and
Islamic thinkers. While his reasons for rejecting these errors are
clear enough, if at times based on a confused understanding of his
sources, his own views on the nature of cognition are less well
developed. Yet it is clear that, with the exception of our knowledge
of first principles and the concepts they involve and certain cases of
supernaturally revealed knowledge, William wishes to present a
naturalistic account of cognition in this life in which God plays no
special role.
In both On the Soul and On the Universe William
attacks at length theories of cognition that posit an agent intellect
or agent intelligence. He incorrectly ascribes the latter theory to
Aristotle, although in fact it is Avicenna's teaching; he ascribes the
former theory to certain unnamed contemporaries. These theories view
cognition as involving the active impression of intelligible signs or
forms—what we might call concepts—on a receptive or
passive recipient. The agent intellect or agent intelligence is taken
to perform this function of impressing intelligible forms on our
material intellect, which is so-called because like
matter it is receptive of forms, albeit intelligible forms. The chief
difference between the agent intellect and agent intelligence, as far
as the theory of cognition is concerned, is that the former is treated
as a part of the human soul, while the latter is taken to be a
spiritual substance apart from the human soul, identified with
Avicenna's tenth intelligence. William notes how the agent intellect
or agent intelligence is viewed by analogy with light or the sun; as
light or the sun through its light serves to render actual merely
potentially existing colors, so the agent intellect or intelligence
serves to render actual intelligible forms existing potentially in the
material intellect.
William as usual offers a large number of objections to these
theories. He attacks as inappropriate the analogies with light or the
sun, and argues that the theory of the agent and material intellects is
incompatible with the simplicity of the soul, as it posits these
intellects as two distinct parts of the soul, one active and one
receptive. In the case of both the agent intellect and the agent
intelligence, he argues that their proponents will be forced to hold
the absurd result that human beings know everything that is naturally
knowable, whereas in fact we must study and learn and observe in order
to acquire much of our knowledge.
As for his own views on the intellective power, William holds that,
like all the powers of the soul, the intellective power in the present
life of misery has been corrupted. Therefore an account of it must
distinguish its operation in its pure, uncorrupted state from its
operation in the present life. In its pure state it is capable of
knowing, without reliance on the senses, everything naturally knowable,
even sensible things, and thus presumably also is capable of possessing
the concepts in terms of which such knowledge is formulated. In its
present state, however, most of its knowledge and repertoire of
concepts stems in some manner from sense experience.
The knowledge of which the intellective power is naturally capable
extends not just to universals, but also to singulars. For the
intellect is naturally directed at the true as the will is at the
good, and has as its end knowledge of the first truth, the creator,
who is singular. William also notes our knowledge of ourselves and the
importance of singular knowledge for our dealings with the
world. Unfortunately, he provides no theory of the nature of singular
cognition, and this issue must be left on the agenda until taken up by
thinkers such as Scotus and Ockham in the late thirteenth and early
fourteenth centuries.
William proposes a representationalist theory of cognition. He holds
that it is not things or states of affairs themselves that are in the
intellective power but rather signs or intelligible forms that serve to
represent them. He takes these signs to be mental habits, that is to
say, not bare potentialities but potentialities most ready to be
actualized. Propositions are those complexes formed from signs through
which states of affairs are represented to the mind. Although
William speaks of these signs as likenesses, he is well aware of
the difficulty in thinking of concepts as such, and he concludes that
in fact there need not be a likeness between a sign and that of
which it is a sign (OO II suppl. 214b; Teske 2000, 454).
A key question William confronts is how we acquire concepts and
knowledge in the present life. In On the Soul he draws an
important distinction. In the case of the first rules of truth and
morality, he speaks of God as a mirror or book of all truths in which
human beings naturally and without an intermediary, and thus without
reliance on sense experience, read these rules. Likewise, God impresses
or inscribes on our intellective power the intelligible signs in terms
of which these first rules or principles are formulated. Thus, William
posits at least some innate concepts; he notes, for example, in On
Virtues and Morals   that the concept of the true
(veri) is innate (OO I, 124a). God also reveals to some
prophets in this life “hidden objects of knowledge to which the
created intellect cannot attain except by the gift and grace of divine
revelation” (OO II suppl., 211b; Teske 2000, 445).
Does William therefore hold, as some have held (Gilson 1926), that
at least in the case of these rules God in some special manner
illuminates the human intellect? This might be suggested by his
references to the intellective power as spiritual vision and his
frequent use of the language of vision and illumination in his accounts
of cognition. And yet, according to William, the first rules of truth
and morality are “known through themselves” or
self-evident. They are “lights in themselves  …
visible through themselves without the help of something else”
(OO II suppl., 210b; Teske 2000, 443), and they serve to illuminate to
the intellect the conclusions drawn from them. God's role, it
would seem, is to impress upon or supply to our intellect, in some way,
these principles, but William gives no indication that he takes God to
shed a special light on these principles in order that they may be
known: once possessed they are, as it were, self illuminating.
The first rules of truth and morality and the concepts in terms of
which they are formulated form only a small subset, however, of our
cognitive repertoire. The remainder of our concepts and knowledge,
leaving to one side the special divine revelation made to prophets,
stems in some way from our dealings with the sensible world. But the
problem William faces is to explain how this is so. The problem, he
says, is that “sensation … brings to the intellect
sensible substances and intellectual ones united to bodies [i.e.,
souls]. But it does not imprint [pingit] upon it their
intelligible forms, because it does not receive such forms of
them” (OO II suppl., 213a; Teske 2000, 449).
William's response to this problem is to hold that the senses have the
role simply of stimulating the intellective power in such a way that
it “forms on its own and in itself intelligible forms for
itself” (OO 1, 914b), a doctrine he draws from
Augustine. According to this account, the intellect is fundamentally
active in the acquisition of intelligible forms. William speaks of the
intellect as able, under the prompting of the senses, to consider the
substances that underlie sensible accidents, and speaks of the
intellect as “abstracting” from sense experience in the
sense that it forms concepts of so-called “vague
individuals” by stripping away perceptible features that serve
to distinguish one individual from another. In these cases, William
says, “the intellect is occasionally inscribed by these forms
that are more separate and more appropriate to its nature” (OO
II suppl., 213b; Teske 2000, 450).
A third cognitive process William mentions, conjunction or
connection, is concerned not with the acquisition of intelligible
forms, but rather with how knowledge of one thing brings with it
knowledge of another. In particular, William argues that knowledge of a
cause brings with it knowledge of the effect.
William is particularly concerned, however, that his account of the
intellect's generation of intelligible forms will require a division
of the intellect into active and passive parts—the very
distinction between an agent and material or receptive intellect he
has devoted so much energy to attacking. The need to make this
division of the intellect into two part is because it is impossible
for the same thing to be both active and passive in the same respect,
and yet in treating the intellect as indivisible it looks as though
William is in fact committed to its being both active and passive in
the same respect in the formation and reception of intelligible
forms.
William's attempts to resolve this problem are repeated in a number of
works and couched in highly metaphorical language that poses severe
problems of interpretation.  The intellective power is both “a
riverbed and fountain of the scientific and sapiential waters …
Hence, in one respect it overflows and shines forth on itself, and in
another respect it receives such outpouring or radiance” (OO II,
suppl. 216b; Teske 2000, 457). William holds that because on this
account the intellective power is not active and passive in the
same respect, he is not forced to divide the intellect into two
distinct parts, one active and one passive.
Scholars have devoted little attention to William's influence on later
writers. Nevertheless, it is clear that he gave rise to no school of
thought, and subsequent thinkers seem to have picked and chosen from
his works the parts they would accept and the parts they would
reject. Thus, William's arguments that the world must have a beginning
probably influenced thinkers such as Bonaventure and Henry of Ghent,
while his rejection of universal hylomorphism and his metaphysics of
being and essence may have influenced Aquinas, who presents similar
views. There is also little doubt that some of William's views were
the subject of criticism, as for example his apparent denial of
genuine secondary causation (see Reilly 1953). The large body of
manuscripts in which William's works survive suggests he was being
read throughout the middle ages; Ottman 2005, for example, lists 44
manuscripts known to contain On the Universe. William's works
were also published in a number of printed editions in the
16th and 17th centuries.