William Heytesbury was most likely born before 1313 in Wiltshire
(Salisbury Diocese). He is first mentioned as a fellow at Merton
College in Oxford in 1330; he is thus among the second generation of
Oxford Calculators (a follower of Thomas Bradwardine and Richard
Kilvington, a contemporary of John Dumbleton and Roger Swyneshed, and
a predecessor of Richard Swineshead). He held the administrative
position of a bursar of Merton in 1338–1339, responsible for
determining dues, auditing accounts, and collecting
 revenues.[1]
 He was named a fellow of the new Queen’s College in 1340, but
was soon mentioned among the fellows of Merton College again. He is
recorded to have become a Doctor of Theology in 1348, yet none of his
theological works are known. He was chancellor of the University in
1371–72 (and perhaps also in 1353–54) and died shortly
thereafter, between December 1372 and January
 1373.[2]
Heytesbury’s extant writings, which are tentatively dated to the
period 1331–1339 by Weisheipl, are (with one exception)
concerned with the analysis of fallacies and sophisms. Regulae
solvendi sophismata [RSS] or Logica (a
collection of six treatises: on paradoxes, on knowing and doubting, on
relative terms, on beginning and ceasing, on maxima and minima, and on
the velocity of movements) is concerned with instructions for solving
different types of sophisms in the first year of logical studies.
Sophismata [Soph] is a collection of
sophisms for advanced students working on natural philosophy.
Sophismata asinina [SophAs] is a collection
of sophistical proofs that the reader is a donkey. Iuxta hunc
textum [IHT], also known as Consequentiae
Heytesbury, is a collection of sophisms designed for testing
formal inference rules. Casus obligationis
[CO] is a collection of epistemic sophisms. De
sensu composito et diviso [SCD] is a manual on
the logical analysis of the de re/de dicto
ambiguity. Termini naturales is a vocabulary of basic
physical
 concepts.[3]
  Most of these have not been critically edited, but early prints,
recent editions, and several modern translations are
 available.[4]
Since most of Heytesbury’s logical views are spelled out either
in the context or in terms of
 obligationes,[5]
 a brief note on these must be the starting point of their
presentation. The most important passages are in
[SCD] and [Soph] and to a certain
degree in [RSS]. Three problems will be introduced:
1) the basic concepts, and in particular, relevance; 2) the
distinction between metaphysical and epistemic possibility; and 3) the
distinction between conceding a sentence and conceding that a sentence
is true.
Heytesbury’s obligationes are zero-sum and dynamic
consistency games participated by two players, an
“opponent” and a “respondent”. The opponent
posits a “casus” (ponitur casus), i.e.,
the initial linguistic and extra-linguistic assumptions, and proposes
particular sentences. The respondent admits or denies the
casus (admittitur, negatur casus) depending
on its consistency and concedes (concedo), negates
(nego), or doubts (dubito) the proposed sentences,
the criteria being logical relations to either casus or to
the totality of preceding moves (including the casus).
Heytesbury chooses the latter option, thus subscribing to so-called
“antiqua responsio” (Read 2013: 20–23). The
respondent wins if he maintains consistency.
Sentences proposed to the respondent split into “relevant”
or “irrelevant” depending on their logical relation to
preceding moves. If the sentence proposed to the respondent or its
negation follows from preceding moves, it is relevant
(pertinens) and should be either conceded (if implied by
these moves) or negated (if it is incompatible with them); otherwise,
it is irrelevant (impertinens). An irrelevant sentence is
either conceded, negated, or doubted depending on the
respondent’s knowledge about the “external” world;
it is conceded if known to be actually true, negated if known to be
actually false and doubted otherwise. Such a game is dynamic in the
sense that the status of irrelevant sentences can change in the game
course ([SCD] 1494: fol. 4ra–rb [1988a:
432–433]). This can happen for two reasons. First, if the
external world changes during the game, the respondent’s move
would change along with his new information state since the
respondent’s moves regarding irrelevant sentences depend on his
knowledge of the external world ([SCD] 1494: fol.
4rb [1988a: 433]). The second (and more interesting) case is brought
about by a particular game course. Heytesbury’s example is the
following game:
opponent’s moves
respondent’s moves
justification
[O1] POSITIO: The king is seated or you are in
Rome.
[R1] I admit the casus.
The casus is possible.
[O2] PROPONITUR: The king is seated.
[R2] I doubt that.
Irrelevant and not known to be true or false in the external world.
[O3] PROPONITUR: You are in Rome.
[R3] I negate that.
Irrelevant and known to be false.
[O4] PROPONITUR: The king is seated.
[R4] I concede that.
Relevant and implied by [R1] and
[R3].
[R2] and [R4] are correct moves because [R1] and [R3] are. When
“the king is seated” is proposed in [O2], it can only be
relevant with respect to [R1], which is not the case as
disjunctions do not entail their sub-formulas. If the respondent is
unaware of the king’s whereabouts, the sentence must be doubted.
“You are in Rome” proposed in [O3] is also irrelevant, but
can be negated as known to be false in the external world. At that
point, “the king is seated” becomes relevant and must be
conceded as implied by “the king is seated or you are in
Rome” and the negation of “you are in Rome” via
disjunctive syllogism ([SCD] 1494: fol. 4rb [1988a:
433–434]).
Heytesbury
 considers three types of casus: a) possible; b) impossible
but imaginable; and c) impossible and unimaginable
([Soph] soph. 18 and 31 [1494: fols. 131va–vb
and 162va–vb]). The criteria of possibility, which probably
pertain to metaphysics, are not spelled out clearly. The criteria of
imaginability are logical and epistemological:
Briefly, every casus which is not explicitly inconsistent or
impossible in a way not easily imaginable (such as a man being a
donkey etc.) can be admitted for the sake of disputation. But first,
the respondent has to make the impossibility of such casus
explicit and emphasize that he has not admitted the casus as
possible but merely as imaginable, to defend its implications (as
imaginable, not as possible) and to negate what is incompatible with
it in accord with his obligation. ([Soph] soph. 31
[1494: fol. 162va–vb])
The realm of the imaginable includes whatever is epistemically
admissible for either logical or epistemic reasons. Neither is purely
objective: what can and cannot be imagined seems player-relative, as
is being “explicitly” inconsistent (for seeing or
overlooking a contradiction is a matter of individual skill). Examples
of the imaginable include the existence of a vacuum, infinite
velocities, expansions of physical objects, and men being immortal,
but not men being
 donkeys.[6]
 The criteria may be practical: certain hypotheses are not productive.
Since the respondent’s goal is to maintain consistency,
accepting overtly inconsistent assumptions is a
 nonstarter,[7]
 and certain impossibilities are such that nobody would agree to
defend them even for the sake of
 argument.[8]
 Defining admissibility in terms of imaginability makes
obligationes into a framework for discussing
“impossibilities” with applications in
 physics[9]
 as a science based on conceptual analysis and
 thought-experiments,[10]
 where the “secundum imaginationem” assumptions
play the same role as the modern day idealizations such as mass points
or frictionless
 movement.[11]
A principle utilized in Heytesbury’s solution to various
paradoxes states that a proposed sentence is evaluated according to
its standard meaning, even if it is assumed to signify something else
in the casus. For instance, the following moves of the
respondent would be correct:
opponent’s moves
respondent’s moves
justification
[O1] POSITIO: “All mice are grey”
signifies that all cats are blue. All cats are white.
[R1] I concede the casus.
The casus is possible.
[O2] PROPONITUR: All mice are grey.
[R2] I concede that.
Irrelevant and known to be true in the external world.
[O3] PROPONITUR: The sentence “all mice are
grey” is true.
[R3] I negate that.
Relevant and inconsistent with the casus.
By [R2], the respondent agrees that all mice are grey, while by [R3]
he denies that all cats are blue. To concede a sentence is to agree
that what the sentence signifies according to its standard meaning is
the case, but to concede that a certain sentence is true is to agree
that what the sentence signifies in the casus is the case.
These may or may not be the same depending on the casus.
([SophAs]
 412)[12]
The genre of “proprietates
 terminorum” developed in the twelfth century alongside the
reception of Aristotle’s Sophistical refutations, and a
logico-semantical analysis of fallacies seems to have been one of its
primary
 applications.[13]
 It is an umbrella genre for, among others, theories of meaning and
reference, the use-mention distinction, quantification, and tense.
These are utilized in several of Heytesbury’s works with
terminological variations. Three of these issues will be presented
here: the theories of “suppositio”,
“mobilitatio”, and
“ampliatio”.
Supposition is a semantic relation between terms and the object(s)
they stand for in a sentential context. The modes of supposition are
connected to the way sentences can be analyzed (expositio),
in particular, to the way general terms can be replaced by a
structured collection of subordinate terms, the so-called
“descensus”. The following classifications of
suppositions can be reconstructed from Heytesbury’s
writings:
Material supposition (“only you are a donkey” in
“only you are a donkey is false”) consists in mentioning
an expression ([SophAs] 403), whereas personal (or
significative) supposition consists in using it
([SophAs] 404). Discrete supposition is a personal
supposition of a singular term ([SophAs]
 390);[14]
 its complement is usually called “common” supposition and
is further divided into determinate and confused suppositions.
Determinate supposition is exemplified by the supposition of
“human” in “some human is an animal”
([SCD] 1494: fol. 3va [1988a: 427]), connected to the
descensus, whereby it can be paraphrased as “this human
is an animal or that human is an animal etc.”
([SophAs] 387). Merely confused or non-distributive
supposition is exemplified by the supposition of “animal”
in “every human is an animal” and connected to
“disjunctive” descensus ([SCD]
1494, fol. 2va–vb [1988a: 420–421]; [Soph]
soph. 7 [1494: fol. 106rb] and soph. 16 (1494: fol. 127vb)), whereby
it can be paraphrased as “every man is this animal or that
animal etc.” Confused and distributive suppositions are most
typically exemplified by the supposition of “human” in
“every human is an animal”, connecting the
descensus to every instance of the common term, whereby it
can be paraphrased as “this human is an animal and that human is
an animal etc.” ([SCD] 1494: fol. 2va–vb
[1988a: 420–421]; [Soph] soph. 7 [1494: fol.
106rb] and soph. 16 [1494: fol. 127vb]).
The theory of suppositio is extended by the theory of
“mobility” and “immobility”. If a particular
mode of descensus is admissible, that type of supposition is
called “mobile” (mobilis); otherwise it is called
“immobile”
 (immobilis).[15]
 Heytesbury’s example of immobile supposition is the function of
“penny” in “I promise you a penny” or
“human” in “by necessity, every man is an
animal” ([PC] 1494: fol. 188vb;
[IHT] arg. 19; [SophAs] 398).
Note that: First, the so-called “simple”
(“human” in “human is a species”) supposition
is
 omitted.[16]
 Second, Heytesbury’s analysis of predicates in terms of the
merely confused supposition is nominalist, as opposed to the realist
analysis of these examples in terms of standing for an abstract
 object.[17]
 Third, Heytesbury endorses the Aristotelian sensus
compositus-sensus divisus distinction, rather than the
terminist framework in cases where that would be
 appropriate.[18]
Lastly, Heytesbury introduces the so-called
“ampliatio”, which consist in extending the range
of a term to non-actual entities, such as entities in the past,
future, or mere possibilia. Thus, for instance, the proper paraphrase
of the sentence “a white thing can be black” is
“something that now is white or can be white can be black”
([SCD] 1494: fol. 2va [1988a:
 418]).[19]
 The complementary property is called
“restrictio” ([Soph] soph. 4
[1494: fol. 89vb]).
The basic textual evidence for
 Heytesbury’s theory of deductive validity includes
[IHT], [Soph] and [RSS].
[IHT] is a collection of arguments for both the
validity and invalidity of spurious inferences. Typically, the
pro-arguments construe them as instances of formal inference rules
(bona et formalis), the contra-arguments argue that they are
not valid (non valet), and the resolutions show that the
inference under scrutiny is not a genuine instance of such a rule.
This method presupposes that deductive validity is ultimately
truth-preservation (an inference is valid if its consequent cannot be
false while its antecedent is true or if its antecedent is
incompatible with the negation of the consequent)
([IHT] arg. 6). The criterion is that it is not
possible to present a counterexample, i.e., a possible (obligational)
situation (casu possibili posito) verifying the antecedent
and falsifying the consequent ([IHT] arg. 2). The
method also presupposes that the underlying inference rules are
assumed to be legitimate but misapplied in such sophisms as to require
elucidation, and not revision. The treatise is mostly concerned with
the analysis of logical form (expositio) of sentences
containing operators (officialia) such as “only”,
“nothing but”, “begins”, “ceases”,
etc., with a few applications of modal and epistemic logic.
[IHT] introduces the distinction between the
“universal” (bona et formalis generaliter) and
“restricted” (bona et formalis specialiter)
formal validity:
An inference is formally valid in the universal sense if the opposite
of its consequent is formally incompatible with its antecedent and a
similar form [of argument] holds in all applications (consimilis
forma valet in omni materia) (…) An inference is
[formally] valid in the restricted sense if the opposite of its
consequent is formally incompatible with its antecedent, but not every
such application is valid. ([IHT] arg. 11)
The concept of formal compatibility is not explicitly introduced in
this context.
[Soph] relates the relevance view of formality as a
conceptual connection between premises and conclusions to the
substitutional view of formality as validity under any substitution of
extra-logical terms or in any domain of application (in omni
materia). If an inference is valid only in a restricted domain of
application, it is valid based on content or in a particular domain of
application (de materia, gratia materiae) or
“simply valid” (bona simpliciter)
([IHT] arg. 11; [Soph] soph. 3
[1494: fol. 86ra]). The concept of formal incompatibility is clarified
as part of the explication of validity based upon the form (de
forma):
It is commonly agreed that such inference is not valid based upon the
form, because the opposite of its consequent and its antecedent do not
formally imply a contradiction, where “to imply a contradiction
formally” means that these two cannot be distinguished or
consistently and distinctively imagined as holding simultaneously.
([Soph] soph. 2 [1494: fol. 83rb])
As opposed to testing simple validity against possible counter-models,
formal validity is tested against impossible but imaginable
counter-models to eliminate extra-linguistic influences. Imaginable
casus introduced in obligationes are thereby
utilized as part of general logic.
Finally, a “necessary” inference is one which can be
reduced to a categorical or hypothetical syllogism via a necessary
auxiliary assumption or “middle” (per medium
necessarium) ([Soph] soph. 2 [1494: fol. 83rb]).
Similarly, two sentences are assumed to be logically equivalent
(convertantur) if they imply each other formally via a
necessary middle ([RSS] 1494: fol. 15rb–va
[1988b:
 461–462]).[20]
 This represents the view of validity as reducibility to
paradigmatically valid
 syllogisms.[21]
In general, Heytesbury introduces three levels of
 validity.[22]
 First, validity as relevance secured by logical form in every domain
of application, explicated as truth-preservation of all inferences
sharing the same logical form (forma or modus
arguendi) with respect to every imaginable world. Second,
validity as relevance secured by conceptual content with a restricted
domain of application, explicated as truth-preservation with respect
to all imaginable worlds, which is not substitution-invariant. Third,
validity as simple truth-preservation with respect to all possible
worlds. Heytesbury’s parallel use of different concepts of
formality makes him a representative of British logic in the
transition period, containing different stages of development: the
substitutional view (validity preserved in all substitution-instances)
typical for the “Continental tradition”, the relevance
view (conceptual connection) typical for the “British
tradition” and later Paul of Venice and Paul of Pergula, and
formality as reducibility to a syllogism typical for the early
fourteenth-century
 tradition.[23]
Heytesbury’s analysis of epistemic statements encompasses the
logical analysis of epistemic statements, inference rules for
sentences containing epistemic operators, and rules for obligational
games with epistemic statements, most of which are applied to
solutions to
 sophisms[24]
 and instructions for obligational games. The underlying principles
pertaining to the logical analysis of language and inference rules for
epistemic statements will be addressed
 below.[25]
Let us consider the following two sentences: 
(dr), called “sensus divisus” by Heytesbury,
denotes that there is a person (who happens to be Socrates) of whom I
correctly know that he is running in Beaumont, but about whom I may or
may not know that he is Socrates; his kinematics, but not his
identity, is part of my belief. On the other hand, according to (dd),
called “sensus compositus” by Heytesbury, I know
that it is Socrates who is running in Beaumont. Hence if I believed
that Socrates died years ago, (dr) could be true but (dd) would be
false ([SCD] 1494: fol. 3va [1988a: 427] and
[RSS] 1494, fol. 13rb and [1988b:
 444]).[26]
 By strictly endorsing the Aristotelian framework and analyzing
epistemic contexts in terms of the de re/de dicto
ambiguity, Heytesbury does not participate in the fourteenth-century
developments in the logical analysis of
 language.[27]
 Also, his criteria for distinguishing between the two readings are
purely syntactic, whereby scholastic Latin is viewed as an artificial
language with strict formation
 rules.[28]
Heytesbury’s remarks on the “common interpretation of
knowledge” emphasize that a firm and unhesitant belief does not
constitute knowledge unless it is veridical, which results in the
formulation “to know is nothing other than unhesitatingly to
apprehend the truth—i.e., to believe unhesitatingly that it is
so when it is so in reality” ([RSS] 1494: fol.
13vb [1988b:
 447]).[29]
 This implies the veracity of knowledge, formally (where
“\(K(\xi,X)\)” abbreviates “the agent \(\xi\) knows
that X”):
The introspection axioms govern iterated epistemic modalities (Boh
1984 and 1985). While denying the possibility of doubting one’s
own knowledge, Heytesbury proposes positive introspection:
This principle is spelled out in terms of the definienda of knowledge:
if an agent perceives something unhesitatingly and pays attention to
whether he does or does not perceive it, he also perceives that he
perceives it, for both the first and second-order knowledge are based
on the same evidence ([RSS] 1494: fol. 13vb [1988b:
447–448]). Heytesbury also holds the contraposition of (4)
([RSS] 1494: fol. 13vb [1988b: 448]):
In the context of (T), Heytesbury discusses the casus where
an agent sees a person who looks exactly like a king, but is not one.
The agent can believe the man to be a king beyond any doubt and even
believe himself to know that. But, by (T), he knows neither that the
man is a king (because that is not true), nor that the man is not a
king (because he does not believe that) ([RSS] 1494:
fol. 13vb [1988b: 447]). Even though Heytesbury doesn’t
explicitly say so, it seems natural to assume that this agent
doesn’t know that he failed to know that man is a king. Hence he
fails to know something, but also, presumably, fails to know that he
fails to know it, which is a counter-example to negative
introspection:
Accepting (4) while denying (5) is based on Heytesbury’s
interpretation of knowledge as an evidence-based act of considering
something and apprehending its factuality: the absence of knowledge
alone does not constitute conscious ignorance.
Heytesbury’s account of the closure properties of knowledge
encompasses the closure of meaning under entailment, the distribution
of knowledge over implication, and the distribution of knowledge over
signification.
First, Heytesbury introduces the concept of implied meaning
(significare ex consequenti) and believes that sentential
meaning is closed under entailment. As he explains the different
senses of “signifying precisely” (significare
precise), he claims that a sentence cannot signify something
precisely in the sense of not signifying anything else. Instead,
“to signify precisely” means that a sentence has a
“primary meaning” (“significat primo et
principaliter” or “significatio primaria et
adequata”) plus whatever its primary meaning entails
(quod sequitur ipsam significantem quod ita sit), but nothing
else ([RSS] 1494: fol. 15ra–rb [1988b:
 459–460]).[31]
 To allow that, Heytesbury’s semantics must validate the
following principle (where “\(\textrm{sig}(x,X)\)”
abbreviates “x signifies that X”):
Second, Heytesbury denies outright logical omniscience, i.e., the
closure of knowledge under implication:
but agrees with the distribution of knowledge over implication, i.e.,
that knowledge is closed under known inferences (the “axiom
K”) ([CO] soph. 2):
Third, if an agent knows that it is completely the case as a sentence
signifies, does he know that everything it signifies is the
 case?[34]
 The problem of conceding a sentence whose meaning is deductively
closed by an agent with a finite cognitive capacity is solved by
introducing a distinction parallel to (K) and (O)
([RSS] 1494: fol. 15rb [1988b: 460]); Heytesbury
denies:
but holds:
Together with “strong” semantic closure,
Heytesbury’s analysis of epistemic operators validates the
“weaker” distribution principles and rejects the
“stronger” closure principles, i.e., different forms of
logical
 omniscience.[35]
Heytesbury analyzes insolubilia or self-referential paradoxes
most thoroughly in the first chapter of
 [RSS],[36]
 where he dismisses three alternative solutions to paradoxes to settle
for the fourth. The first three positions agree that paradoxical
sentences can have precisely their standard meaning. According to the
first position held by Roger Swyneshed, paradoxical sentences are
false because they imply their own falsity, and a sentence and its
negation can be false at the same time if one of them is paradoxical
([RSS] 1494: fol. 4va and 6rb [1979: 18–19 and
45]). According to the second position, paradoxical sentences do not
make genuine statements, hence are neither true nor false
([RSS] 1494: fols. 4va–vb [1979: 19]). That is
reminiscent of the so-called “cassantes” who
claim that paradoxical sentences fail to make a true or false
statement (literally “say nothing”) (de Rijk 1966), available, for instance,
through Burley or Bradwardine (Roure 1970; Bradwardine B-I. Heytesbury
also could have viewed the second position as the interpretation of
Bradwardine’s “mediantes”, who claims that
paradoxical sentences are neither true nor false, but of a
“middle
 value”.[37]
 According to the third position, paradoxical sentences are
either-true-or-false but neither true nor false; they make genuine
statements, but fail to have a standard truth-value
([RSS] 1494: fol. 4vb [1979: 19–20]).
According to the fourth position, paradoxical sentences have their
standard meaning, but say more than what their overt meanings
indicate. It is based on the definitions of a paradoxical
casus and a paradoxical sentence. There are two versions of
these definitions, differing in the last clause:
A paradoxical casus is one in which mention is made of some
sentence such that if in the same casus that sentence
signifies precisely as its words commonly pretend, from its being true
follows that it is false, and vice versa. ([RSS]
1494: fol. 6rb [1979: 47])
or:
…it follows that it is true and also false. (Pozzi 1987:
236)
Furthermore:
A paradoxical sentence is one of which mention is made in a
paradoxical casus, such that if in the same casus it
signifies precisely as its words commonly pretend, then from its being
true follows that it is false, and vice versa ([RSS]
1494: fol. 6rb [1979: 47]).
or:
…it follows that it is true and also false. (Pozzi 1987:
 236)[38]
The solution to paradoxes is exemplified by the casus, where
Socrates only pronounces the sentence “Socrates is saying
something false”, henceforth labelled (s). Five elementary
settings differ in assumptions concerning its meaning:
For Heytesbury, “to solve a paradox” is to instruct the
respondent in the corresponding obligatio-game. His
instructions are as follows:
The corresponding moves are:
opponent’s moves
respondent’s moves
justification
[O1] POSITIO: Socrates only pronounces (s).
[R1] I admit the casus.
The casus is possible.
[O2] PROPONITUR: (s) is false.
[R2] ???
Irrelevant and ???
Heytesbury applies his view of obligationes: in the absence
of any other assumptions, (s) is initially irrelevant. As such, if
proposed as the first sentence in the game, the respondent’s
move cannot be affected by either the casus or the previous
moves, but must follow the respondent’s knowledge about the
external world. Heytesbury’s emphasis on the stage of the game
suggests that this can change due to the dynamic character of
obligationes.
The corresponding moves are:
opponent’s moves
respondent’s moves
justification
[O1] POSITIO: Socrates only pronounces (s) and (s)
signifies precisely that (s) is false
[R1] I do not admit the casus.
The casus is inconsistent.
Since obligationes are consistency-maintenance games, the
only non-losing strategy for a respondent is not to start such a game,
for otherwise he would be dragged into inconsistency via the
well-known paradoxical reasoning.
The corresponding moves are:
opponent’s moves
respondent’s moves
justification
[O1] POSITIO: Socrates only pronounces (s) and (s)
signifies that (s) is false
[R1] I admit the casus.
The casus is consistent.
[O2] PROPONITUR: (s) is false.
[R2] I concede that.
Implied by the casus.
[O3] PROPONITUR: “(s) is false” is
true.
[R3] I deny that.
Incompatible with the casus.
The justification of [R2] is not clearly explained in
[RSS]. A minimalist interpretation is that the
proposed sentence is implied by [R1] via reductio: If (s) is
false, then it is false (trivially); if (s) is not false, it is true,
and then it is the case as it signifies, hence it is false. Either
way, it is false, hence it is
 false.[39]
 An obligational explanation is that (s) is regarded as relevant in
this casus, and as such can only be conceded or denied. Since
its denial implies an inconsistency, such a move must be avoided in a
consistency-maintenance game, therefore it should be conceded. Since
the casus has been admitted as consistent, it cannot validate
an inconsistent move, hence it must validate its opposite. By the same
reasoning, it is possible to deny that (s) is true. Furthermore,
Heytesbury refuses to certify the additional meaning of (s)
([RSS] 1494: fol. 6va [1979: 49–50]).
Unsatisfactory as this may seem, it is legitimate from the point of
view of obligationes: meaning certification is not a move
available to the respondent, and since the instructions are
respondent-oriented, the actual meaning of (s) is an external
problem.
(2.31) and (2.32) are dealt with along the same lines.
For Heytesbury, paradoxes are obligational games with self-referential
 sentences.[40]
 However, his criticism of alternative solutions is part of the
fourteenth-century developments relating paradoxes to general
logico-semantical
 issues.[41]
 He views his approach as relatively defensible and probable, but
admits that he cannot solve all objections and considers a completely
satisfactory solution to paradoxes impossible (unfortunately without a
justification). Without too much self-confidence, he closes his
treatise by saying that young students should move past the topic and
do something useful. ([RSS] 1494: fol. 4vb and 7rb
[1979: 21 and 58])
Heytesbury’s treatise Regule solvendi sophismata may be
taken as representative of Oxford Calculators’s
speculative/mathematical physics. It links interests in logic,
mathematics, and physics. As Curtis Wilson says: “Heytesbury
employs the concept of “limit” and “infinite
aggregate” with considerable precision and subtlety; and in
treating of variable physics quantities, he approaches the ideal of a
purely mathematical description” (Wilson 1960: 3). Not only does
Heytesbury analyze physical and mathematical problems by means of the
techniques of the logica moderna, but he also employs
physical and mathematical rules in the analyses of logical or semantic
problems of denomination. Heytesbury is mostly interested in the
problem of determining under what conditions a subject can be
denominated such-and-such, e.g., “white” or
“running”. The issue of denomination arises because the
attributes of subjects vary in degrees of intensity or completeness.
He establishes sets of rules of everyday speech, determining how we
denominate a subject under all imaginable circumstances of change. For
example, in sophism Omnis homo qui est albus currit, he
concludes that a man is called to be “white” if and only
if the external surface of the upper half of him is white (in everyday
speech, a man is white if the skin of his face is white) (Wilson 1960:
22–23).
Like one of the founders of the School of Oxford
Calculators—Richard Kilvington– Heytesbury takes
Ockham’s nominalist position and affirms that the real physical
world consists only of res absolutae, i.e., substances and
qualities. They both acknowledge that terms such as
“point”, “line”,
“latitude”, and “degree” do
not have any representation in reality, but are useful for describing
different types of change. They also hold that time is not real since
time is not distinguished realiter from the motion of
celestial sphere, and motion not distinguished realiter from
the body which moves. Thus, they both contrast things that are really
distinct with things distinguishable only in reason, i.e., in the
imagination. Heytesbury follows Kilvington’s frequent use of the
phrase secundum imaginationem. Imaginary cases are
descriptions of hypothetical situations; the elements of the
description, and not the situation itself, are of primary concern. The
only requirement for an imaginable case is that it should not involve
a formal logical contradiction; whether it is physically possible or
not is a matter of indifference. As Wilson says, 
a distinction is drawn between realiter or
naturaliter or physice loquendo and logice
or sophistice loquendo: physice we follow experience
and the principles laid down in the natural philosophy of Aristotle;
logice or sophistice we are free to introduce
whatever distinctions and cases are convenient and imaginable. (Wilson
1960: 25)
Heytesbury, however, remains in the framework of Aristotelian
philosophy of nature, and the problems he discusses are to be found in
Aristotle’s Physica and De caelo.
Nevertheless, Heytesbury is captivated by the mathematical approach
like former Oxford Calculators were. Like Thomas Bradwardine and
Richard Kilvington, he examines physical problems using mathematical
apparatus. In Chapters 4–6 of the Regulae, Heytesbury
develops the measurement by limit, i.e., by the first and last
instants of the beginning and ending, and by the intrinsic and
extrinsic limits of passive and active capacities. Although these type
of “measuring” do not appear to be straightforwardly
mathematical, it raises mathematical considerations and give
outstanding results in analyses of the instantaneous in motion and
time, as well as analyses of the continuum. As Wilson states: 
“Heytesbury admits “according to the common mode of
speech” that everything which is, whether time or motion or
instant, is in an instant, in the sense that it is instantaneously
measured by an instant […] the instant in time and the
instantaneous position in movement are always to be regarded as
“limits”. (Wilson 1960: 41) 
The second type of measurement employs a new calculus of compounding
ratios. The third type of measurement, by latitude of forms, describes
motion, in which an accidental form, such as speed, is intensified or
diminished. He focuses on establishing the rules for uniform and
difform local motion, alteration, and augmentation. He is centered on
the possible measure of the speed of such motions by the effect
produced during equal length of time. Thus, he is interested in the
kinematical aspect of motion (Ideo viso iam generaliter penes quid
tamquam quo ad effectum attendatur velocitas in motu locali, quia
secundum proportionem potentie motoris ad potentiam resistivam
generaliter attenditur velocitas in quocumque motu tamquam quo ad eius
causam) ([RSS] 1494: fol. 44rb).
In chapter IV of the Regulae (De incipit et desinit)
Heytesbury poses and analyzes in great detail cases in which any
thing, process, or state may be said to begin or cease to be. He
begins with possible expositions of the terms “beginning”
(incipere) and “ceasing” (desinere) in a
way that uncovers certain paradoxical properties of the temporal
continuum. “Beginning” may be expounded by
positio of the present (i.e., by the positing of existence in
the present instant) and remotio of the past (i.e., by denial
of existence in the past), meaning that in the present instant a thing
or a process is, and immediately prior to the present instant it was
not. “Beginning” may be also expounded by remotio
of the present and positio of the future, meaning that in the
present instant a thing or a process is not, and immediately after the
present instant it will be. Likewise, “ceasing” may be
expounded in two ways, either by remotio of the present and
positio of the past, meaning that in the present instant a
thing or a process is not, and immediately prior to the present
instant it was, or by positio of the present and
remotio of the future, meaning that in the present instant a
thing or a process is, and immediately after the present instant it
will not be. Heytesbury offers a number of sophisms involving the
limit-decision. One of them is particularly interesting since it
clearly exhibits Heytesbury’s remarkable skill in solving
problems of instantaneous motion and time without symbolic techniques
of the calculus. Heytesbury poses a case in which both Plato and
Socrates begin to move from rest at the same instant, but Plato starts
to move with a constant acceleration and Socrates with an acceleration
which starts at zero degree and increases uniformly with time. He
concludes that “both Socrates and Plato infinitely slowly begin
to be moved, and yet Socrates infinitely more slowly begins to be moved
than Plato” (Wilson 1960: 54, [RSS] 1494: fol. 26vb).
As Wilson proves, the
conclusion is an effect of comparison of two infinitesimals of
different order. 
In the case under consideration both the velocity of Plato (\(v_p\))
and the velocity of Socrates (\(v_s\)) are infinitesimal for time
t approaching zero. Two infinitesimals are said to be of
different order if the limit of their quotient is either zero or
infinite. In the case under consideration the limit of the quotient
\(v_p/v_s\) as \(t\rightarrow 0\) is infinite. (Wilson 1960: 55)
In chapter V of the Regulae, Heytesbury considers the limits
of capacities, and he applies the limit-concept to the bounding of the
ranges of variables and aggregates. All capacities are sorted as
active or passive. An active capacity (force) is measured against the
passive capacity (resistance) which it can overcome. If an active
capacity can overcome some resistance, it can overcome less. For
example, if Socrates can lift one hundred pounds, he can lift fifty
pounds. Conversely, if a passive capacity can be affected by less, it
can be affected by greater. For example, if Socrates can see a grain
of millet from the distance of a mile, he will be able to see the
Church at the same distance. The boundaries of capacities are of two
kinds: an intrinsic boundary (when an element is a member of the
sequence of elements it bounds: maximum quod sic, minimum quod
sic) and an extrinsic boundary (when an element which serves as a
boundary stands outside the range of elements which it bounds:
maximum quod non, minimum quod non). From the definitions of
active and passive capacities, it follows that the boundary of an
active capacity must be assigned either by the affirmation of the
maximum (maximum quod sic) or by the negation of the minimum
(minimum quod non); the boundary of a passive capacity is
assigned either by the affirmation of the minimum (minimum quod
sic) or by the negation of the maximum (maximum quod
non).
Heytesbury sets the following conditions which must be obtained for
limits to exist: (1) There must be a range in which the capacity can
act or be acted upon, and another range in which it cannot act or be
acted upon, and not both; (2) Each capacity should only be able to
take a value in the range on which it is measured from zero and the
value which serves as its boundary. Thus, if an active capacity is
capable of acting upon a given passive capacity in the range, it must
be capable of acting upon any less, and if it is not capable of acting
upon a given passive capacity, it is not capable of acting upon any
greater. Conversely, if a passive capacity is capable of being acted
upon by a certain agent, it must be capable of being acted upon by any
agent of greater strength, and if it is not capable of being acted
upon by a certain agent, it is not capable of being acted upon by a
weaker agent; and (3) Infinite capacities like the infinite power of
God are excluded from the discussion, since no termination can be
assigned for them ([RSS] 1494: fol.
29va–vb).
Heytesbury, like Kilvington, classifies all capacities as mutable or
immutable. A mutable capacity is capable of more and less, and both
affirmative and negative parts of the division might be assigned. For
example, with respect to Socrates, a mutable power of lifting (an
active capacity) a minimum quod non is assigned. For a
passive capacity the maximum quod non is assigned, e.g., a
maximum visible body which cannot be seen at a given distance. An
immutable capacity acts in a determinate way, so it produces the only
one effect it actually produces. Therefore, the affirmative part of
the division is always assigned as a boundary for immutable capacity.
Thus, e.g., there is a maximum distance which, ceteris
paribus, Socrates can traverse in an hour by a speed which
increases uniformly from A to B degree ([RSS] 1494:
fol. 29vb; Wilson 1960: 73).
Chapter VI (De tribus praedicamentis) of the Regulae
deals with motion in three categories: place, quantity, and quality.
The first part (de motu locali) deals with the quickness or
slowness in uniformly or difformly accelerated and decelerated motion
considered in its kinematical aspect. The second part (de
velocitate motus augmentationis) deals with augmentation
understood as pure increase in size, and more specifically with the
speed of rarefaction as measured by the effect produced, i.e., by
space traversed in time. The third part (de velocitate motus
alterationis) is concentrated on mathematical description of
variation of intensity in space and time. The prime purpose to be
achieved in this chapter is to establish definitions of speed in the
three categories of motion. All debated cases are posed secundum
imaginationem.
Local motions are grouped into two classes: uniform and difform. A
uniform motion is motion in which equal spaces are traversed
continually in equal parts of time. Difform motions can vary in
infinite ways, both with respect to the magnitude or the subject
moved, and with respect to time. Difform motion with respect to the
subject moved is motion in which different points of the body move
with unequal speeds; for instance, a rolling wheel moves with difform
motion since different points on the wheel vary in regard to distance
from the axis of rotation. Difform motion with respect to time is
motion in which unequal spaces are traversed in equal times. Motion
can also be difform with respect to both time and the subject moved.
Difform motions are subdivided into two classes: the uniformly difform
motion and the difformly difform motion. Uniformly difform motion is
motion in which the speed either increases or decreases uniformly,
that is, a motion in which in any equal parts of time, equal latitudes
of speed are either acquired or lost. A difformly difform motion is
motion in which a greater latitude of velocity is gained or lost in
one part of time than in another equal to it.
The most gripping example of uniformly difform motion is accelerated
motion, like a motion of a body moving towards the earth. Heytesbury
gives a general rule, called Mean Speed Theorem, by which we may
calculate the distance traversed from the latitude of speed uniformly
acquired. He makes use of this theorem to both accelerate and
decelerate motions. According to this rule, the distance traversed by
a uniformly accelerated body in a given time is equal to the distance
which would be traversed in the same time in a uniform motion with its
mean speed (half of the sum of the initial and final speed). A number
of conclusions follow from this theorem:
In concluding the chapter, Heytesbury states that an infinite number
of sophisms can be made concerning speed in local motion, as well as
intension and remission of such speed (Infinita possunt fieri
sophismata de velocitate motus localis et de comparatione unius motus
ad alium, et de comparatione intensionis ad remissionem motus et
coniungendo latitudinem motus intensionis et remissionis cum
latitudine velocitatis ([RSS] 1494: fols.
44rb–44va)).
Heytesbury presents the same concern with quantitative description of
hypothetical cases in the subchapter dealing with qualitative change.
He takes part in the debate over one of the most widely discussed
problems in the fourteenth-century philosophy of nature focused on the
possible “measure” of the intension and remission of
forms. Like most of the Oxford Calculators, Heytesbury accepts
Scotus’s and Ockham’s addition theory and assumes that the
intension of form is the result of adding qualitative parts. As an
Ockhamist, Heytesbury emphasizes that the term “motion” in
alteration connotes nothing else than the degrees or latitude of
quality that are successively acquired. A basic assumption is that
qualitative intensity is a certain kind of linearly ordered and
additive quantity. Thus, as in the case of local motion, Heytesbury
divides the latitudes of motion of alteration into the latitude of
motion of intension and the latitude of motion of remission; and the
latitude of the latitude of motion into the latitude of the
acquisition of the latitude of motion and the latitude of the loss of
latitude of motion. In modern terminology, these latitudes correspond
to latitudes of speed and of acceleration and deceleration,
respectively. Since there is no limit to speeds of alteration nor to
rates of acceleration or deceleration of that speed, those latitudes
are all infinite.
Heytesbury presents three different ways of “measuring”
the speed of alteration in which intensity of a quality varies form
one point to another, or from instant to instant of time, or from
point to point of the moving body: (1) by the degree (gradus)
induced (a subject is considered to be altered faster when a higher
degree is induced); (2) by the latitude of form acquired in comparison
to the size of the subject (the speed of alteration is proportionally
greater in a larger body); and (3) by the latitude acquired in a given
time, without regard to size of the subject undergoing alteration.
Heytesbury holds the third position and claims that as in the case of
local motion, the speed of alteration is to be measured at the point
of the body where the rate of change is most rapid, that is, where the
maximum latitude of form is acquired ([RSS] 1494:
fol. 51ra).
Heytesbury deals with augmentation as with pure increase in size,
which is the same process as rarefaction; more precisely, he deals
with the speed of rarefaction as measured by the effect produced.
There are three ways of “measuring” the speed of
augmentation acquired in time: (1) by the maximum quantity acquired;
(2) by the latitude of rarity or rareness; and (3) by the ratio of new
size to previous size ([RSS] 1494: fol. 60rb). He
holds the third position, according to which the ratios correspond to
different degrees of augmentation. Augmentation, like the two other
motions, can be uniform or difform. An augmentation is uniform if in
equal intervals of time, the body undergoing augmentation increases in
size by the same ratio. While discussing the above mentioned
positions, Heytesbury makes broad use of the new calculus of ratios
invented by Kilvington and Bradwardine.
As a logician, Heytesbury strongly influenced logic in fourteenth and
fifteenth-century Britain, and there is a notable fifteenth and early
sixteenth-century reception in Italy where multiple editions of his
commentaries on [RSS] and [SCD] were
printed (Ashworth & Spade 1992; de Rijk 1975, 1977). As of now,
only the influence of his insolubilia-treatise is
particularly well-documented. Despite his dismissive attitude toward
this genre, Heytesbury’s treatise is one of the most influential
late medieval texts. These influences include the British logical
tradition (see Pironet 2008), the Italian logical
 tradition,[42]
 and John Mair’s
 circle,[43]
 and the treatise is referred to even as late as 1688 (De Benedictis
1688: 580–590; for other influence, see Spade 1989: 273).
Heytesbury’s catalogue of solutions to the paradoxes, where the
positions are (correctly or not) attributed to fourteenth-century
British logicians, is further developed and sometimes defended against
Heytesbury’s harsh and sarcastic dismissal. (R2.2) is developed
by extending the proof and supplemented by saying that paradoxical
sentences (or all sentences, for that matter) signify their own truth.
As a philosopher, Heytesbury significantly influenced later Oxford
Calculators: John Dumbleton, anonymous author of Tractatus de sex
inconvenientibus, Richard Swineshead, author of one of the most
famous treatise Liber Calculationum, and continental
fourteenth and fifteenth-century philosophers, e.g., John Casali, John
of Holland, Petrus of Mantua, Cajetan of Thiene, Giovanni Marliani,
and Paul of Venice (see Wilson 1960: 25–28). The Mean Speed
Theorem was widely discussed during the fourteenth and fifteenth
centuries, and later played an important role in the formulation of
the law of free fall (see Damerow et al. 1992: 161–200,
esp. 232–236).