1908: born, Akron, Ohio, on June 25th.
1926–30: attended Oberlin College, Ohio; B.A, major in Mathematics
with honors reading in mathematical philosophy.
1930–32: attended Harvard University; Ph.D. in Philosophy,
dissertation on Whitehead and Russell’s Principia
Mathematica.
1932–33: held a Sheldon Traveling Fellowship and visited (most
notably) Vienna, Warsaw, and Prague (where Carnap was then
teaching).
1933–36: a Junior Fellow in Harvard’s newly-formed Society of
Fellows; worked chiefly on logic and set theory.
1934: published A System of Logistic, a revised version of
his dissertation.
1936–78: held teaching positions at Harvard, first as Faculty
Instructor, then as Associate Professor (1941) and then as Professor
(1948).
1940: published Mathematical Logic.
1942–45: U.S. Navy, working chiefly in Naval intelligence.
1953: published From a Logical Point of View.
1960: published Word and Object.
1963: published Set Theory and its Logic.
1966: published Ways of Paradox.
1969: published Ontological Relativity and Other
Essays.
1974: published The Roots of Reference.
1981: published Theories and Things.
1990: published Pursuit of Truth.
1995: published From Stimulus to Science.
2000: died, Boston, Massachusetts, December 25t.h.
(Note: for the sake of brevity, we have listed only Quine’s
most notable books, including collections of essays.) 
Quine’s philosophical thought is remarkably consistent over
the course of his long working life. There are developments, of course,
but outright changes of mind are relatively rare and mostly on
relatively minor points. We can, for the most part, treat him as having
a single philosophical orientation, to which what he calls
“naturalism” is fundamental. This is not to say that his
naturalism is self-conscious and explicit from the start; it is,
rather, something that he became clearer about over the years. (For the
development of Quine’s naturalism, see Verhaegh, 2018.)
The term “naturalism” has been understood in various
ways; we need to see what Quine’s naturalism comes to. At one
point, he describes naturalism as “the recognition that it is
within science itself, and not in some prior philosophy, that reality
is to be identified and described” (1981, 21). Two points
are important to note about the idea of “science” here.
First, it is less restrictive than it may seem. Quine certainly takes
the natural sciences, especially physics, as paradigmatic. As he says
himself, however, he uses the word “science” broadly; he
explicitly includes psychology, economics, sociology, and history (see
1995, 49). Second, Quine does not see scientific knowledge as different
in kind from our ordinary knowledge; he sees it, rather, as the result
of attempts to improve our ordinary knowledge of the world:
“Science is not a substitute for common sense but an extension of
it.” (1957, 229). The scientist, he says, “is
indistinguishable from the common man in his sense of evidence, except
that the scientist is more careful.” (1957, 233). We might add
that the scientist is more narrowly focused on issues of truth and
objectivity and, in the hope of contributing to these goals, clearer
and more systematic.
Many philosophers would no doubt accept that the methods and
techniques of science are the best way to find out about the world.
(With or without the points just noted about the word
“science”.) The distinctiveness of Quine’s naturalism
begins to emerge if we ask what justifies this naturalistic claim: what
reason do we have to believe that the methods and techniques of science
are the best way to find out about the world? Quine would insist that
this claim too must be based on natural science. (If this is
circular, he simply accepts the circularity.) This is the revolutionary
step: naturalism self-applied. There is no foundation for Quine’s
naturalism: it is not based on anything else.
The point here is that Quine denies that there is a
distinctively philosophical standpoint, which might, for example,
allow philosophical reflection to prescribe standards to science as a
whole. He holds that all of our attempts at knowledge are subject to
those standards of evidence and justification which are most explicitly
displayed, and most successfully implemented, in the natural sciences.
This applies to philosophy as well as to other branches of knowledge.
The epistemologist, therefore, reflects on science from within science;
there is no theory of knowledge distinct from science.
“Epistemology”, Quine says, “…is contained in
natural science, as a chapter of psychology” (1969, 83). (For an
alternative view of the relation of philosophy to science, based on
discussion of the history of science, see Friedman, 1997.)
In Quine’s view, philosophers can, therefore, do no better
than to adopt the standpoint of the best available knowledge, i.e.
science, in some suitably broad sense. We adopt what he calls
“the fundamental conceptual scheme of science and common
sense” (1960, 276). Philosophers are thus to be constrained by
scientific standards. In (1974) he puts it this way: “In our
account of how science might be acquired we do not try to justify
science by some prior and firmer philosophy, but neither are we to
maintain less than scientific standards. Evidence must regularly be
sought in external objects, out where observers can jointly observe
it….” (1974, 34f.)
The view sketched above has both positive and negative aspects. The
latter are better-known, and Quine is often thought of as a negative
philosopher, primarily concerned to criticize others. He casts doubt on
terms which many philosophers take for granted. He does not dismiss
such terms as meaningless, but simply as not meriting a place in
serious science, or in the objective account of the world at which
science aims. A well-known and important example is his criticism of
the idea of meaning, in the sense of the meaning of a particular
sentence or statement. Quine says: “Meaning… is a worthy
object of philosophical and scientific clarification and analysis,
and… it is ill-suited for use as an instrument of philosophical
and scientific clarification and analysis.” (1981, 185). The term
is insufficiently clear, and putative explanations which employ it are
in fact unexplanatory; by engendering the illusion of explanation they
tend to impede the progress of science. So philosophers should not rely
on the term. He makes similar remarks about “thought”,
“belief”, “experience”,
“necessity”, and other terms which many philosophers assume
are legitimate and available for philosophical use without themselves
requiring explanation and justification in other terms. (For an
illustration of Quine’s attitude towards the term
“meaning” as used by one such philosopher, see his reply to
Pagin in Orenstein and Kokato, 420f.)
This criticism of the scientific and philosophical use of certain
ordinary terms goes along with rejection of philosophical questions
which make essential use of those terms. For example, many philosophers
hold that there are important philosophical problems concerning
knowledge: Do we really know anything at all? What exactly are the
conditions on knowledge? (This latter question has seemed especially
pressing since Gettier, 1963.) Quine, by contrast, finds the word
“knowledge” vague, and consequently rejects it for serious
use, saying that the word is ‘‘useful and unobjectionable
in the vernacular where we acquiesce in vagueness, but unsuited to
technical use because of lacking a precise boundary’’
(1984, 295). Accordingly, many such questions formulated using the term
may simply be dismissed, even if it remains eminently useful for making
rough sorts of claim, when we say as above that scientific knowledge is
not different in kind from our ordinary knowledge.
As we have just seen, Quine’s views issue in very general
criticism of much philosophy and indeed of the assumption that the term
“knowledge” marks a clear subject of inquiry. It is,
nevertheless, a mistake to think of him as primarily a critical or
negative thinker: his criticisms rely on his positive doctrine, which
in turn generates further questions. As for whether those are genuinely
philosophical questions, it is implicit in what has already
been said that he would not acknowledge such a category as the
‘genuinely philosophical’ if that is meant to
imply questions which are different in kind from those of science. But
certainly he accepts that some questions are sufficiently general,
abstract, and remote from observation, that they may be classified as
philosophical. At times he assimilates the questions with which he is
concerned to those which have traditionally occupied philosophers.
Epistemology—the theory of knowledge—is a clear example,
although Quine’s approach to that subject is quite different from
that of many philosophers.
In some places, Quine approaches epistemology through the problem of
scepticism about the external world. But he has no room for the kind of
scepticism which asks the following kind of question: even if our
alleged knowledge, our science, is completely successful in its
predictions, how do we know that it tells us the way the world really
is? (See Alston, 1993.) Thus Quine says:
This dismissal of one kind of scepticism is an example of
Quine’s naturalism, and indicates how he understands that
idea. 
There is, however, a way of understanding the sceptical question
which Quine takes seriously. Philosophers have been concerned with the
gap between what is given in experience and the knowledge that we take
ourselves to have. Quine invokes gestalt psychology and argues that the
simple sensory ideas which Berkeley and Hume had claimed were given by
the senses are not in fact given, that we see things in
three-dimensions, for example, instead of having to infer the third. He
does not, however, conclude that there is no problem at all here.
Rather, he says, “the problem was real but wrongly viewed”
(1974, 2). Epistemology, as he sees it, is here “confronting a
challenge to natural science that arises from within natural
science.” (loc. cit.). What is the challenge? It starts
with what Quine takes to be “a finding of natural science
itself… that our information about the world comes only through
impacts on our sensory receptors” (1990a, 19). The sceptical
challenge is then: “How… could one hope to find out about
that external world from such meager traces? In short, if our science
were true, how could we know it?” (1974, 2).
Scepticism, understood in this fashion, is a challenge to
Quine’s form of naturalism. It questions whether our knowledge
can be accounted for in terms which are, by Quine’s standards,
purely naturalistic. Quine’s response is thus to sketch an
austerely naturalistic account of how our knowledge, and the cognitive
language in which that knowledge is embodied, arises, or might arise.
This project, as he sees it, is essential to the defence of his
naturalistic world-view. (Section 4. will go into more detail about the
project.) 
When Quine asks: “How… could one hope to find out about
that external world from such meager traces?” this is not a
rhetorical question. It is, rather, a serious question, to be answered
by deploying the full resources of our knowledge; it is a scientific
question. Quine recognizes that the question, thus construed, is not
exactly what earlier epistemologists had in mind, but argues that the
change is justified: “A far cry, this, from the old epistemology.
Yet it is no gratuitous change of subject matter, but an enlightened
persistence rather in the original epistemological problem.”
(1974, 3).
The defence and articulation of Quine’s naturalism requires
Quinean epistemology, an analogue of traditional epistemology but
carried out as a scientific enterprise. It also requires that he set
out, in outline, what is to be included in a naturalistic account of
the world; in other words, it requires an account of the world, a least
in broad outline. Among other things, this account constrains his
epistemology, since that is to be a naturalistic account of
knowledge.
In what follows, we shall sometimes speak of Quine’s account
of the world as his “metaphysics”, but it is metaphysics
naturalized: it is not carried out a priori, or by reflection
on the nature of Being quâ Being, or anything of that
sort. (Quine himself does not much use the word
“metaphysics”. He puts forward views on metaphysical
topics—such as ontology, time, and abstract objects—but
within the confines of his naturalism.)
Quine approaches his naturalistic analogue of metaphysics through
the idea of regimented theory. Regimented theory is our overall
science, the sum total of our best and most objective knowledge about
the world, reformulated in the clearest and simplest form. Quine sees
this kind of reformulating as of a piece with ordinary scientific
endeavours, but carried further than working scientists are likely to
have reason to do. He discusses the distorting effect which language is
likely to have on our view of the world and comments:
Regimented theory is, of course, an idealization. It is not a
complete and finished object, available for us to examine.
Quine’s reflections on it might be considered as something like a
thought-experiment: if we were to set about assembling our total theory
of the world and recasting it in the best form, what would it look
like? Since the enterprise is not in fact going to be carried out all
the way we are not going to get a detailed answer. But on some
important general issues, Quine holds, we can get answers. In
particular, he argues that the framework of regimented theory is
first-order logic with identity (and so that theory is extensional);
that the variables of this theory range only over physical objects and
sets; and that the predicates of the theory, the only non-logical
vocabulary, are physicalistic, in his somewhat complicated sense. (See
section 5, below.) Although this is not traditional a priori
metaphysics, we should not underestimate the ambition of the project.
He says of his regimented theory that “all traits of reality
worthy of the name can be set down in an idiom of this austere form if
in any idiom” (1960, 228) and speaks of “limning the true
and ultimate structure of reality” (1960, 221). The claim
that the variables of regimented theory range only over physical
objects and sets is, as far as he is concerned, the claim that only
physical objects and sets really exist.
The philosophers who most influenced Quine were the Logical
Empiricists (also known as Logical Positivists), especially Rudolf
Carnap. The distinction between analytic truths and synthetic truths
plays a crucial role in their philosophy. Analytic truths might be
characterized as those true solely in virtue of the meanings of the
words they contain, or of the rules of the language, or something of
the sort. Synthetic truths, by contrast, state matters of
extra-linguistic fact, and are known by experience. The Logical
Empiricists accounted for truths which do not seem to be answerable to
experience, most obviously the truths of logic and mathematics, by
saying that they are analytic. This position was very widely held by
the 1940s. Quine, however, famously casts doubt on
analytic-synthetic distinction, and rejects the use made of it by
the Logical Empiricists and other philosophers from the 1930s on.
(Notable among the others is C. I. Lewis, first a teacher and then a
colleague of Quine; his influence on Quine has perhaps been
underestimated. See Baldwin 2013, Ben-Menahem 2016, and Sinclair
2016.)
The issues here are complex, and the argument takes many twists and
turns. The aim of this section is to give an account of Quine’s
mature view, and of the strongest arguments that he has for it.
Carnap holds that the role of philosophy is to analyze and clarify
the language of science, and to formulate and recommend alternative
languages. After 1932, he holds that there are languages which differ
in expressive power, not merely as notational variants. The difference
between intuitionistic logic and classical logic is an important
example here, as is the difference between the language of Newtonian
mechanics and the language of relativistic mechanics. (Earlier, he
says, he had ‘overlooked the fact that there is a multiplicity of
possible languages’, Carnap 1934, 245; cf. also 322 of the same
work.) Within a given language, there may be only one correct theory on
a given subject. But the choice of a language is in that respect unlike
the choice of a theory. In deciding which theory is correct, we will
appeal to observations but also to the rules of the language; no such
appeal is possible when we are choosing a language, for in this case it
is the rules themselves that we are choosing. So Carnap holds that
there is no one correct language. This idea has become known
as the Principle of Tolerance; from the 1930s on, it is fundamental to
Carnap’s view of what philosophy is and how it differs from
science. (That there is such a difference is a point which Carnap never
questions.) Because there is no one correct language, it is no part of
the philosopher’s job to prescribe this or that language, merely
to analyze, to clarify, and to suggest alternatives.
The Principle of Tolerance requires the analytic-synthetic
distinction. It requires that we can, in all cases, distinguish between
theoretical changes which involve a change of meaning, and hence,
strictly speaking, a change of language, and those which do not. The
former kind of change involves analytic sentences, and is a matter for
Tolerance; the latter involves only synthetic sentences, and Tolerance
does not apply. The use of the Principle of Tolerance thus presupposes
a clear distinction between the analytic sentences of the language and
its synthetic sentences.
At least as Quine sees the matter, the use of the Principle of
Tolerance puts analytic sentences on an entirely different
epistemological footing from synthetic sentences. Synthetic sentences
are answerable to evidence; analytic sentences are a matter of the
choice of language, which does not require theoretical justification.
Quine, however, rejects the idea that there is such an epistemological
difference. Even if we can distinguish the analytic sentences from the
synthetic sentences, we may still have reasons to reject an analytic
sentence. And those reasons may be of the same kind that lead us to
reject synthetic sentences. This point is hard to see if one focuses on
examples such as “All bachelors are unmarried”. The matter
is otherwise if one considers examples such as “Force equals mass
times acceleration”. (See Putnam, 1962.) A change of mind
about an analytic sentence would be a change in the language. Still, we
might have reasons to make such a change, reasons that are of the same
sort that lead us to make revisions to synthetic sentences. In that
case, we have no more reason to apply Tolerance in the one kind of case
than in the other.
This is the view that Quine argues for. On the one hand, he
emphasizes the point (which Carnap largely accepts) that choice of
language is not theoretically neutral: some choices will make for a
better theory than others. On the other hand, he argues that
‘pragmatic’ factors, such as simplicity, which Carnap
had accepted as playing a role in choice of language, also play a role
in the choice of a theory within a language. Hence, he claims, the two
sorts of choice are on the same epistemological footing, and the
Principle of Tolerance is unjustified.
Quine’s argument for this position relies on holism.
This is the claim that most of our sentences do not have implications
for experience when they are taken one-by-one, each in isolation from
the others. What has experiential implication is, in most cases, not an
individual sentence but a larger chunk of theory. Holism is not a very
controversial doctrine. (Carnap accepts it; see Carnap, 1934, 318.)
Quine claims that holism shows that most of our sentences are not
justified by the relation of the individual sentence, considered in
isolation, to experience. Almost always, what matters is the relation
to experience of some larger chunk of theory (in principle, although
perhaps never in practice, of the theory as a whole). This means that
in principle the correctness of a given claim is almost never settled
simply by looking at the empirical evidence for that claim alone. Other
factors will play a role, in particular the way in which accepting the
given claim would contribute to the efficacy and simplicity of the
theory as a whole. But these are precisely the ‘pragmatic
factors’ which Carnap thought played a role in the choice of
language. In arguing that such factors play a role throughout our
knowledge, Quine accepts ‘a more thorough pragmatism’
(1951, 46) which puts Carnap’s external changes on the same
epistemological footing as his internal changes. (Quine’s early
account of these matters is extremely sketchy. For elaboration, see
Quine 1991 and 1996; for criticism of the sketchy account, see Sober
2000.)
If logic, mathematics, and other putatively a priori parts
of our knowledge, are not to be explained by analyticity, how are they
to be accounted for? Holism, which is central to Quine’s argument
against Carnap, also provides him with an alternative position. It
seems as if logic and mathematics have a special status because they
are independent of experience. They appear to be necessary and not
susceptible of refutation by what future experience brings; they appear
to be a priori because we know them independent of experience.
Carnap sought to explain these appearances by appealing to the idea
that accepting an analytic sentence of a given language goes with
speaking that language, and to the Principle of Tolerance. Since choice
of language is not justified by experience, the truth of the analytic
sentences of a given language is not answerable to experience.
How is Quine to explain the apparent necessity and a priori
status of some truths without appeal to the Principle of Tolerance?
Quine’s holism is the view that almost none of our knowledge is
directly answerable to experience. (The exceptions are what he
calls ‘observation sentences’; see 4.2, below.) In almost
all cases the relation is indirect: a given sentence is only answerable
to experience if a body of theory is presupposed. (When we say that a
given observation confirms or refutes a given theoretical claim, we are
tacitly presupposing other theoretical knowledge.) This is most easily
seen if we consider a highly theoretical sentence, but in Quine’s
view it holds, of almost all our sentences. The reason to accept a
sentence is its contribution to the success of theory as a whole as an
efficient and simple method of dealing with and predicting experience;
in principle, this means the success of our theory as a whole, the
whole body of sentences that we accept, in dealing with experience as a
whole.
For many of our sentences, this strong statement of holism holds
only in principle. In practice, we may have a good idea what
experiences would lead us to change our minds about a given sentence,
and what further changes in theory would follow. Elementary arithmetic
(to take that as an example) is different because it is involved in
almost every part of systematic knowledge. (In Quine’s well-known
metaphor, it stands near the centre of the ‘web of
belief’.) Abandoning it would mean abandoning our whole system of
knowledge, and replacing it with an alternative which we have not even
begun to envisage. Nothing in principle rules out the possibility that
the course of experience will be such that our present system of
knowledge becomes wholly useless, and that in constructing a new one we
find that arithmetic is of no use. But this is a purely abstract
possibility, certainly not something we can imagine in any detail. So
the idea that we might reject arithmetic is likewise unimaginable;
hence the truths of arithmetic appear to be necessary.
For similar reasons, arithmetic appears to be a priori. No
particular experience confirms ‘2 + 2 = 4’. (Quine is not
advancing what Frege derided as a ‘gingerbread and pebble’
account of arithmetic (Frege 1884, vii), in which the sentence is
justified by our observations of cookies or stones.) Arithmetic is
independent of any particular experience, or any easily specifiable
portion of experience; hence it appears as a priori. On
Quine’s account, it rests on our experience as a whole, and the
fact that the theory which best accounts for that experience makes
essential use of arithmetic.
As we have just seen, even sentences which we cannot imagine
rejecting might, in principle, be rejected. As Quine says: ‘no
statement is immune to revision’ (1951, 43; see Ebbs 2017, Ch.
8). This claim of Quine’s has attracted a good deal of attention,
and is sometimes thought to be shocking or even paradoxical. In the
context of his debate with Carnap, however, it is not, by itself, at
all surprising. For Carnap too, any sentence can be revised; he would
insist, however, that in the case of some sentences, the analytic ones,
a revision involves a change of language, and thus of the meaning of
the words used in the sentence. So the idea of meaning, and sameness of
meaning, occupies a crucial role in the debate over analyticity.
Quine’s initial arguments against the analytic-synthetic
distinction seek to cast doubt on the idea that there is a notion of
meaning which is clear enough to use in defining a notion of
analyticity. He explores various proposals and finds them wanting. (See
especially Quine 1951.) Here too a crucial role is played by holism.
One apparently clear conception of meaning is that the meaning of a
sentence is given by the experiences which would confirm it; holism,
however, implies that the idea of confirmation does not apply to
individual sentences, considered in isolation from the theories of
which they are parts. (For criticism see Fodor and Lepore 1992; for a
counter to Fodor and Lepore see Heal 1994; for later Quine on holism
see his 1991.)
Quine’s scepticism about the idea of meaning is much
criticized. We will mention two criticisms. First, what standards of
clarity is he employing, when he says that the notion of analyticity is
insufficiently clear? The answer, not explicit in (Quine, 1951), is
that the standards are those indicated by our discussion in the
previous section; Quine is asking for an explanation which is
acceptable by his naturalistic standards (see Lugg 2012). Such an
explanation would not presuppose an idea of meaning, and would use such
ideas as definition or convention only in ways which are justified by
the literal sense of those terms. Second, some responses to
Quine’s position here argue that it has obviously absurd
consequences, such as that meaningful discourse would be impossible or
that we could not understand our language. (See, for example, Grice and
Strawson, 1956.) But Quine’s scepticism about meanings
does not lead to any scepticism about meaningfulness. If we
think of meaningfulness as a matter of having a meaning then
we may think that our words cannot be meaningful unless there are
meanings. But such a way of thinking is, Quine claims, quite
misleading. In (Quine 1953), he offers a rough and ready behavioural
account of meaningfulness; it is clear from the way the account
proceeds that the success of something along those lines would be of no
help at all in defining synonymy or analyticity.
We said above that Quine seeks ‘to cast doubt’ on the
idea of meaning, and on the use of that idea to explain the distinction
between those changes of doctrine which involve a change of meaning and
those which do not, and thus also to explain analyticity. One might
read (Quine 1951) and get the impression that he is not merely casting
doubt but wholly rejecting these ideas. In later works, however, he
himself suggests a definition of analyticity. A sentence is analytic
for a given native speaker ‘if he learned the truth of the
sentence by learning to use one or more of its words’ (Quine,
1991, 270; see also Quine 1974, 78–80.) It is analytic without
qualification if it is analytic for all native speakers. By this
criterion, some obvious truths, such as ‘Bachelors are
unmarried’, will presumably count as analytic. If we think of the
set of analytic sentences as closed under logical consequence, as Quine
suggests, then, he says, all first-order logical truths ‘would
then perhaps qualify as analytic’ (Quine, 1991, 270). Along
with this, he comes to accept that certain revisions of belief do
involve a change of meaning, presumably in a sufficiently clear sense
of meaning (Quine, 1991, 270).
Now it might seem as if Quine completely withdraws his earlier
criticism of the analytic-synthetic distinction and thus, presumably,
of Logical Empiricism as a whole. But in fact this is not so. One
consideration here is the scope of Quinean analyticity. The idea will
perhaps (as Quine says) include first-order logic, but it will not
include mathematics; on this count alone, it is clear that it will not
do what Carnap requires of the idea of analyticity. An even more
important consideration is that Quine’s version of the
analytic-synthetic distinction is not an epistemological distinction.
Some changes of doctrine involve changes of meaning, others do not. In
Quine’s view, however, this does not mean that the two sorts of
change must have different epistemological bases. To the contrary: as
we saw in 3.1, Quine rejects the Principle of Tolerance and, with it,
the idea that a change of language takes place on a different kind of
epistemological basis from a change of theory within a language. His
acceptance of a limited conception of analyticity does not change this
picture. As he says: “I recognize the notion of analyticity in
its obvious and useful but epistemologically insignificant
applications” (1991, 271; emphasis added).
On the interpretation advanced here, Quine’s rejection of the
Principle of Tolerance is the deepest aspect of his disagreement with
Carnap. Quine sees all our cognitive endeavours, whether they involve
formulating a new language or making a small-scale theoretical change,
as having the same very general aim of enabling us to deal with the
world better; all such endeavours have the same very general kind of
justification, namely, as contributing to that end. In this picture,
there is no basis for Carnap’s insistence that philosophy is in
principle different from science. Philosophy, as Quine sees it,
has no special vantage point, no special method, no special access to
truth. Here we have the crucial idea of Quine’s naturalism,
discussed in the previous section.
As we saw in section 2, Quine takes the fundamental epistemological
problem to be that of showing how we come to have knowledge of the
world. He seeks an account which is naturalistic in his austere sense,
and thus starts with the idea that we know about the world only from
impacts of various forms of energy on our sensory nerves (see 2.3,
above). How do we get from such impacts to something recognizable as
knowledge of the world? In the words of the title of Quine’s last
monograph: how do we get from stimulus to science?
This question is central for Quine’s scientific naturalism in
general. An answer would show that that world-view can accommodate an
account of human knowledge. If no answer is available, that world-view
is cast in doubt. For these purposes it is perhaps enough if Quine can
sketch an account, compatible with his naturalistic view, of how we
might acquire the knowledge which we take ourselves to have,
whether or not it is correct in detail. (See Quine 1990c, 291.)
Quine treats knowledge as embodied in language. Apart from other
considerations, language-use is observable and thus subject to
scientific inquiry. Quine’s concern with how we might acquire
knowledge thus takes the form of a concern with how we might acquire
cognitive language. But his interest here is in epistemology, rather
than in language for its own sake: “I am interested in the flow
of evidence from the triggering of the senses to the pronouncements of
science…. It is these epistemological concerns, and not my
incidental interest in linguistics, that motivate my
speculations.” (1990b, 3).
Much of Quine’s work in epistemology is thus a discussion of
how a child might acquire cognitive language. This genetic project may
seem to be a long way from the traditional concerns of epistemology.
Quine claims, however, that the project in fact affords us the best
obtainable insight into the nature of the evidence for our theories,
and into the relation between theory and evidence: “the
evidential relation is virtually enacted, it would seem, in the
learning.” (1975b, 74–75).
Central to Quine’s naturalistic account of knowledge is the
idea that all our knowledge is in some way based upon stimulations of
our sensory nerves. For much of our knowledge, the relation is quite
indirect. (This is one way of expressing holism; see 3.1, above.) Most
sentences are not accepted because of a direct relation between the
given sentence and stimulations of nerve endings; the connection goes
via other sentences, and may be quite indirect and remote. But
then there must presumably be some sentences which are directly related
to stimulations. This is the role that observation sentences play in
Quine’s thought. Acts of uttering such sentences, or of assenting
to them when they are uttered by others, are shared responses to
stimulation. (We shall enter some qualifications at the end of this
sub-section.)
Observation sentences are the starting point for our acquisition of
knowledge, the child’s entry into cognitive language. They are
also the sentences which are evidentially basic. What fits them to play
both roles is that they are (largely) independent of other parts of our
language. Hence they can (largely) be mastered by a child otherwise
without linguistic competence, and known without presupposing other
parts of our theory. (The reason for the qualification will become
apparent at the end of this sub-section.)
Many philosophers are content to take for granted the idea of an
evidentially basic sentence. Quine, however, cannot take that attitude;
he needs to show how we get “from stimulus to science”. The
first step is to show that we can give a purely naturalistic account of
how some linguistic utterances can be directly tied to the occurrence
of stimulations of the sensory nerves---an account of observation
sentences, more or less. Quine expends enormous labour on this
point.
Quine considers acts of assenting to sentences (or dissenting; but
we shall mostly leave that as understood). He focuses, in particular,
on our dispositions to assent to sentences. (We will briefly
consider the idea of a disposition in the next section.) To be an
observation sentence, a sentence must fulfill two criteria, one
individualistic and one social. The individualistic criterion is that a
sentence is an observation sentence for a given person if he or she is
disposed to assent to it when, and only when, he or she is undergoing
appropriate sensory stimulations, regardless of her internal state
(e.g. the ancillary information which he or she possesses).
“It’s warm in here” presumably satisfies this
criterion; my willingness to assent to it perhaps depends only on which
of my sensory nerves are stimulated at the given moment. 
“There’s milk in the refrigerator” presumably does
not; unless I am actually looking into the refrigerator at the time, my
willingness to assent to it depends not on what I am experiencing at
the time but on my internal state, what I remember. The social
criterion is that the individualistic criterion should hold across the
linguistic community as a whole. To specify this more precisely is
tricky, and we shall postpone the matter for a few paragraphs.
Even the individualistic criterion raises considerable complications
and difficulties. We speak of a disposition to assent (or dissent) in
response to a pattern of stimulation but this is not quite accurate.
Such a pattern, a complete list of which sensory nerves are firing, and
in which order, will hardly ever repeat itself. So what we need is,
rather, the idea of a correlation of a response with a type of
stimulation
 pattern.[1]
But the relevant idea of a
type here is complicated. The physical resemblance of two stimulation
patterns, what Quine calls receptual similarity, is
not enough to make them constitute events of the same type, in the
relevant sense; two such patterns may resemble each other very closely
yet lead to quite different responses. (Two occasions on which I am
driving a car may be almost identical in terms of my stimulation
patterns, except that on one occasion I see a red light and on the
other I see a green light. As far as my response goes, that small
difference outweighs all the similarities.) What is wanted is a more
complex notion which Quine calls perceptual similarity. Very
roughly, two stimulation patterns count as similar (for an animal, at a
time) if they tend to lead to the same
 response.[2]
With the account of perceptual similarity in place, we can say what
it is for a sentence to be observational for me: if I am disposed to
assent to it on one occasion on which I have a certain neural intake,
then I will also be disposed to assent to it on any other occasion on
which I have neural intake which is (sufficiently) perceptually similar
for me at that time.
It is worth emphasizing the fact that the definition of the key
notion of perceptual similarity is behavioural. It avoids any idea of
experience, of awareness, of what strikes the person (or other animal)
as more similar to what. It is simply a matter of responses, and thus
of behaviour. (Assent is also treated as behavior, as sound-making
propensities; see 1975c pp. 87–88). This is in accord with
Quine’s insistence on what he takes to be scientific standards of
clarity and rigour. One consequence of it is that the notion cannot be
invoked to explain behaviour. Quine is under no illusions on
this score. (See 1975c, 87, where the point is explicit.) The
behavioural account does not explain our understanding of
observation sentences; explanation, if possible at all, comes at the
neuro-physiological level. What the behavioural account does is to make
clear exactly what behaviour constitutes that understanding and, hence,
what the neuro-physiological account would have to explain. (It also
shows that there is indeed something to be explained.)
So far we have only an account of what it is for a sentence to be an
observation sentence for a particular person. But our language is
shared, as it must be if it is to enable us to communicate with one
another. So we need to generalize the criterion across the linguistic
community. One might at first think that the social criterion would be:
if one person is disposed to assent to the sentence on any occasion on
which he or she has a certain neural intake, then any other person
having the same neural intake will also be disposed to assent to it.
Quine gives essentially this account in (1960). As he quickly comes to
see, however, it is not tenable, for it assumes that we can make sense
of the idea of “same neural intake” between different
people. But different people have different sensory nerves (and there
is no reason to suppose that one person’s sensory nerves are
homologous to those of others; see Quine 1969, chapter 6).
Quine returned to this problem on and off over the next thirty-five
years. His eventual solution is that a sentence only counts as an
observation sentence if an occasion which leads to my having neural
intake which disposes me to assent to it also leads to your having
neural intake which disposes you to assent to it. Here there is no
cross-person identification of neural intake or cross-person standards
of perceptual similarity. On this account, however, there can only be
observation sentences if our standards of perceptual similarity line up
in the right way. Two occasions which produce in me neural intakes
which are perceptually similar by my standards must also (often enough)
produce in you neural intakes which are perceptually similar by your
standards. Quine is happy enough with this assumption of mutual
attunement and suggests that it can be explained along evolutionary
lines (see 1996, 160f.).
We have been explaining the idea of our having shared responses to
stimulation. For the most part, Quine assumes that assent to an
observation sentence simply is such a response. This assumption,
however, cannot be quite correct. It may look for all the world as if
there were a rabbit in front of me, even though there is not. If I have
no reason to be suspicious I will be disposed to assent to
“Rabbit?”; if I know about the deception, however, I will
not be. So my disposition to assent does not, after all, depend solely
on my sensory stimulations at the time. It depends also on my internal
state, whether I know that in this case the rabbit-like appearance is
misleading. The difficulty arises because “There’s a
rabbit” is corrigible, a feature which, on most accounts, it
shares with just about every sentence other than those about the
speaker’s current experience. If a sentence is corrigible then
there will be circumstances in which it is false, even though those
circumstances produce stimulation patterns which would generally lead
observers to assent to it. But then some observers may know that the
circumstances are of this deceptive kind and not be disposed to assent,
while others have no such knowledge and are disposed to assent. The
moral of this is that assent, even to observation sentences, is not a
mere response to stimulation; the responder’s internal state
(having ancillary knowledge, or not) may also play a role.
Quine does not seem to have fully appreciated this point, though
some of his later discussions come close to doing so (see, in
particular, Quine 1996). It is not fatal to his general account; it
complicates the story rather than requiring a radical change. There may
be no sentences—at least none that satisfy the social criterion
for observationality—which can be wholly mastered simply by
acquiring appropriate dispositions to assent and dissent in response to
current stimulations. For some sentences, however, acquiring such
dispositions comes close to mastering their use, because those
sentences are almost always true in those cases where
observers receive sensory stimulations which dispose them to assent.
(Clearly this will be a matter of degree.) So the acquisition of the
relevant dispositions, and partial mastery of the sentence, can be used
as a basis on which the child can learn more of the language, and more
about the world. This further learning in turn allows the child to
modify her or his original disposition to assent and dissent merely in
response to current stimulation.
Quine’s treatment of more sophisticated parts of language is
notably sketchier and more speculative than his detailed discussion of
observation sentences. In part this may be because he holds that it is
most important to understand the very first step into cognitive
language, how such language is possible at all. It may also be that the
difficulty of getting a satisfactory account of observation sentences
impeded him.
Beyond these points, however, there is, from a Quinean perspective,
a limit to how detailed an account we should expect to have of the
acquisition of sophisticated cognitive language. Mastery of an
observation sentence corresponds (more or less) to a relatively
straightforward disposition: to assent when receiving a stimulation
pattern within a certain range. For most sentences, however, this is
not the case. What disposition must one have acquired in order to count
as understanding a sentence such as “The economy is in
recession”? No doubt the disposition to assent in response to
evidence is required, but what counts as evidence is almost unmanageably diffuse.
In such a case, the links between sensory stimulation (such as that
induced by the sight of words in a newspaper) and assent are
“multifarious [and] not easily reconstructed even in
conjecture” (1960, 11). A relatively clear-cut account, of the
sort that Quine gives of observation sentences, is simply not
available.
So Quine does not offer any sort of detailed account of the
acquisition cognitive language beyond the observation sentences. (For
comparison of Quine’s approach here with the very different
approach of Chomsky, see Smith 2014.) Instead, he considers stages on
the way, forms of language which one might suppose could be easily
acquired by a child who has mastered observation sentences and which
might provide steps leading to yet more advanced language.
One such step, which is emphasized in Quine’s later work, is
the mastery of what he calls observation categoricals (1981 p. 28)
These are sentences of the form “Whenever X [happens], Y
[happens]”, where the schematic letters are to be replaced by
observation sentences. (E.g. “Whenever there’s smoke,
there’s fire.”) It is plausible to suppose that a child who
has learnt the observation sentences can come by a mastery of the
relevant observation categorical. Observation sentences are what Quine
calls occasion sentences, true on some occasions and false on others,
whereas observation categoricals are eternal sentences, true or false
once for all. Quine suggests that we can think of observation
categoricals as a plausible first step towards a general mastery of
eternal sentences, which make up our serious theoretical knowledge.
Another step of the same kind is what Quine calls eternal
predications, subject-predicate sentences true or false once for all,
such as “Fido is a dog”. Assuming the child has learnt each
term as an observation sentence, the sight of the dog will dispose him
to assent to each. Quine speculates that the sound of the word
“Fido” may have something of the same effect as the sight
of the beast, inclining our learner to assent to “Dog” and
thus to “Fido is a dog”. It is notable that there is a sort
of use-mention confusion operating here, if Quine’s suggestion is
correct. Language is learnt by confusion and “short leaps of
analogy” rather than by “continuous derivation”
(1975b, 77f.); indeed a holistic language cannot be learnt without such
leaps.
A further advance, in Quine’s view, takes place when the child
comes to use similar sentences but with two general terms, such as
“Dogs are animals”. Such a sentence, Quine remarks is
‘‘really a universal categorical, ‘Every α is a
β’.’’ (1974, 66). This kind of sentence, can be
represented using pronouns (“If something is a dog then it is an
animal”) or, more or less equivalently, using the logical device
of quantifiers and variables. Such sentences have a particular
importance for Quine in connection with the idea of reference. Merely
to be able to use a name, to be able to name Fido upon seeing him, for
example, is not yet to refer; one might simply be using the term as a
response to the sight of the dog, hence as an observation sentence.
Reference, as Quine sees the matter, requires the capacity to
reidentify the object over time and changing circumstances: if a dog is
barking then it—that very same dog—is hungry; hence the
importance of pronouns.
Quine also has things to say on more familiar epistemological
themes. In some cases he indicates how they can be integrated into his
approach; thus he suggests that we can (albeit unrealistically)
schematize the testing of a scientific theory by thinking of ourselves
as deriving observation categoricals which can then be directly tested
against observation sentences. In other cases he is content to adopt
more or less unchanged the account given by earlier authors, as in his
list of the virtues of a theory (see 1990a, 20). Our account above has
stressed the most novel parts of his epistemology.
One issue left unaddressed above is the question whether
Quine’s naturalized version of epistemology is normative. Some
commentators have claimed that it is not, and that this is a serious
defect (see Kim, 1988). Others claim that naturalized epistemology is
normative (see Gregory, 2008). Quine himself has weighed in, saying
that critics ‘are wrong in protesting that the normative
element…goes by the board’ (Quine, 1990a, 19). He cites
the ‘finding of natural science…that our information about
the world comes only through impacts on our sensory receptors’
(Quine, 1990a, 19) as being normative, ‘warning us against
telepaths and soothsayers’ (Quine, 1990a, 19). More generally,
naturalized epistemology is concerned with ‘the whole strategy of
rational conjecture in the framing of scientific hypotheses’
(Quine, 1990a, 20).
Naturalized epistemology is thus certainly normative in this sense:
it tells us that in drawing up scientific theories we should
rely on the evidence of the senses rather than on soothsayers; that we
should aim at simple theories, and so on. In telling us these
things, however, it relies on what we already know: it deploys some
parts of our science to guide attempts in other areas. It does not take
a normative attitude towards science as a whole, criticizing or
justifying it by wholly external, non-scientific standards. That would
require a wholly extra-scientific position, an idea which Quine
derogates as ‘First Philosophy’ (e.g. Quine 1981, 67). The
rejection of any such idea is one way of phrasing the naturalism he
advocates.
Quine takes seriously the idea that “it is within science
itself, and not in some prior philosophy, that reality is to be
identified and described” (1981, 21). It follows from this idea,
as he construes it, that our best scientific theory of the world tells
us as much as we know about reality. (Our best theory at given time
tells us as much as we know at that time; no doubt our views will
progress.) So setting out the broad outlines of that theory is the
Quinean version or analogue of metaphysics, though he does not much use
the word. This subject interacts with that of the last section:
Quine’s account of the world both lays down the constraints
within which an account of knowledge must proceed, and is, in outline,
the knowledge that must be accounted for.
 How does Quine think we should establish the sort of claims
that we are calling “metaphysical”? Some points are
familiar from our discussion in section 2. First, we do not resort to
any special kind of philosophical insight. Second, what matters is
ordinary knowledge as refined and improved upon: science. Third, we
rely upon the idea of regimented theory, science formulated in a
language that is clarified and simplified “beyond what might
reasonably be urged upon the practicing scientist” (1957, 235;
see 2.4, above). We rely upon ordinary usage where no better is to
hand, but accept changes that are improvements (see 1960, 3). A further
point is that in striving for the clarity and simplicity of our theory
we must consider the whole theory; local gains may be offset by global
losses. It is thus to overall regimented theory that we look when we
are “limning the true and ultimate structure of reality”
(1960, 221).
What is Quine’s justification for relying on the idea of
regimented theory, rather than on our ordinary conceptual scheme? (Cf.
Strawson, 1959, Introduction.) One part of the answer is that just as
science is in the same line of business as ordinary knowledge, but does
it better, so regimented language is in the same business as ordinary
language, but does it better. Regimentation, that is to say, is not the
imposition of a wholly foreign language; it is the adoption of a
language that maximizes scientific virtues already partially present in
ordinary speech—logical structure, reference, the ready
amenability to algorithmic methods. But another part of the answer is
the idea that “our ordinary conceptual scheme” does not
pick out anything definite enough to answer metaphysical questions.
Thus Quine says: “…a fenced ontology is just not implicit
in ordinary language…. Ontological concern is not a correction
of a lay thought and practice; it is foreign to the lay culture, though
an outgrowth of it.” (1981, 9).
Regimentation, in Quine’s view, involves paraphrase into
logical notation. Such paraphrase greatly clarifies and simplifies our
theory. Inferences which are a matter of logic will be revealed as
such; where additional assumptions are required it will be explicit
just what is needed. The logic which Quine takes as the structure of
regimented theory is classical (bivalent) first-order logic with
identity. Bivalence is justified on the grounds of simplicity. It is
not that we have some independent insight into the nature of the world
which shows us that every sentence of regimented theory is either true
or false. It is, rather, that the simplicity that we gain from making
this assumption, justifies our using a bivalent language; the
metaphysical claim follows along. (This reversal of direction should
remind us of Carnap. The difference is that Quine does not accept the
Principle of Tolerance; see section 3, above.)
Quine’s choice of first-order logic, rather than second-order
logic, has been more controversial than his adoption of bivalence. One
reason he gives for the decision is that every formalization of
second-order logic (unlike first-order logic) is incomplete, relative
to the standard semantics. A further reason is that one purpose of the
canonical framework is to enable us to assess the ontology of a theory.
From this point of view it is an advantage that first-order logic has
no ontological presuppositions of its own. (By adopting that logic we
do commit ourselves to there being some object or other, but not to the
existence of any particular entity.) Here again there is a clear
contrast with second-order logic, which does have ontological
presuppositions. Exactly what those presuppositions are is unclear, and
has been debated; for Quine, this unclarity is a further reason to
avoid the subject entirely.
Paraphrasing a theory into classical logic imposes extensionality on
it: a predicate may be replaced by a co-extensive predicate without
change of truth-value of the containing sentence; likewise an embedded
sentence by a sentence of the same
 truth-value.[3]
Extensionality imposes quite
severe restrictions. It requires, for example, that attributions of
belief, and other propositional attitudes, be regimented into a form
quite different from that which they may appear to have. (For this
reason, the commitment to extensionality is quite controversial; see
Føllesdal 1986 and Kaplan 1968, 1986.) So one might suppose that
Quine accepts extensionality reluctantly, as the price to be paid for
the advantages of the use of logic in regimenting theory. Such is not
his attitude, however. To the contrary, he thinks of the clarity that
extensionality brings as a great advantage, and of theories that lack
it as not fully comprehensible: “I find extensionality necessary,
indeed, though not sufficient, for my full understanding of a
theory.” (1995, 90f.)
Quine’s regimented theory, then, is the sum total of our
knowledge, the best that we have, reformulated so as to fit into the
framework of first-order logic. The extra-logical vocabulary consists
only of predicates. All metaphysical questions can thus be boiled down
to two: What objects do the variables range over? and: What sorts of
primitive predicates are to be admitted?
To the first of these questions Quine offers a straightforward
answer: his ontology consists of physical objects and sets. He counts
as a physical object the matter occupying any portion of space-time,
however scattered the portion and however miscellaneous the occupants;
such an object need not be what he calls a “body”, such as
a person or a tree or a building (see 1981, 13). He briefly entertains
the idea that we could manage without postulating matter at all, simply
using sets of space-time points, where these are understood as sets of
quadruples of real numbers, relative to some co-ordinate system---that
is, an ontology of abstract objects only. He seems to see no knock-down
argument against this but abandons it, perhaps because the gain is too
small to justify the magnitude of the departure from our ordinary
views. That he is willing to consider such a view, and take it
seriously, shows something about his general attitude.
Regimented theory contains no abstract objects other than sets. Many
abstracta, however, can be defined in terms of sets: numbers,
functions, and other mathematical entities being the most obvious.
Quine excludes other alleged abstracta, such as properties,
propositions (as distinct from sentences), and merely possible
entities. The chief reason for this is that he finds the
identity-criteria for such entities unclear. He holds, quite generally,
that we should not postulate entities without having clear
identity-criteria for them. (This is the view that he sums up in the
slogan “no entity without identity”; see (1969, 23) and
elsewhere.) Doing so would threaten the clarity and definiteness which
the notion of identity brings to theory; local gains from postulating,
say, propositions are not worth this global loss. (For a contrary view
about properties, see Armstrong 1980.)
Regimented theory also has no place for mental entities, most
obviously minds, if those are taken to be distinct from physical
entities. The qualification is important. Many mental entities can be
admitted as special cases of physical objects. Thus my act of thinking
about Fermat’s Last Theorem at a particular time can simply be
identified with my body during that period of time (see 1995, 87f.).
The things that we might want to say about my act of thinking (that it
was inspired, or stupid, or what have you) can simply be reconstrued as
predicates true or false of physical objects. This is the view
sometimes known as anomalous monism or as token-token identity theory,
as distinct from type-type identity theory (see 1960, §54, and
Davidson 1980). I may think of the theorem at many times, over the
years, and on each occasion that act is identified with the physical
state that I am in at the time. Token-token identity theory does not
claim that these physical states have anything in particular in common,
still less that all acts of thinking about the theorem have something
in common. There is no claim that each act of thinking about the
theorem can be identified with, e.g. a repeatable pattern of the firing
of brain cells. It is enough for Quine’s purposes that each
particular act of thinking can be identified with a physical object.
This ontological physicalism might seem almost trivial; Quine speaks of
it as “[e]ffortless monism … form without substance”
(1995, 85). (Note that this view excludes disembodied minds
and mental entities. Quine thinks that is no loss at all. Note also
that it can be construed either as eliminating mental entities
or simply as identifying them with physical objects. Quine
prefers the latter phrasing but thinks there is no real difference
here; cf. 1960, 265.)
On the issue of the admissibility of predicates, Quine’s
physicalism is more complicated. (This is in keeping with his general
idea that we can think of the predicates, rather than the ontology, as
“where the metaphysical action is”; 1976, 504). The
requirement here is that the difference between a predicate’s
being true of a given object and its being false of it should, in all
cases, be a physical difference: “nothing happens in the world,
not the flutter of an eyelid, not the flicker of a thought, without
some redistribution of microphysical states…. physics can settle
for nothing less” (1981, 98). If a predicate such as
“…is thinking about Fermat’s Last Theorem”
picks out genuine events in the world then there is a physical
difference between its being true of a person and its not being true of
them: a fact of the matter.
A difficulty in making sense of this is that the idea of a
physical fact is not definitively specifiable. To tie the idea
too closely to current physics would rule out fundamental changes in
that subject; to leave it floating free might seem to allow anything at
all to qualify. But clearly Quine does not mean just any subject that
someone might call by the name “Physics”. He has in mind a
subject continuous with our physics, alike or superior in its coherence
and in its explanatory power. (In particular, it would not have
“an irreducibly psychological annex”: 1986a, 403f.). If
phenomena occurred which could not be explained by any theory of that
kind, then Quine’s physicalism would go by the board. 
The most controversial application of this view is to mental
phenomena. Within that realm, Quine focuses on attributions of
propositional attitudes, statements that so-and-so believes that
such-and-such, or hopes that, or fears that, etc. (One reason for this
focus may be that his interest is primarily in human knowledge; another
that some other mental states, such as pain, can perhaps be accounted
for by identifying them with certain types of neurophysiological
events.)
Propositional attitudes also raise a different kind of issue.
Attributions of such attitudes violate extensionality. If Mary is the
Dean, still Tom’s believing that the Dean sings well is not the
same as his believing that Mary sings well, since her accession to the
Deanship may be unknown to him. Quine escapes this sort of problem by
taking an attribution of belief to express a relation between the
believer and a sentence, understood to be, in the usual case,
in the language of the ascriber (not the language of the believer,
where the languages differ).
It is worth noting the idea of another sense of belief-ascription
which would not be vulnerable even prima facie problems of
extensionality: so-called de re belief, as distinct from
de dicto belief. In the 1950s Quine argued that there must be
such a sense. In the late 1960s, however, he abandoned the idea, for
lack of clear standards of when it is correct to ascribe a de
re belief to someone. (See Quine, 1956 for a statement of the
distinction, and Quine, 1973 for retraction.) Other philosophers,
however, continue to hold the idea. (See, for example, Kaplan 1968,
Kripke 1979.)
Construing attributions of belief as statements of attitudes towards
sentences gives them a syntax and an ontology that Quine can accept.
That does not, however, show that the idiom “A believes
that p” satisfies his physicalistic criterion, i.e. that
all statements of this form correspond to (physical) facts. The matter
is complicated. Quine certainly accepts that most uses of this idiom
are factual. The relevant facts are neurophysiological states of the
person concerned, and those states are causally connected with actions
which the person performs, or would perform under certain
circumstances, and which we would count as manifestations of the
belief, or lack of belief. (Assenting or dissenting when asked is one
such action, but only one among a myriad.) In cases where we have
evidence for or against the ascription of a belief to someone, the
evidence consists in behaviour and there are presumably
neurophysiological states which explain the behaviour. Those states are
not in practice specifiable in neurophysiological terms. Nevertheless,
the person’s being in those states is the physical fact in which
the truth of the ascription consists. Even where there is no behaviour
of the relevant kind, there may still be dispositions to behave in
those ways under certain unrealized circumstances. The dispositions are
the physical states in which the truth of the ascription consists. So
in most cases where we ascribe belief, there is a fact of the matter
which makes the ascription true or false. (More on dispositions a few
paragraphs hence.)
The belief idiom, however, also lends itself to use in other cases,
where there is no fact of the matter. These are not merely cases in
which we have no evidence. They are cases in which no behavioural tests
which we might have carried out would have supplied evidence, cases in
which there simply is nothing in the subject’s neurophysiology,
and hence nothing in their actual or potential behaviour, which would
decide the matter. Quine puts the point like this: “Some beliefs,
perhaps belief in the essential nobility of man qua man, are…
not readily distinguishable from mere lip service, and in such cases
there is no fact of the matter…. But most attributions or
confessions of belief do make sense…. The states of belief,
where real, are… states of nerves.” (1986a, 429)
Quine explicitly acknowledges that we could not in practice manage
without idioms of propositional attitude, and that most uses of such
idioms are entirely unobjectionable. But such idioms allow the
formation of sentences which do not correspond to facts of the matter.
For that reason, Quine excludes them from regimented theory; they are
not be used when we are concerned with “limning the true and
ultimate structure of reality” (1960, 221). (Some philosophers
might insist: ‘Either you accept the concept of belief or you
don’t’. Quine would not agree; see 1986e for closely
related remarks about the idea of knowing who someone is.)
A somewhat similar point can be made about subjunctive or
counterfactual conditionals. Some are factual, but the general
counterfactual idiom allows for the formation of sentences which are
not factual. Like propositional attitudes, counterfactual conditionals
have an important role in our practical lives. They are also closely
connected with dispositions which, as we have seen, play a central role
in Quine’s account of language and how it is learnt. The
connection is easily seen: to call an object fragile is to say that it
would break if it were dropped onto a hard surface
from a significant height.
Quine does not accept the general counterfactual idiom, “if
X were to happen then Y would happen”, as part
of regimented theory. As in the case of belief, the unrestricted use of
this idiom allows us to form sentences whose truth-conditions are, at
best, unclear. A famous example is the pair, presumably alluding to the
Korean war of the early 1950s: “If Caesar were in charge he would
use the atom bomb”; “If Caesar were in charge he would use
catapults” (see Quine, 1960, 222); they seem equally plausible
but they cannot both be true (for a response, see Lewis 1973). In
such cases, we have no reason to think that some (physical) fact is
being claimed. Many dispositions, however, are perfectly acceptable by
Quinean standards. To call the glass fragile is to attribute to it a
structure which would lead its breaking under certain circumstances; the
structure is a physical state, even if we cannot in practice specify it
in physical terms.
Quine claims that the dispositions he relies on in his account of
language are like the case of fragility rather than the case of Caesar.
The disposition to assent to an observation sentence when receiving
certain stimulations is a physical state of the person concerned; in
particular, presumably, of his or her brain. The claim that a given
person has such a disposition is thus a claim about the state of a
physical object. It is, moreover, a claim that we can test, at least
under favourable conditions. There is no reason to exclude it from
regimented theory.
Another idiom which Quine famously excludes from regimented theory
is that of modality, statements that such-and-such must be the
case, or cannot be the case, and so on. Such idioms have been
the subject of much discussion on the part of Quine and (especially)
his critics; the discussion here will be very brief. Technically, there
are similarities with the case of belief. There is prima facie
violation of extensionality which can, however, be avoided by taking
necessity to apply to sentences; some philosophers have claimed that
there is a de re sense of necessity which does not lead to
even prima facie violations of extensionality. Quine allows
that modal terms have a legitimate ordinary language use
(‘possible’ is sometimes used to mean something like: we
can’t rule it out; see 1966, ch. 10). But his attitude towards
the philosophical use of the idea of modality, dividing truths into the
necessary and the possible, is far less sympathetic than his attitude
towards belief; he is particularly unsympathetic towards the idea of
de re necessity, which he sees as requiring
“Aristotelian essentialism” (Quine, 1953, 155).
What frames these critical points about necessity is that Quine
holds that regimented theory, the best and most objective statement of
our knowledge, simply has no need for that notion. The benefit of
including such idioms in regimented theory is not worth the cost in
unclarity that it would bring.
Truth, in Quine’s view, is immanent, as opposed to
transcendent. In accord with his fundamental naturalism, he sees
judgments of truth as made from within our theory of the world. For
this reason, he sympathizes with what is sometimes called
disquotational theory of truth: to say that a sentence is true is, in
effect, to assert the sentence. Two qualifications must be made. First,
the disquotational view is not a definition of “is
true”. It enables us to eliminate the predicate from contexts in
which it is applied to a finite number of specific sentences, but not
from contexts where it is applied to infinitely many. Contexts of the
latter kind are of particular importance to logical theory. We say, for
example, that a conjunction is true just in case both conjuncts are
true; here “is true” cannot be eliminated. (Unless, indeed,
we ascend to a metalanguage and give a definition of truth for the
object language that we are concerned with, following Tarski 1933.)
Second, calling an eternal sentence true is in one way unlike asserting
it. If we subsequently change our verdict on it we say that we used to
believe it but now we don’t. We do not, however, say that it used
to be true but now it isn’t; rather we say that it was never
true. Quine, however, sees this as simply a point of usage, with no
particular philosophical implications.
In this section we take up two ideas much discussed by commentators.
Neither is essential to Quine’s overall philosophy, although in
each case, but especially in the case of indeterminacy, the opposite
claim has been made. (See Ebbs, 1997; for a defense of the position
taken here, see Hylton, 2007.)
The basic idea of underdetermination is that two or more rival
theories might have all the same observational consequences, and thus
be empirically equivalent. Theory would thus be underdetermined by
observation. This might be held to call realism into question (as in
van Frassen 1980). Quine finds underdetermination harder to make sense
of than might appear and, in any case, does not see a threat to
realism.
In Quine’s idealized schematization of the relation between
theory and evidence, evidence for theory consists of observation
categoricals. (These latter can, in turn, be tested by observing or
contriving situations in which relevant observation sentences are
true.) The case which most obviously poses a potential threat to
realism is that of a final global theory, a perfected and completed
version of our own. What if there are two or more such theories,
equally simple, each of which implies all true observation
categoricals? (Note that the theory will not be implied by all
the true observation categoricals; apart from other considerations,
some sentences of the theory will essentially contain terms which do
not occur in observation categoricals.)
Quine is often thought to accept underdetermination. But in fact he
holds that there is considerable difficulty in making non-trivial sense
of the doctrine. He identifies theories with sets of sentences, not
with sets of sentence-meanings (propositions). So we can quite
trivially obtain an empirically equivalent alternative to any theory:
simply spell one of the theoretical terms differently at every
occurrence. Strictly speaking, the result is a different set of
sentences which implies all the same observation categoricals (1975a,
319). The difference from the original theory, however, is merely
orthographic; this possibility is clearly not of any philosophical
significance.
A closely related point can be made in terms of translation.
Translation of observation categoricals is quite unproblematic in
principle. So we can count two theories as empirically equivalent not
merely if they imply the same observation categoricals but also if they
imply intertranslateable observation categoricals. So classical physics
as formulated in English (say) would, by this criterion, count as
empirically equivalent to classical physics as formulated in German,
yet the two formulations are, strictly speaking, different theories.
Quite generally, any theory is empirically equivalent to its
translation into any other language. But this fact is also not of any
great philosophical significance, and certainly poses no threat to
realism.
In order to threaten realism, a version of underdetermination would
thus have to assert that our postulated complete global theory of the
world has empirically equivalent alternatives and that no translation
from one theory to the other is possible. Since the predicates of the
theory are its only non-logical vocabulary, this is equivalent to
saying that we cannot obtain one from the other by reconstruing the
predicates of the theory. Quine comments: “This, for me, is an
open question.” (1975a, 327). Much of his subsequent discussion
of underdetermination takes place in terms of the weaker idea that our
theory might have empirically equivalent alternatives and that
“we would see no way of reconciling [them] by
reconstrual of predicates” (loc. cit, emphasis added;
cf. also 1990a, 97).
If some version of underdetermination were true, how should we
respond? This is an issue on which Quine has not merely changed his
mind but vacillated, going back and forth between what he calls the
“sectarian” and the “ecumenical” responses. The
sectarian response is to say that we should not let the existence of
the alternative in any way affect our attitude towards our own theory:
we should continue to take it seriously, as uniquely telling us the
truth about the world. (We are assuming that the two theories possess
all theoretical virtues to equal degree; clearly Quine would say that
if one theory were superior in some way then we would have reason to
adopt it.) The ecumenical response, by contrast, counts both theories
as true. In almost his last word on the subject he suggests that there
may be little at stake since the “fantasy of irresolubly rival
systems of the world” takes us “out beyond where linguistic
usage has been crystallized by use” (1990a, 100f).
Quine can afford to vacillate because, in his view, nothing very
much turns on the issue. In particular, he never holds that
underdetermination, in any version, would threaten realism; at no time
does he suggest that it casts doubt on the truth of our theory. That is
not what is in question between the sectarian and the ecumenical
positions; all that is in question is whether the alternative theory
should also be counted as true. Nor is this surprising. The
terms in which underdetermination is stated, such as observation
categoricals, are part of our theory, as would be the demonstration
that another theory was empirically equivalent. The point here is the
naturalism which we have emphasized throughout. Nothing in our
epistemology pronounces on the status of theory from an independent
standpoint; to the contrary: it presupposes the truth of our theory.
This central idea is not cast in doubt by underdetermination. (See
Severo 2008; for criticism, see Moore 2015 and for a rejoinder to Moore
see Kemp 2016.)
The general claim of the indeterminacy of translation is that there
might be different ways of translating a language which are equally
correct but which are not mere stylistic variants. The claim includes
what one might think of as the limiting case of translation, that in
which a given language is ‘translated’ into itself.
Some philosophers hold that the idea of indeterminacy is absurd, or
that it amounts to an extreme form of scepticism about whether we ever
understand one another, or whether correct translation is possible at
all. (See for example Searle, 1987; for a reply, see Føllesdal,
1990.) It is not hard to see how such opinions arise. One picture of
communication is like this: you have an idea, a determinate meaning, in
your mind and convey it to me by your utterance. To those who have that
picture, indeterminacy threatens the whole idea of communication, for
it suggests that the conveying is always vulnerable to drastic
failure. In the case of translation, the analogous view is that
synonymy, or sameness of meaning, is the criterion of correct
translation; in that case, indeterminacy may appear as a denial that
translation is possible at all.
Such views, however, take for granted a view of communication, or of
translation, which is very far from Quine’s. For Quine, the
criterion of successful communication, whether or not it involves
translation, is fluent interaction, verbal and nonverbal:
“Success in communication is judged by smoothness of
conversation, by frequent predictability of verbal and nonverbal
reactions, and by coherence and plausibility of native
testimony.” (1990a, 43) This is a third person or external view
of language and communication, as required by Quine’s naturalism.
From this point of view, talk of synonymy and of ideas in the mind is
simply a theoretical gloss which is (at best) in need of justification.
Quine doubts that the gloss is justifiable; scepticism about the
theorizing, however, is not scepticism about the data. Smooth
communication certainly occurs, sometimes in cases where different
languages are involved. Quine says nothing that casts doubt on the idea
that successful translation (by his criterion) is possible; his claim,
indeed, is that it may be possible in more than one way.
At this point we need to distinguish two kinds of indeterminacy.
Quine introduces the general idea of indeterminacy, in Chapter Two of
(1960), without explicitly distinguishing the two, but subsequently
comes to treat them quite differently. The first is indeterminacy
of reference: some sentences can be translated in more than one
way, and the various versions differ in the reference that they
attribute to parts of the sentence, but not in the overall net import
that they attribute to the sentence as a whole. (Quine uses the terms
“ontological relativity” and “inscrutability of
reference”, as well as “indeterminacy of reference”.
Some philosophers have sought to distinguish these doctrines, but in
later work Quine makes it clear that he uses the terms simply as
different names for the same thing. See Ricketts 2011, Roth, 1986, and
Quine 1986d.) To use an example which has become famous, a given
sentence might be translated as “There’s a rabbit” or
as “Rabbithood is manifesting itself there” or as
“There are undetached rabbit parts”, or in other ways
limited only by one’s ingenuity. All that is needed is what Quine
calls a proxy function, which maps each object onto another object and
each predicate onto one which is true of a given proxy-object if and
only if the original predicate is true of the original object. For
terms referring to physical objects, he suggests, we can take the
proxy-function to map each object onto its space-time complement. The
change to the translation of singular terms and the change to the
translation of predicates cancel out, leaving the overall significance
of the sentence unchanged. The claim of indeterminacy of reference is
not in any way a claim about what goes on in the language-user’s
mind (pace Wright 1997). (Note that it will not help to ask
the person we are translating whether she means to refer to the family
dog or to its space-time complement: her answer is subject to the same
indeterminacy.)
Indeterminacy of reference is akin to a view of theoretical entities
put forward by Ramsey: that there is no more to such an entity than the
role that it plays in the structure of the relevant theory (see Ramsey,
1931). For Quine, however, the point holds for all objects, since he
“see[s] all objects as theoretical… . Even our most
primordial objects, bodies, are already theoretical” (1981, 20).
Quine holds, moreover, that considerations akin to those of the
previous paragraph amount to a “trivial proof” of
indeterminacy of reference (1986c, 728).
The second kind of indeterminacy, which Quine sometimes refers to as
holophrastic indeterminacy, is another matter. Here the claim
is that there is more than one correct method of translating sentences
where the two translations of a given sentence differ not merely in the
meanings attributed to the sub-sentential parts of speech but also in
the net import of the whole sentence. (Hence the two translations would
express different propositions, in the abstract sense, or different
Fregean Gedanke; Quine claims that undermining these ideas was
part of his motivation in developing the doctrine; see 1990d.) This
claim involves the whole language, so there are no examples, except
perhaps of an exceedingly artificial kind. There is also nothing
resembling a proof; in some late works, indeed, Quine refers to it as a
“conjecture” (1986c, 728). At some earlier points, he seems
to think that sufficiently clear-headed reflection on what goes into
translation will suffice to make the idea at least plausible. All that
can be required of a method of translation is that it enables us to get
along with the speakers of the other language: why should there
not be more than one way to do it?
Arguments have been offered for holophrastic indeterminacy based on
the idea of underdetermination of theory by evidence (by Quine
himself in his 1970) . Perhaps there is determinate translation of
observation sentences, and thus of observation categoricals. Still, if
each two distinct theories is compatible with all observational truths,
surely we could plausibly attribute either theory to the speaker of the
other language. The weakness of this kind of argument is that
translation must presumably preserve more than links between sentences
and stimulations, as captured by observation sentences; it must also
preserve links among sentences, links which make it more or less likely
that a person who accepts a given sentence will also accept another.
Could there be methods of translation which preserved both kinds of
links but nevertheless yielded different results? Quine’s term
“conjecture” seems apt.
Given the interpretation advanced in section 3, above, indeterminacy
is not crucial for Quine’s rejection of the sort of use that
Carnap makes of the idea of analyticity. He has other arguments on that
score, as we saw. More generally, on the interpretation advanced here,
indeterminacy is not a crucial part of Quine’s overall view. His
coming to speak of it as conjectural, while not questioning other parts
of his philosophy, suggests that he would accept this. If we were sure
that translation is determinate, we could perhaps use the idea to
define a notion of synonymy. (Agnosticism here favours the contrary
position.) And, as Quine has indicated, we could then define the
meaning of an expression as the set of synonymous expressions. Such a
notion of meaning might make some difference. It might, for example,
provide a criterion of identity which enabled us to accept beliefs as
entities. It would not, however, play the most important roles in which
philosophers have cast the idea of meaning. In particular, it would not
play a role in the explanation of how we understand our language, or of
how communication between persons takes place.
In the 1930s and 1940s, many scientifically-oriented philosophers
tended to assume some form of Logical Empiricism. One important aspect
of Quine’s influence on the course of philosophy is that he
called that view or nexus of views into question (see section 3,
above). Some of his criticisms are detailed and technical. His target,
however, was not a technical detail but the fundamental idea of Logical
Empiricism, that there is a distinction between analytic truths and
synthetic truths which can account for a priori truth. After
Quine’s work of the early 1950s, philosophers, even those who did
not accept his detailed arguments could no longer take it for granted
that some form of Logical Empiricism is correct. This was a very major
change among scientifically-oriented philosophers.
Quine’s rejection of Logical Empiricism leads him to two
(connected) views which have been extremely influential. First, he
rejects the idea of a distinction between philosophy on the one hand
and empirical science on the other hand. To the contrary: he sees
philosophy as essentially in the same line of work as science, but
mostly concerned with more theoretical and abstract questions. This is
an integral part of his naturalism. Second, his criticism of Carnap,
and of the Principle of Tolerance in particular, opens the way for
something that might be called metaphysics: for very general
reflections on the nature of the world, based on the best scientific
knowledge that we have and on claims about how that knowledge might be
organized so as to maximize its objectivity and clarity.
Both of these Quinean views, his naturalism and his acceptance of
something like metaphysics, correspond to very important developments
within analytic philosophy over the past half-century. His influence
has surely played a significant role here. (In the case of metaphysics,
in particular, it is notable that two leading figures, Saul Kripke and
David Lewis, were students of Quine’s.) For the most part,
however, those Quinean doctrines have led to work to which Quine
himself would be strongly opposed.
In the case of naturalism, many philosophers have welcomed the idea
that they are free to use concepts and results drawn from empirical
science. Fewer have accepted that philosophy should also be constrained
by scientific standards of clarity, of evidence, and of
explanatoriness. The result is that while views which claim to accept
naturalism are common, those which accept Quine’s standards of
what counts as reputable naturalistic philosophy are not.
The case of metaphysics is similar but perhaps more extreme. Quine
accepts that the philosopher is in a position to make very general
claims about the world (that there are sets but not properties, for
example). In his hands, such claims are answerable to the idea of a
total system of our scientific knowledge, regimented so as to
maximize clarity and systematicity. Many philosophers have welcomed the
freedom to speculate about the nature of the world but have not
accepted Quine’s constraints on the process. The result is a
flourishing of metaphysics, often based on ordinary (unregimented)
language or on the alleged deliverances of ‘intuition’;
much of this work would be anathema to Quine. (See Rosen 2014.)
On the one hand, then, Quine’s work has been extremely
influential and has done much to shape the course of philosophy in the
second-half of the twentieth century and into the twenty-first. On the
other hand, much of the work directly or indirectly influenced by Quine
is of a sort that he would have thought quite misguided.