Wittgenstein’s non-referential, formalist conception of
mathematical propositions and terms begins in the
 Tractatus.[1]
 Indeed, insofar as he sketches a rudimentary Philosophy of
Mathematics in the Tractatus, he does so by
contrasting mathematics and mathematical equations with
genuine (contingent) propositions, sense, thought, propositional signs
and their constituent names, and truth-by-correspondence.
In the Tractatus, Wittgenstein claims that a genuine
proposition, which rests upon conventions, is used by us to assert
that a state of affairs (i.e., an elementary or atomic fact;
‘Sachverhalt’) or fact (i.e., multiple states of
affairs; ‘Tatsache’) obtain(s) in the one and
only real world. An elementary proposition is isomorphic to the
possible state of affairs it is used to represent: it must
contain as many names as there are objects in the possible state of
affairs. An elementary proposition is true iff its possible
state of affairs (i.e., its ‘sense’;
‘Sinn’) obtains. Wittgenstein clearly states this
Correspondence Theory of Truth at (4.25): 
If an elementary proposition is true, the state of affairs exists; if
an elementary proposition is false, the state of affairs does not
exist. 
But propositions and their linguistic components are, in and of
themselves, dead—a proposition only has sense because we human
beings have endowed it with a conventional sense (5.473).
Moreover, propositional signs may be used to do any number of
things (e.g., insult, catch someone’s attention); in order to
assert that a state of affairs obtains, a person must
‘project’ the proposition’s sense—its possible
state of affairs—by ‘thinking’ of (e.g., picturing)
its sense as one speaks, writes or thinks the proposition (3.11).
Wittgenstein connects use, sense,
correspondence, and truth by saying that “a
proposition is true if we use it to say that things stand in
a certain way, and they do” (4.062; italics added).
The Tractarian conceptions of genuine (contingent)
propositions and the (original and) core concept of truth are used to
construct theories of logical and mathematical
‘propositions’ by contrast. Stated boldly and
bluntly, tautologies, contradictions and mathematical propositions
(i.e., mathematical equations) are neither true nor false—we say
that they are true or false, but in doing so we use the words
‘true’ and ‘false’ in very different senses
from the sense in which a contingent proposition is true or false.
Unlike genuine propositions, tautologies and contradictions
“have no ‘subject-matter’” (6.124),
“lack sense”, and “say nothing” about the
world (4.461), and, analogously, mathematical equations are
“pseudo-propositions” (6.2) which, when ‘true’
(‘correct’; ‘richtig’ (6.2321)),
“merely mark … [the] equivalence of meaning [of
‘two expressions’]” (6.2323). Given that
“[t]autology and contradiction are the limiting
cases—indeed the disintegration—of the
combination of signs” (4.466; italics added), where 
the conditions of agreement with the world—the representational
relations—cancel one another, so that [they] do[] not stand in
any representational relation to reality, 
tautologies and contradictions do not picture reality or possible
states of affairs and possible facts (4.462). Stated differently,
tautologies and contradictions do not have sense, which means we
cannot use them to make assertions, which means, in turn, that they
cannot be either true or false. Analogously, mathematical
pseudo-propositions are equations, which indicate or show that two
expressions are equivalent in meaning and therefore are
intersubstitutable. Indeed, we arrive at mathematical equations by
“the method of substitution”: 
starting from a number of equations, we advance to new equations by
substituting different expressions in accordance with the equations.
(6.24) 
We prove mathematical ‘propositions’ ‘true’
(‘correct’) by ‘seeing’ that two expressions
have the same meaning, which “must be manifest in the two
expressions themselves” (6.23), and by substituting one
expression for another with the same meaning. Just as “one can
recognize that [‘logical propositions’] are true from the
symbol alone” (6.113), “the possibility of proving”
mathematical propositions means that we can perceive their correctness
without having to compare “what they express” with facts
(6.2321; cf. RFM App. III, §4).
The demarcation between contingent propositions, which can be used to
correctly or incorrectly represent parts of the world, and
mathematical propositions, which can be decided in a purely formal,
syntactical manner, is maintained by Wittgenstein until his death in
1951 (Zettel §701, 1947; PI II, 2001 edition,
pp. 192–193e, 1949). Given linguistic and symbolic conventions,
the truth-value of a contingent proposition is entirely a function of
how the world is, whereas the “truth-value” of a
mathematical proposition is entirely a function of its constituent
symbols and the formal system of which it is a part. Thus, a second,
closely related way of stating this demarcation is to say that
mathematical propositions are decidable by purely formal means (e.g.,
calculations), while contingent propositions, being about the
‘external’ world, can only be decided, if at all, by
determining whether or not a particular fact obtains (i.e., something
external to the proposition and the language in which it resides)
(2.223; 4.05).
The Tractarian formal theory of mathematics is, specifically, a theory
of formal operations. Over the past 20 years,
Wittgenstein’s theory of operations has received considerable
examination (Frascolla 1994, 1997; Marion 1998; Potter 2000; and Floyd
2002), which has interestingly connected it and the Tractarian
equational theory of arithmetic with elements of Alonzo Church’s
\(\lambda\)-calculus and with R. L. Goodstein’s equational
calculus (Marion 1998: chapters 1, 2, and 4). Very briefly stated,
Wittgenstein presents: 
adding that “[t]he concept of number is… the general form
of a number” (6.022). As Frascolla (and Marion after him) have
pointed out, “the general form of a proposition is a
particular case of the general form of an
‘operation’” (Marion 1998: 21), and all three
general forms (i.e., of operation, proposition, and natural number)
are modeled on the variable presented at (5.2522) (Marion 1998: 22).
Defining “[a]n operation [as] the expression of a relation
between the structures of its result and of its bases” (5.22),
Wittgenstein states that whereas “[a] function cannot be its own
argument,… an operation can take one of its own results as its
base” (5.251).
On Wittgenstein’s (5.2522) account of ‘[\(a, x, O \spq
x\)]’, 
the first term of the bracketed expression is the beginning of the
series of forms, the second is the form of a term \(x\) arbitrarily
selected from the series, and the third [\(O \spq x\)] is the form of
the term that immediately follows \(x\) in the series. 
Given that “[t]he concept of successive applications of an
operation is equivalent to the concept ‘and so on’”
(5.2523), one can see how the natural numbers can be generated by
repeated iterations of the general form of a natural number, namely
‘[\(0, \xi , \xi +1\)]’. Similarly, truth-functional
propositions can be generated, as Russell says in the Introduction to
the Tractatus (p. xv), from the general form of a proposition
‘[\(\overline{p}\), \(\overline{\xi}\), \(N(\overline{\xi})\)]’ by
taking any selection of atomic propositions [where \(p\) “stands
for all atomic propositions”; “the bar over the variable
indicates that it is the representative of all its values”
(5.501)], negating them all, then taking any selection of the set of
propositions now obtained, together with any of the originals [where
\(x\) “stands for any set of propositions”]—and so
on indefinitely. 
On Frascolla’s (1994: 3ff) account, 
a numerical identity “\(\mathbf{t} = \mathbf{s}\)” is an
arithmetical theorem if and only if the corresponding equation
“\(\Omega^t \spq x = \Omega^s \spq x\)”, which is framed
in the language of the general theory of logical operations, can be
proven. 
By proving 
the equation “\(\Omega^{2 \times 2}\spq x = \Omega^{4}\spq
x\)”, which translates the arithmetic identity “\(2 \times
2 = 4\)” into the operational language (6.241), 
Wittgenstein thereby outlines “a translation of numerical
arithmetic into a sort of general theory of operations”
(Frascolla 1998: 135).
Despite the fact that Wittgenstein clearly does not attempt
to reduce mathematics to logic in either Russell’s manner or
Frege’s manner, or to tautologies, and despite the fact that
Wittgenstein criticizes Russell’s Logicism (e.g., the Theory of
Types, 3.31–3.32; the Axiom of Reducibility, 6.1232, etc.) and
Frege’s Logicism (6.031, 4.1272,
 etc.),[2]
 quite a number of commentators, early and recent, have interpreted
Wittgenstein’s Tractarian theory of mathematics as a variant of
Logicism (Quine 1940 [1981: 55]; Benacerraf & Putnam 1964a: 14;
Black 1964: 340; Savitt
1979 [1986: 34]; Frascolla 1994: 37; 1997: 354, 356–57, 361;
1998: 133; Marion 1998: 26 & 29; and Potter 2000: 164 and
182–183). There are at least four reasons proffered for this
interpretation.
Though at least three Logicist interpretations of the
Tractatus have appeared within the last 20 years, the
following considerations (Rodych 1995; Wrigley 1998) indicate that
none of these reasons is particularly cogent.
For example, in saying that “[m]athematics is a method of
logic” perhaps Wittgenstein is only saying that since the
general form of a natural number and the general form of a proposition
are both instances of the general form of a (purely formal) operation,
just as truth-functional propositions can be constructed using the
general form of a proposition, (true) mathematical equations can be
constructed using the general form of a natural number. Alternatively,
Wittgenstein may mean that mathematical inferences (i.e., not
substitutions) are in accord with, or make use of, logical inferences,
and insofar as mathematical reasoning is logical reasoning,
mathematics is a method of logic.
Similarly, in saying that “[t]he logic of the world” is
shown by tautologies and true mathematical equations (i.e., #2),
Wittgenstein may be saying that since mathematics was invented to help
us count and measure, insofar as it enables us to infer contingent
proposition(s) from contingent proposition(s) (see 6.211 below), it
thereby reflects contingent facts and “[t]he logic of
the world”. Though logic—which is inherent in natural
(‘everyday’) language (4.002, 4.003, 6.124) and which has
evolved to meet our communicative, exploratory, and survival
needs—is not invented in the same way, a valid logical
inference captures the relationship between possible facts and a
sound logical inference captures the relationship between
existent facts.
As regards #3, Black, Savitt, and Frascolla have argued that, since we
ascertain the truth of tautologies and mathematical equations without
any appeal to “states of affairs” or “facts”,
true mathematical equations and tautologies are so analogous
that we can “aptly” describe “the philosophy of
arithmetic of the Tractatus… as a kind of
logicism” (Frascolla 1994: 37). The rejoinder to this is that
the similarity that Frascolla, Black and Savitt recognize does not
make Wittgenstein’s theory a “kind of logicism” in
Frege’s or Russell’s sense, because Wittgenstein does not
define numbers “logically” in either Frege’s way or
Russell’s way, and the similarity (or analogy) between
tautologies and true mathematical equations is neither an identity nor
a relation of reducibility.
Finally, critics argue that the problem with #4 is that there is no
evidence for the claim that the relevant operation is logical
in Wittgenstein’s or Russell’s or Frege’s sense of
the term—it seems a purely formal, syntactical operation. “Logical operations are performed with propositions,
arithmetical ones with numbers”, says Wittgenstein (WVC
218); “[t]he result of a logical operation is a proposition, the
result of an arithmetical one is a number”. In sum, critics of
the Logicist interpretation of the Tractatus argue that
##1–4 do not individually or collectively constitute cogent
grounds for a Logicist interpretation of the Tractatus.
Another crucial aspect of the Tractarian theory of
mathematics is captured in (6.211).
Indeed in real life a mathematical proposition is never what we want.
Rather, we make use of mathematical propositions only in
inferences from propositions that do not belong to mathematics to
others that likewise do not belong to mathematics. (In philosophy the
question, ‘What do we actually use this word or this proposition
for?’ repeatedly leads to valuable insights.)
Though mathematics and mathematical activity are purely formal and
syntactical, in the Tractatus Wittgenstein tacitly
distinguishes between purely formal games with signs, which have no
application in contingent propositions, and mathematical propositions,
which are used to make inferences from contingent proposition(s) to
contingent proposition(s). Wittgenstein does not explicitly say,
however, how mathematical equations, which are not
genuine propositions, are used in inferences from genuine
proposition(s) to genuine proposition(s) (Floyd 2002: 309; Kremer
2002: 293–94). As we shall see in
 §3.5,
 the later Wittgenstein returns to the importance of
extra-mathematical application and uses it to distinguish a mere
“sign-game” from a genuine, mathematical
language-game.
This, in brief, is Wittgenstein’s Tractarian theory of
mathematics. In the Introduction to the Tractatus, Russell
wrote that Wittgenstein’s “theory of number”
“stands in need of greater technical development”,
primarily because Wittgenstein had not shown how it could deal with
transfinite numbers (Russell 1922[1974]: xx).
Similarly, in his review of
the Tractatus, Frank Ramsey wrote that Wittgenstein’s
‘account’ does not cover all of mathematics partly because
Wittgenstein’s theory of equations cannot explain inequalities
(Ramsey 1923: 475). Though it is doubtful that, in 1923, Wittgenstein
would have thought these issues problematic, it certainly is true that
the Tractarian theory of mathematics is essentially a sketch,
especially in comparison with what Wittgenstein begins to develop six
years later.
After the completion of the Tractatus in 1918, Wittgenstein
did virtually no philosophical work until February 2, 1929, eleven
months after attending a lecture by the Dutch mathematician L.E.J.
Brouwer.
There is little doubt that Wittgenstein was invigorated by L.E.J.
Brouwer’s March 10, 1928 Vienna lecture “Science,
Mathematics, and Language” (Brouwer 1929), which he attended
with F. Waismann and H. Feigl, but it is a gross overstatement to say
that he returned to Philosophy because of this lecture or that his
intermediate interest in the Philosophy of Mathematics issued
primarily from Brouwer’s influence. In fact,
Wittgenstein’s return to Philosophy and his intermediate work on
mathematics is also due to conversations with Ramsey and members of
the Vienna Circle, to Wittgenstein’s disagreement with Ramsey
over identity, and several other factors.
Though Wittgenstein seems not to have read any Hilbert or Brouwer
prior to the completion of the Tractatus, by early 1929
Wittgenstein had certainly read work by Brouwer, Weyl, Skolem, Ramsey
(and possibly Hilbert) and, apparently, he had had one or more private
discussions with Brouwer in 1928 (Finch 1977: 260; Van Dalen 2005:
566–567). Thus, the rudimentary treatment of mathematics in the
Tractatus, whose principal influences were Russell and Frege,
was succeeded by detailed work on mathematics in the middle period
(1929–1933), which was strongly influenced by the 1920s work of
Brouwer, Weyl, Hilbert, and Skolem.
To best understand Wittgenstein’s intermediate Philosophy of
Mathematics, one must fully appreciate his strong variant of
formalism, according to which “[w]e make
mathematics” (WVC 34, note 1; PR §159) by
inventing purely formal mathematical calculi, with
‘stipulated’ axioms (PR §202), syntactical
rules of transformation, and decision procedures that enable us to
invent “mathematical truth” and “mathematical
falsity” by algorithmically deciding so-called mathematical
‘propositions’ (PR §§122, 162).
The core idea of Wittgenstein’s formalism from 1929 (if
not 1918) through 1944 is that mathematics is essentially syntactical,
devoid of reference and semantics. The most obvious aspect of this
view, which has been noted by numerous commentators who do not refer
to Wittgenstein as a ‘formalist’ (Kielkopf 1970:
360–38; Klenk 1976: 5, 8, 9; Fogelin 1968: 267; Frascolla 1994:
40; Marion 1998: 13–14), is that, contra Platonism, the
signs and propositions of a mathematical calculus do not
refer to anything. As Wittgenstein says at (WVC 34,
note 1), “[n]umbers are not represented by proxies; numbers
are there”. This means not only that numbers are there
in the use, it means that the numerals are the
numbers, for “[a]rithmetic doesn’t talk about numbers, it
works with numbers” (PR §109).
What arithmetic is concerned with is the schema \(||||\).—But
does arithmetic talk about the lines I draw with pencil on
paper?—Arithmetic doesn’t talk about the lines, it
operates with them. (PG 333)
In a similar vein, Wittgenstein says that (WVC 106)
“mathematics is always a machine, a calculus” and
“[a] calculus is an abacus, a calculator, a calculating
machine”, which “works by means of strokes, numerals,
etc”. The “justified side of formalism”, according
to Wittgenstein (WVC 105), is that mathematical symbols
“lack a meaning” (i.e.,
Bedeutung)—they do not “go proxy
for” things which are “their
meaning[s]”.
You could say arithmetic is a kind of geometry; i.e. what in geometry
are constructions on paper, in arithmetic are calculations (on
paper).—You could say it is a more general kind of geometry.
(PR §109; PR §111)
This is the core of Wittgenstein’s life-long formalism. When we
prove a theorem or decide a proposition, we operate in a purely
formal, syntactical manner. In doing mathematics, we do
not discover pre-existing truths that were “already there
without one knowing” (PG 481)—we invent
mathematics, bit-by-little-bit. “If you want to know what \(2 +
2 = 4\) means”, says Wittgenstein, “you have to ask how we
work it out”, because “we consider the process of
calculation as the essential thing” (PG 333). Hence,
the only meaning (i.e., sense) that a mathematical proposition has is
intra-systemic meaning, which is wholly determined by its
syntactical relations to other propositions of the calculus.
A second important aspect of the intermediate Wittgenstein’s
strong formalism is his view that extra-mathematical application
(and/or reference) is not a necessary condition of a
mathematical calculus. Mathematical calculi do not require
extra-mathematical applications, Wittgenstein argues, since we
“can develop arithmetic completely autonomously and its
application takes care of itself since wherever it’s applicable
we may also apply it” (PR §109; cf. PG
308, WVC 104).
As we shall shortly see, the middle Wittgenstein is also drawn to
strong formalism by a new concern with questions of
decidability. Undoubtedly influenced by the writings of
Brouwer and David Hilbert, Wittgenstein uses strong formalism to forge
a new connection between mathematical meaningfulness and algorithmic
decidability.
An equation is a rule of syntax. Doesn’t that explain why we
cannot have questions in mathematics that are in principle
unanswerable? For if the rules of syntax cannot be grasped,
they’re of no use at all…. [This] makes intelligible the
attempts of the formalist to see mathematics as a game with signs.
(PR §121)
In
 Section 2.3,
 we shall see how Wittgenstein goes beyond both Hilbert and Brouwer by
maintaining the Law of the Excluded Middle in a way that
restricts mathematical propositions to expressions that are
algorithmically decidable.
The single most important difference between the Early and Middle
Wittgenstein is that, in the middle period, Wittgenstein rejects
quantification over an infinite mathematical domain, stating that,
contra his Tractarian view, such ‘propositions’
are not infinite conjunctions and infinite disjunctions simply because
there are no such things.
Wittgenstein’s principal reasons for developing a
finitistic Philosophy of Mathematics are as follows.
These two reasons have at least five immediate consequences
for Wittgenstein’s Philosophy of Mathematics.
Since we invent mathematics in its entirety, we do not
discover pre-existing mathematical objects or facts or that
mathematical objects have certain properties, for “one cannot
discover any connection between parts of mathematics or logic that was
already there without one knowing” (PG 481). In
examining mathematics as a purely human invention, Wittgenstein tries
to determine what exactly we have invented and why exactly, in his
opinion, we erroneously think that there are infinite mathematical
extensions.
If, first, we examine what we have invented, we see that we have
invented formal calculi consisting of finite extensions and
intensional rules. If, more importantly, we endeavour to determine
why we believe that infinite mathematical extensions exist
(e.g., why we believe that the actual infinite is intrinsic to
mathematics), we find that we conflate mathematical
intensions and mathematical extensions, erroneously
thinking that there is “a dualism” of “the law and
the infinite series obeying it” (PR §180). For
instance, we think that because a real number “endlessly yields
the places of a decimal fraction” (PR §186), it
is “a totality” (WVC 81–82, note
1), when, in reality, “[a]n irrational number isn’t the
extension of an infinite decimal fraction,… it’s a
law” (PR §181) which “yields
extensions” (PR §186). A law and a list are
fundamentally different; neither can ‘give’ what the other
gives (WVC 102–103). Indeed, “the mistake in the
set-theoretical approach consists time and again in treating laws and
enumerations (lists) as essentially the same kind of thing”
(PG 461).
Closely related with this conflation of intensions and extensions is
the fact that we mistakenly act as if the word ‘infinite’
is a “number word”, because in ordinary discourse we
answer the question “how many?” with both (PG
463; cf. PR §142). But “‘[i]nfinite’
is not a quantity”, Wittgenstein insists (WVC
228); the word ‘infinite’ and a number word like
‘five’ do not have the same syntax. The words
‘finite’ and ‘infinite’ do not function as
adjectives on the words ‘class’ or ‘set’,
(WVC 102), for the terms “finite class” and
“infinite class” use ‘class’ in completely
different ways (WVC 228). An infinite class is a recursive
rule or “an induction”, whereas the symbol for a finite
class is a list or extension (PG 461). It is because an
induction has much in common with the multiplicity of a finite class
that we erroneously call it an infinite class (PR
§158).
In sum, because a mathematical extension is necessarily a finite
sequence of symbols, an infinite mathematical extension is a
contradiction-in-terms. This is the foundation of Wittgenstein’s
finitism. Thus, when we say, e.g., that “there are infinitely
many even numbers”, we are not saying “there are
an infinite number of even numbers” in the same sense
as we can say “there are 27 people in this house”; the
infinite series of natural numbers is nothing but “the infinite
possibility of finite series of numbers”—“[i]t is
senseless to speak of the whole infinite number series, as if
it, too, were an extension” (PR §144). The
infinite is understood rightly when it is understood, not as a
quantity, but as an “infinite possibility” (PR
§138).
Given Wittgenstein’s rejection of infinite mathematical
extensions, he adopts finitistic, constructive views on mathematical
quantification, mathematical decidability, the nature of real numbers,
and Cantor’s diagonal proof of the existence of infinite sets of
greater cardinalities.
Since a mathematical set is a finite extension, we cannot
meaningfully quantify over an infinite mathematical domain,
simply because there is no such thing as an infinite mathematical
domain (i.e., totality, set), and, derivatively, no such things as
infinite conjunctions or disjunctions (G.E. Moore 1955: 2–3; cf.
AWL 6; and PG 281).
[I]t still looks now as if the quantifiers make no sense for numbers.
I mean: you can’t say ‘\((n) \phi n\)’, precisely
because ‘all natural numbers’ isn’t a bounded
concept. But then neither should one say a general proposition follows
from a proposition about the nature of number.
But in that case it seems to me that we can’t use
generality—all, etc.—in mathematics at all. There’s
no such thing as ‘all numbers’, simply because there are
infinitely many. (PR §126; PR §129)
‘Extensionalists’ who assert that
“\(\varepsilon(0).\varepsilon(1).\varepsilon(2)\) and so
on” is an infinite logical product (PG 452) assume or
assert that finite and infinite conjunctions are close
cousins—that the fact that we cannot write down or enumerate all
of the conjuncts ‘contained’ in an infinite conjunction is
only a “human weakness”, for God could surely do so and
God could surely survey such a conjunction in a single glance and
determine its truth-value. According to Wittgenstein, however, this is
not a matter of human limitation. Because we
mistakenly think that “an infinite conjunction” is similar
to “an enormous conjunction”, we erroneously reason that
just as we cannot determine the truth-value of an enormous conjunction
because we don’t have enough time, we similarly cannot, due to
human limitations, determine the truth-value of an infinite
conjunction (or disjunction). But the difference here is not one of
degree but of kind: “in the sense in which it is impossible to
check an infinite number of propositions it is also impossible to try
to do so” (PG 452). This applies, according to
Wittgenstein, to human beings, but more importantly, it applies also
to God (i.e., an omniscient being), for even God cannot write down or
survey infinitely many propositions because for him too the series is
never-ending or limitless and hence the ‘task’ is not a
genuine task because it cannot, in principle, be done (i.e.,
“infinitely many” is not a number word). As Wittgenstein
says at (PR 128; cf. PG 479): “‘Can God
know all the places of the expansion of \(\pi\)?’ would have
been a good question for the schoolmen to ask”, for the question
is strictly ‘senseless’. As we shall shortly see, on
Wittgenstein’s account, “[a] statement about all
numbers is not represented by means of a proposition, but by means of
induction” (WVC 82).
Similarly, there is no such thing as a mathematical proposition about
some number—no such thing as a mathematical proposition
that existentially quantifies over an infinite domain (PR
§173).
What is the meaning of such a mathematical proposition as
‘\((\exists n) 4 + n = 7\)’? It might be a
disjunction—\((4 + 0 = 7) \vee{}\) \((4 + 1 = 7) \vee {}\) etc. ad
inf. But what does that mean? I can understand a proposition with
a beginning and an end. But can one also understand a proposition with
no end? (PR §127)
We are particularly seduced by the feeling or belief that an infinite
mathematical disjunction makes good sense in the case where
we can provide a recursive rule for generating each next member of an
infinite sequence. For example, when we say “There exists an odd
perfect number” we are asserting that, in the infinite sequence
of odd numbers, there is (at least) one odd number that is
perfect—we are asserting ‘\(\phi(1) \vee \phi(3) \vee
\phi(5) \vee{}\) and so on’ and we know what would make it true
and what would make it false (PG 451). The mistake here made,
according to Wittgenstein (PG 451), is that we are implicitly
“comparing the proposition
‘\((\exists n)\)…’ with the proposition…
‘There are two foreign words on this page’”, which
doesn’t provide the grammar of the former
‘proposition’, but only indicates an analogy in their
respective rules.
On Wittgenstein’s intermediate finitism, an expression
quantifying over an infinite domain is never a meaningful
proposition, not even when we have proved, for instance, that a
particular number \(n\) has a particular property.
The important point is that, even in the case where I am given that
\(3^2 + 4^2 = 5^2\), I ought not to say ‘\((\exists x,
y, z, n) (x^n + y^n = z^n)\)’, since taken extensionally
that’s meaningless, and taken intensionally this doesn’t
provide a proof of it. No, in this case I ought to express only the
first equation. (PR §150)
Thus, Wittgenstein adopts the radical position that all
expressions that quantify over an infinite domain, whether
‘conjectures’ (e.g., Goldbach’s Conjecture, the Twin
Prime Conjecture) or “proved general theorems” (e.g.,
“Euclid’s Prime Number Theorem”, the Fundamental
Theorem of Algebra), are meaningless (i.e.,
‘senseless’; ‘sinnlos’) expressions
as opposed to “genuine mathematical
proposition[s]” (PR §168). These
expressions are not (meaningful) mathematical propositions, according
to Wittgenstein, because the Law of the Excluded Middle does not
apply, which means that “we aren’t dealing with
propositions of mathematics” (PR §151). The
crucial question why and in exactly what sense the Law of the
Excluded Middle does not apply to such expressions will be answered in
the next section.
The middle Wittgenstein has other grounds for rejecting unrestricted
quantification in mathematics, for on his idiosyncratic account, we
must distinguish between four categories of concatenations of
mathematical symbols.
In his 2004 (p. 18), Mark van Atten says that
… [i]ntuitionistically, there are four [“possibilities
for a proposition with respect to truth”]:
What is immediately striking about Wittgenstein’s ##1–3
and Brouwer’s ##1–3 (Brouwer 1955: 114; 1981: 92) is the
enormous similarity. And yet, for all of the agreement, the
disagreement in #4 is absolutely crucial.
As radical as the respective #3s are, Brouwer and Wittgenstein agree
that an undecided \(\phi\) is a mathematical proposition (for
Wittgenstein, of a particular mathematical calculus) if we
know of an applicable decision procedure. They also agree that until
\(\phi\) is decided, it is neither true nor false (though, for
Wittgenstein, ‘true’ means no more than “proved in
calculus \(\Gamma\)”). What they disagree about is the status of
an ordinary mathematical conjecture, such as Goldbach’s
Conjecture. Brouwer admits it as a mathematical proposition, while
Wittgenstein rejects it because we do not know how to algorithmically
decide it. Like Brouwer (1948 [1983: 90]), Wittgenstein holds that
there are no “unknown truth[s]” in mathematics, but unlike
Brouwer he denies the existence of “undecidable
propositions” on the grounds that such a
‘proposition’ would have no ‘sense’,
“and the consequence of this is precisely that the propositions
of logic lose their validity for it” (PR §173). In
particular, if there are undecidable mathematical
propositions (as Brouwer maintains), then at least some mathematical
propositions are not propositions of any existent
mathematical calculus. For Wittgenstein, however, it is a defining
feature of a mathematical proposition that it is either decided or
decidable by a known decision procedure in a mathematical
calculus. As Wittgenstein says at (PR §151), 
where the law of the excluded middle doesn’t apply, no other law
of logic applies either, because in that case we aren’t dealing
with propositions of mathematics. (Against Weyl and Brouwer). 
The point here is not that we need truth and falsity in
mathematics—we don’t—but rather that every
mathematical proposition (including ones for which an applicable
decision procedure is known) is known to be part of a
mathematical calculus.
To maintain this position, Wittgenstein distinguishes between
(meaningful, genuine) mathematical propositions, which have
mathematical sense, and meaningless, senseless
(‘sinnlos’) expressions by stipulating that an
expression is a meaningful (genuine) proposition of a mathematical
calculus iff we know of a proof, a refutation, or an
applicable decision procedure (PR §151; PG 452;
PG 366; AWL 199–200). “Only where
there’s a method of solution [a ‘logical method for
finding a solution’] is there a [mathematical] problem”,
he tells us (PR §§149, 152; PG 393).
“We may only put a question in mathematics (or make a
conjecture)”, he adds (PR §151), “where the
answer runs: ‘I must work it out’”.
At (PG 468), Wittgenstein emphasizes the importance of
algorithmic decidability clearly and emphatically: 
In mathematics everything is algorithm and nothing
is meaning [Bedeutung]; even when it
doesn’t look like that because we seem to be using
words to talk about mathematical things. Even these
words are used to construct an algorithm. 
When, therefore, Wittgenstein says (PG 368) that if
“[the Law of the Excluded Middle] is supposed not to hold, we
have altered the concept of proposition”, he means that an
expression is only a meaningful mathematical proposition if we
know of an applicable decision procedure for deciding it
(PG 400). If a genuine mathematical proposition is
undecided, the Law of the Excluded Middle holds in the sense
that we know that we will prove or refute the
proposition by applying an applicable decision procedure (PG
379, 387).
For Wittgenstein, there simply is no distinction between syntax and
semantics in mathematics: everything is syntax. If we wish to
demarcate between “mathematical propositions” versus
“mathematical pseudo-propositions”, as we do, then the
only way to ensure that there is no such thing as a
meaningful, but undecidable (e.g., independent), proposition
of a given calculus is to stipulate that an expression is only a
meaningful proposition in a given calculus (PR
§153) if either it has been decided or we know of an
applicable decision procedure. In this manner, Wittgenstein defines
both a mathematical calculus and a mathematical
proposition in epistemic terms. A calculus is defined in
terms of stipulations (PR §202; PG 369),
known rules of operation, and known decision
procedures, and an expression is only a mathematical proposition
in a given calculus (PR §155), and only if that
calculus contains (PG 379) a known (and applicable)
decision procedure, for “you cannot have a logical plan of
search for a sense you don’t know” (PR
§148).
Thus, the middle Wittgenstein rejects undecidable mathematical
propositions on two grounds. First, number-theoretic
expressions that quantify over an infinite domain are not
algorithmically decidable, and hence are not meaningful mathematical
propositions.
If someone says (as Brouwer does) that for \((x) f_1 x = f_2 x\),
there is, as well as yes and no, also the case of undecidability, this
implies that ‘\((x)\)…’ is meant extensionally and
we may talk of the case in which all \(x\) happen to have a property.
In truth, however, it’s impossible to talk of such a case at all
and the ‘\((x)\)…’ in arithmetic cannot be taken
extensionally. (PR §174)
“Undecidability”, says Wittgenstein (PR
§174) “presupposes… that the bridge cannot
be made with symbols”, when, in fact, “[a] connection
between symbols which exists but cannot be represented by symbolic
transformations is a thought that cannot be thought”, for
“[i]f the connection is there,… it must be possible to
see it”. Alluding to algorithmic decidability, Wittgenstein
stresses (PR §174) that “[w]e can assert anything
which can be checked in practice”, because
“it’s a question of the possibility of
checking” (italics added).
Wittgenstein’s second reason for rejecting an undecidable
mathematical proposition is that it is a
contradiction-in-terms. There cannot be “undecidable
propositions”, Wittgenstein argues (PR §173),
because an expression that is not decidable in some actual
calculus is simply not a mathematical proposition, since
“every proposition in mathematics must belong to a calculus of
mathematics” (PG 376).
This radical position on decidability results in various radical and
counter-intuitive statements about unrestricted mathematical
quantification, mathematical induction, and, especially, the
sense of a newly proved mathematical proposition. In
particular, Wittgenstein asserts that uncontroversial mathematical
conjectures, such as Goldbach’s Conjecture (hereafter
‘GC’) and the erstwhile conjecture “Fermat’s
Last Theorem” (hereafter ‘FLT’), have no sense (or,
perhaps, no determinate sense) and that the
unsystematic proof of such a conjecture gives it a sense that
it didn’t previously have (PG 374) because 
it’s unintelligible that I should admit, when I’ve got the
proof, that it’s a proof of precisely this proposition,
or of the induction meant by this proposition. (PR
§155)
Thus Fermat’s [Last Theorem] makes no sense until I can
search for a solution to the equation in cardinal numbers.
And ‘search’ must always mean: search systematically.
Meandering about in infinite space on the look-out for a gold ring is
no kind of search. (PR §150)
I say: the so-called ‘Fermat’s Last Theorem’
isn’t a proposition. (Not even in the sense of a proposition of
arithmetic.) Rather, it corresponds to an induction. (PR
§189)
To see how Fermat’s Last Theorem isn’t a proposition and
how it might correspond to an induction, we need to examine
Wittgenstein’s account of mathematical induction.
Given that one cannot quantify over an infinite mathematical domain,
the question arises: What, if anything, does any
number-theoretic proof by mathematical induction actually
prove?
On the standard view, a proof by mathematical induction has the
following paradigmatic form.
If, however, “\(\forall n\phi(n)\)” is not a
meaningful (genuine) mathematical proposition, what are we to make of
this proof?
Wittgenstein’s initial answer to this question is decidedly
enigmatic. “An induction is the expression for arithmetical
generality”, but “induction isn’t itself a
proposition” (PR §129).
We are not saying that when \(f(1)\) holds and when \(f(c + 1)\)
follows from \(f(c)\), the proposition \(f(x)\) is therefore
true of all cardinal numbers: but: “the proposition \(f(x)\)
holds for all cardinal numbers” means “it holds
for \(x = 1\), and \(f(c + 1)\) follows from \(f(c)\)”.
(PG 406)
In a proof by mathematical induction, we do no actually prove the
‘proposition’ [e.g., \(\forall n\phi(n)\)] that is
customarily construed as the conclusion of the proof
(PG 406, 374; PR §164), rather this
pseudo-proposition or ‘statement’ stands
‘proxy’ for the “infinite possibility” (i.e.,
“the induction”) that we come to
‘see’ by means of the proof (WVC 135).
“I want to say”, Wittgenstein concludes, that “once
you’ve got the induction, it’s all over”
(PG 407). Thus, on Wittgenstein’s account, a particular
proof by mathematical induction should be understood in the following
way.
Here the ‘conclusion’ of an inductive proof [i.e.,
“what is to be proved” (PR §164)] uses
‘\(m\)’ rather than ‘\(n\)’ to indicate that
‘\(m\)’ stands for any particular number, while
‘\(n\)’ stands for any arbitrary number. For
Wittgenstein, the proxy statement “\(\phi(m)\)”
is not a mathematical proposition that “assert[s] its
generality” (PR §168), it is an
eliminable pseudo-proposition standing proxy for the proved
inductive base and inductive step. Though an inductive proof
cannot prove “the infinite possibility of
application” (PR §163), it enables us “to
perceive” that a direct proof of any
particular proposition can be constructed (PR
§165). For example, once we have proved “\(\phi(1)\)”
and “\(\phi(n) \rightarrow \phi(n + 1)\)”, we need not
reiterate modus ponens \(m - 1\) times to prove the
particular proposition “\(\phi(m)\)” (PR
§164). The direct proof of, say, “\(\phi\)(714)”
(i.e., without 713 iterations of modus ponens) “cannot
have a still better proof, say, by my carrying out the derivation as
far as this proposition itself” (PR §165).
A second, very important impetus for Wittgenstein’s radically
constructivist position on mathematical induction is his rejection of
an undecidable mathematical proposition.
In discussions of the provability of mathematical propositions it is
sometimes said that there are substantial propositions of mathematics
whose truth or falsehood must remain undecided. What the people who
say that don’t realize is that such propositions, if we
can use them and want to call them “propositions”, are not
at all the same as what are called “propositions” in other
cases; because a proof alters the grammar of a proposition.
(PG 367)
In this passage, Wittgenstein is alluding to Brouwer, who, as early as
1907 and 1908, states, first, that “the question of the validity
of the principium tertii exclusi is equivalent to the question
whether unsolvable mathematical problems exist”,
second, that “[t]here is not a shred of a proof for the
conviction… that there exist no unsolvable mathematical
problems”, and, third, that there are meaningful
propositions/‘questions’, such as “Do there
occur in the decimal expansion of \(\pi\) infinitely many pairs of
consecutive equal digits?”, to which the Law of the
Excluded Middle does not apply because “it must be
considered as uncertain whether problems like [this] are
solvable” (Brouwer, 1908 [1975: 109–110]). “A
fortiori it is not certain that any mathematical problem can either be
solved or proved to be unsolvable”, Brouwer says (1907 [1975:
79]), “though HILBERT, in ‘Mathematische Probleme’,
believes that every mathematician is deeply convinced of
it”.
Wittgenstein takes the same data and, in a way, draws the opposite
conclusion. If, as Brouwer says, we are uncertain whether all
or some “mathematical problems” are solvable, then we
know that we do not have in hand an applicable
decision procedure, which means that the alleged mathematical
propositions are not decidable, here and now. “What
‘mathematical questions’ share with genuine
questions”, Wittgenstein says (PR §151), “is
simply that they can be answered”. This means that if we do not
know how to decide an expression, then we do not know how to
make it either proved (true) or refuted (false), which means
that the Law of the Excluded Middle “doesn’t apply”
and, therefore, that our expression is not a mathematical
proposition.
Together, Wittgenstein’s finitism and his criterion of
algorithmic decidability shed considerable light on his highly
controversial remarks about putatively meaningful conjectures
such as FLT and GC. GC is not a mathematical proposition because we do
not know how to decide it, and if someone like G. H. Hardy
says that he ‘believes’ GC is true (PG 381;
LFM 123; PI §578), we must answer that s/he
only “has a hunch about the possibilities of extension of the
present system” (LFM 139)—that one can only
believe such an expression is ‘correct’ if one
knows how to prove it. The only sense in which GC (or FLT)
can be proved is that it can “correspond to a proof by
induction”, which means that the unproved inductive step (e.g.,
“\(G(n) \rightarrow G(n + 1)\)”) and the expression
“\(\forall nG(n)\)” are not mathematical propositions
because we have no algorithmic means of looking for an induction
(PG 367). A “general proposition” is senseless
prior to an inductive proof “because the question would only
have made sense if a general method of decision had been known
before the particular proof was discovered”
(PG 402). Unproved ‘inductions’ or inductive
steps are not meaningful propositions because the Law of the Excluded
Middle does not hold in the sense that we do not know of a decision
procedure by means of which we can prove or refute the expression
(PG 400; WVC 82).
This position, however, seems to rob us of any reason to search for a
‘decision’ of a meaningless ‘expression’ such
as GC. The intermediate Wittgenstein says only that “[a]
mathematician is… guided by… certain analogies with the
previous system” and that there is nothing “wrong or
illegitimate if anyone concerns himself with Fermat’s Last
Theorem” (WVC 144).
If e.g. I have a method for looking at integers that satisfy the
equation \(x^2 + y^2 = z^2\), then the formula \(x^{n} + y^n = z^{n}\)
may stimulate me. I may let a formula stimulate me. Thus I shall say,
Here there is a stimulus—but not a question.
Mathematical problems are always such stimuli. (WVC 144, Jan.
1, 1931)
More specifically, a mathematician may let a senseless conjecture such
as FLT stimulate her/him if s/he wishes to know whether a calculus can
be extended without altering its axioms or rules (LFM
139).
What is here going [o]n [in an attempt to decide GC] is an
unsystematic attempt at constructing a calculus. If the attempt is
successful, I shall again have a calculus in front of me, only a
different one from the calculus I have been using so far.
(WVC 174–75; Sept. 21, 1931; italics added)
If, e.g., we succeed in proving GC by mathematical induction (i.e., we
prove “\(G(1)\)” and “\(G(n) \rightarrow G(n +
1)\)”), we will then have a proof of the inductive step, but
since the inductive step was not algorithmically decidable beforehand
(PR §§148, 155, 157; PG 380), in
constructing the proof we have constructed a new calculus, a
new calculating machine (WVC 106) in which we
now know how to use this new “machine-part”
(RFM VI, §13) (i.e., the unsystematically proved
inductive step). Before the proof, the inductive step is not a
mathematical proposition with sense (in a particular calculus),
whereas after the proof the inductive step is a mathematical
proposition, with a new, determinate sense, in a newly created
calculus. This demarcation of expressions without mathematical sense
and proved or refuted propositions, each with a determinate sense in a
particular calculus, is a view that Wittgenstein articulates in myriad
different ways from 1929 through 1944.
Whether or not it is ultimately defensible—and this is an
absolutely crucial question for Wittgenstein’s Philosophy of
Mathematics—this strongly counter-intuitive aspect of
Wittgenstein’s account of algorithmic decidability, proof, and
the sense of a mathematical proposition is a piece with his
rejection of predeterminacy in mathematics. Even in the case
where we algorithmically decide a mathematical proposition, the
connections thereby made do not pre-exist the algorithmic decision,
which means that even when we have a “mathematical
question” that we decide by decision procedure, the expression
only has a determinate sense qua proposition when it is
decided. On Wittgenstein’s account, both middle and later,
“[a] new proof gives the proposition a place in a new
system” (RFM VI, §13), it “locates it in the
whole system of calculations”, though it “does not
mention, certainly does not describe, the whole system of calculation
that stands behind the proposition and gives it sense”
(RFM VI, §11).
Wittgenstein’s unorthodox position here is a type of
structuralism that partially results from his rejection of
mathematical semantics. We erroneously think, e.g., that GC has a
fully determinate sense because, given “the misleading way in
which the mode of expression of word-language represents the sense of
mathematical propositions” (PG 375), we call to mind
false pictures and mistaken, referential conceptions of
mathematical propositions whereby GC is about a mathematical
reality and so has just a determinate sense as “There exist
intelligent beings elsewhere in the universe” (i.e., a
proposition that is determinately true or false, whether or
not we ever know its truth-value). Wittgenstein breaks with this
tradition, in all of its forms, stressing that, in
mathematics, unlike the realm of contingent (or empirical)
propositions, “if I am to know what a proposition like
Fermat’s last theorem says”, I must know its
criterion of truth. Unlike the criterion of truth for an
empirical proposition, which can be known before the
proposition is decided, we cannot know the criterion of truth for an
undecided mathematical proposition, though we are “acquainted
with criteria for the truth of similar propositions”
(RFM VI, §13).
The intermediate Wittgenstein spends a great deal of time wrestling
with real and irrational numbers. There are two distinct reasons for
this.
First, the real reason many of us are unwilling to abandon
the notion of the actual infinite in mathematics is the prevalent
conception of an irrational number as a necessarily infinite
extension. “The confusion in the concept of the ‘actual
infinite’ arises” (italics added), says
Wittgenstein (PG 471), 
from the unclear concept of irrational number, that is, from the fact
that logically very different things are called ‘irrational
numbers’ without any clear limit being given to the concept.
Second, and more fundamentally, the intermediate Wittgenstein wrestles
with irrationals in such detail because he opposes foundationalism and
especially its concept of a “gapless mathematical
continuum”, its concept of a comprehensive theory of
the real numbers (Han 2010), and set theoretical conceptions and
‘proofs’ as a foundation for arithmetic, real number
theory, and mathematics as a whole. Indeed, Wittgenstein’s
discussion of irrationals is one with his critique of set theory, for,
as he says, “[m]athematics is ridden through and through with
the pernicious idioms of set theory”, such as “the way
people speak of a line as composed of points”, when, in fact,
“[a] line is a law and isn’t composed of anything at
all” (PR §173; PR §§181, 183,
& 191; PG 373, 460, 461, & 473).
Since, on Wittgenstein’s terms, mathematics consists exclusively
of extensions and intensions (i.e., ‘rules’ or
‘laws’), an irrational is only an extension insofar as it
is a sign (i.e., a ‘numeral’, such as
‘\(\sqrt{2}\)’ or ‘\(\pi\)’). Given that there
is no such thing as an infinite mathematical extension, it
follows that an irrational number is not a unique infinite
expansion, but rather a unique recursive rule or law
(PR §181) that yields rational numbers (PR
§186; PR §180).
The rule for working out places of \(\sqrt{2}\) is itself the numeral
for the irrational number; and the reason I here speak of a
‘number’ is that I can calculate with these signs (certain
rules for the construction of rational numbers) just as I can with
rational numbers themselves. (PG 484)
Due, however, to his anti-foundationalism, Wittgenstein takes the
radical position that not all recursive real numbers (i.e., computable
numbers) are genuine real numbers—a position that distinguishes
his view from even Brouwer’s.
The problem, as Wittgenstein sees it, is that mathematicians,
especially foundationalists (e.g., set theorists), have sought to
accommodate physical continuity by a theory that
‘describes’ the mathematical continuum (PR
§171). When, for example, we think of continuous motion and the
(mere) density of the rationals, we reason that if an object moves
continuously from A to B, and it travels only the distances
marked by “rational points”, then it must skip
some distances (intervals, or points) not marked by rational
numbers. But if an object in continuous motion travels distances that
cannot be commensurately measured by rationals alone, there
must be ‘gaps’ between the rationals (PG 460),
and so we must fill them, first, with recursive irrationals, and then,
because “the set of all recursive irrationals”
still leaves gaps, with “lawless irrationals”.
[T]he enigma of the continuum arises because language misleads us into
applying to it a picture that doesn’t fit. Set theory preserves
the inappropriate picture of something discontinuous, but makes
statements about it that contradict the picture, under the impression
that it is breaking with prejudices; whereas what should really have
been done is to point out that the picture just doesn’t
fit… (PG 471)
We add nothing that is needed to the differential and integral calculi
by ‘completing’ a theory of real numbers with
pseudo-irrationals and lawless irrationals, first because there are no
gaps on the number line (PR §§181, 183, & 191;
PG 373, 460, 461, & 473; WVC 35) and, second,
because these alleged irrational numbers are not needed for a theory
of the ‘continuum’ simply because there is no mathematical
continuum. As the later Wittgenstein says (RFM V, §32),
“[t]he picture of the number line is an absolutely natural one
up to a certain point; that is to say so long as it is not used for a
general theory of real numbers”. We have gone awry by
misconstruing the nature of the geometrical line as a continuous
collection of points, each with an associated real number, which has
taken us well beyond the ‘natural’ picture of the number
line in search of a “general theory of real numbers” (Han
2010).
Thus, the principal reason Wittgenstein rejects certain constructive
(computable) numbers is that they are unnecessary creations which
engender conceptual confusions in mathematics (especially set theory).
One of Wittgenstein’s main aims in his lengthy discussions of
rational numbers and pseudo-irrationals is to show that
pseudo-irrationals, which are allegedly needed for the mathematical
continuum, are not needed at all.
To this end, Wittgenstein demands (a) that a real number must be
“compar[able] with any rational number taken at random”
(i.e., “it can be established whether it is greater than, less
than, or equal to a rational number” (PR §191))
and (b) that “[a] number must measure in and of itself”
and if a ‘number’ “leaves it to the rationals, we
have no need of it” (PR §191) (Frascolla 1980:
242–243; Shanker 1987: 186–192; Da Silva 1993:
93–94; Marion 1995a: 162, 164; Rodych 1999b, 281–291;
Lampert 2009).
To demonstrate that some recursive (computable) reals are not genuine
real numbers because they fail to satisfy (a) and (b), Wittgenstein
defines the putative recursive real number
as the rule “Construct the decimal expansion for \(\sqrt{2}\),
replacing every occurrence of a ‘5’ with a
‘3’” (PR §182); he similarly defines
\(\pi '\) as
(PR §186) and, in a later work, redefines \(\pi '\)
as
(PG 475).
Although a pseudo-irrational such as \(\pi '\) (on either definition)
is “as unambiguous as … \(\pi\) or \(\sqrt{2}\)”
(PG 476), it is ‘homeless’ according to
Wittgenstein because, instead of using “the idioms of
arithmetic” (PR §186), it is dependent upon the
particular ‘incidental’ notation of a particular system
(i.e., in some particular base) (PR §188; PR
§182; and PG 475). If we speak of various
base-notational systems, we might say that \(\pi\) belongs to
all systems, while \(\pi '\) belongs only to one, which shows
that \(\pi '\) is not a genuine irrational because “there
can’t be irrational numbers of different types”
(PR §180). Furthermore, pseudo-irrationals do
not measure because they are homeless, artificial
constructions parasitic upon numbers which have a natural place in a
calculus that can be used to measure. We simply do not need these
aberrations, because they are not sufficiently comparable to rationals
and genuine irrationals. They are not irrational numbers
according to Wittgenstein’s criteria, which define, Wittgenstein
interestingly asserts, “precisely what has been meant or looked
for under the name ‘irrational number’” (PR
§191).
For exactly the same reason, if we define a “lawless
irrational” as either (a) a non-rule-governed,
non-periodic, infinite expansion in some base, or (b) a
“free-choice sequence”, Wittgenstein rejects
“lawless irrationals” because, insofar as they are not
rule-governed, they are not comparable to rationals (or irrationals)
and they are not needed. 
[W]e cannot say that the decimal fractions developed in accordance
with a law still need supplementing by an infinite set of irregular
infinite decimal fractions that would be ‘brushed under the
carpet’ if we were to restrict ourselves to those
generated by a law, 
Wittgenstein argues, for “[w]here is there such an infinite
decimal that is generated by no law” “[a]nd how would we
notice that it was missing?” (PR §181; cf.
PG 473, 483–84). Similarly, a free-choice sequence,
like a recipe for “endless bisection” or “endless
dicing”, is not an infinitely complicated mathematical
law (or rule), but rather no law at all, for after each
individual throw of a coin, the point remains “infinitely
indeterminate” (PR §186). For closely related
reasons, Wittgenstein ridicules the Multiplicative Axiom (Axiom of
Choice) both in the middle period (PR §146) and in the
latter period (RFM V, §25; VII, §33).
Superficially, at least, it seems as if Wittgenstein is offering an
essentialist argument for the conclusion that real number arithmetic
should not be extended in such-and-such a way. Such an
essentialist account of real and irrational numbers seems to
conflict with the actual freedom mathematicians have to extend and
invent, with Wittgenstein’s intermediate claim (PG 334)
that “[f]or [him] one calculus is as good as another”, and
with Wittgenstein’s acceptance of complex and imaginary numbers.
Wittgenstein’s foundationalist critic (e.g., set theorist) will
undoubtedly say that we have extended the term “irrational
number” to lawless and pseudo-irrationals because they are
needed for the mathematical continuum and because such
“conceivable numbers” are much more like rule-governed
irrationals than rationals.
Though Wittgenstein stresses differences where others see similarities
(LFM 15), in his intermediate attacks on pseudo-irrationals
and foundationalism, he is not just emphasizing differences, he is
attacking set theory’s “pernicious idioms”
(PR §173) and its “crudest imaginable
misinterpretation of its own calculus” (PG
469–70) in an attempt to dissolve “misunderstandings
without which [set theory] would never have been invented”,
since it is “of no other use” (LFM 16–17).
Complex and imaginary numbers have grown organically within
mathematics, and they have proved their mettle in scientific
applications, but pseudo-irrationals are inorganic creations
invented solely for the sake of mistaken foundationalist aims.
Wittgenstein’s main point is not that we cannot create
further recursive real numbers—indeed, we can create as many as
we want—his point is that we can only really speak of different
systems (sets) of real numbers (RFM II, §33)
that are enumerable by a rule, and any attempt to speak of “the
set of all real numbers” or any piecemeal attempt to add or
consider new recursive reals (e.g., diagonal numbers) is a useless
and/or futile endeavour based on foundational misconceptions. Indeed,
in 1930 manuscript and typescript (hereafter MS and TS, respectively)
passages on irrationals and Cantor’s diagonal, which were not
included in PR or PG, Wittgenstein says: “The
concept ‘irrational number’ is a dangerous
pseudo-concept” (MS 108, 176; 1930; TS 210, 29; 1930).  As we
shall see in the next section, on Wittgenstein’s account, if we
do not understand irrationals rightly, we cannot but engender
the mistakes that constitute set theory.
Wittgenstein’s critique of set theory begins somewhat benignly
in the Tractatus, where he denounces Logicism and says
(6.031) that “[t]he theory of classes is completely superfluous
in mathematics” because, at least in part, “the generality
required in mathematics is not accidental generality”. In his
middle period, Wittgenstein begins a full-out assault on set theory
that never abates. Set theory, he says, is “utter
nonsense” (PR §§145, 174; WVC 102;
PG 464, 470), ‘wrong’ (PR §174),
and ‘laughable’ (PG 464); its “pernicious
idioms” (PR §173) mislead us and the crudest
possible misinterpretation is the very impetus of its invention
(Hintikka 1993: 24, 27).
Wittgenstein’s intermediate critique of transfinite set theory
(hereafter “set theory”) has two main components: (1) his
discussion of the intension-extension distinction, and (2) his
criticism of non-denumerability as cardinality. Late in the
middle period, Wittgenstein seems to become more aware of the
unbearable conflict between his strong formalism (PG
334) and his denigration of set theory as a purely formal,
non-mathematical calculus (Rodych 1997: 217–219),
which, as we shall see in
 Section 3.5,
 leads to the use of an extra-mathematical application criterion to
demarcate transfinite set theory (and other purely formal sign-games)
from mathematical calculi.
The search for a comprehensive theory of the real numbers and
mathematical continuity has led to a “fictitious
symbolism” (PR §174).
Set theory attempts to grasp the infinite at a more general level than
the investigation of the laws of the real numbers. It says that you
can’t grasp the actual infinite by means of mathematical
symbolism at all and therefore it can only be described and not
represented. … One might say of this theory that it buys a pig
in a poke. Let the infinite accommodate itself in this box as best it
can. (PG 468; cf. PR §170)
As Wittgenstein puts it at (PG 461), 
the mistake in the set-theoretical approach consists time and again in
treating laws and enumerations (lists) as essentially the same kind of
thing and arranging them in parallel series so that one fills in gaps
left by the other. 
This is a mistake because it is ‘nonsense’ to say
“we cannot enumerate all the numbers of a set, but we can give a
description”, for “[t]he one is not a substitute for the
other” (WVC 102; June 19, 1930); “there
isn’t a dualism [of] the law and the infinite series obeying
it” (PR §180).
“Set theory is wrong” and nonsensical (PR
§174), says Wittgenstein, because it presupposes a fictitious
symbolism of infinite signs (PG 469) instead of an actual
symbolism with finite signs. The grand intimation of set theory, which
begins with “Dirichlet’s concept of a function”
(WVC 102–03), is that we can in principle
represent an infinite set by an enumeration, but because of human or
physical limitations, we will instead describe it
intensionally. But, says Wittgenstein, “[t]here can’t be
possibility and actuality in mathematics”, for mathematics is an
actual calculus, which “is concerned only with the
signs with which it actually operates” (PG
469). As Wittgenstein puts it at (PR §159), the fact
that “we can’t describe mathematics, we can only do
it” in and “of itself abolishes every ‘set
theory’”.
Perhaps the best example of this phenomenon is Dedekind, who in giving
his ‘definition’ of an “infinite class” as
“a class which is similar to a proper subclass of itself”
(PG 464), “tried to describe an infinite
class” (PG 463). If, however, we try to apply this
‘definition’ to a particular class in order to ascertain
whether it is finite or infinite, the attempt is
‘laughable’ if we apply it to a finite class,
such as “a certain row of trees”, and it is
‘nonsense’ if we apply it to “an infinite
class”, for we cannot even attempt “to co-ordinate
it” (PG 464), because “the relation \(m = 2n\)
[does not] correlate the class of all numbers with one of its
subclasses” (PR §141), it is an “infinite
process” which “correlates any arbitrary number with
another”. So, although we can use \(m = 2n\) on the
rule for generating the naturals (i.e., our domain) and
thereby construct the pairs (2,1), (4,2), (6,3), (8,4), etc., in doing
so we do not correlate two infinite sets or extensions
(WVC 103). If we try to apply Dedekind’s definition as
a criterion for determining whether a given set is infinite
by establishing a 1–1 correspondence between two inductive rules
for generating “infinite extensions”, one of which is an
“extensional subset” of the other, we can’t possibly
learn anything we didn’t already know when we applied the
‘criterion’ to two inductive rules. If Dedekind or anyone
else insists on calling an inductive rule an “infinite
set”, he and we must still mark the categorical difference
between such a set and a finite set with a determinate, finite
cardinality.
Indeed, on Wittgenstein’s account, the failure to properly
distinguish mathematical extensions and intensions is the root cause
of the mistaken interpretation of Cantor’s diagonal proof as a
proof of the existence of infinite sets of lesser and greater
cardinality.
Wittgenstein’s criticism of non-denumerability is primarily
implicit during the middle period. Only after 1937 does he provide
concrete arguments purporting to show, e.g., that Cantor’s
diagonal cannot prove that some infinite sets have greater
‘multiplicity’ than others.
Nonetheless, the intermediate Wittgenstein clearly rejects the notion
that a non-denumerably infinite set is greater in cardinality than a
denumerably infinite set.
When people say ‘The set of all transcendental numbers is
greater than that of algebraic numbers’, that’s nonsense.
The set is of a different kind. It isn’t ‘no longer’
denumerable, it’s simply not denumerable! (PR
§174)
As with his intermediate views on genuine irrationals and the
Multiplicative Axiom, Wittgenstein here looks at the diagonal proof of
the non-denumerability of “the set of transcendental
numbers” as one that shows only that transcendental numbers
cannot be recursively enumerated. It is nonsense, he says, to go from
the warranted conclusion that these numbers are not, in principle,
enumerable to the conclusion that the set of transcendental
numbers is greater in cardinality than the set of algebraic numbers,
which is recursively enumerable. What we have here are two very
different conceptions of a number-type. In the case of algebraic
numbers, we have a decision procedure for determining of any given
number whether or not it is algebraic, and we have a method
of enumerating the algebraic numbers such that we can see
that ‘each’ algebraic number “will be”
enumerated. In the case of transcendental numbers, on the other hand,
we have proofs that some numbers are transcendental (i.e.,
non-algebraic), and we have a proof that we cannot
recursively enumerate each and every thing we would call a
“transcendental number”.
At (PG 461), Wittgenstein similarly speaks of set
theory’s “mathematical pseudo-concepts” leading to a
fundamental difficulty, which begins when we unconsciously presuppose
that there is sense to the idea of ordering the rationals by
size—“that the attempt is
thinkable”—and culminates in similarly thinking that it is
possible to enumerate the real numbers, which we then
discover is impossible.
Though the intermediate Wittgenstein certainly seems highly critical
of the alleged proof that some infinite sets (e.g., the reals) are
greater in cardinality than other infinite sets, and though he
discusses the “diagonal procedure” in February 1929 and in
June 1930 (MS 106, 266; MS 108, 180), along with a diagonal diagram,
these and other early-middle ruminations did not make it into the
typescripts for either PR or PG. As we shall see in
 Section 3.4,
 the later Wittgenstein analyzes Cantor’s diagonal and claims of
non-denumerability in some detail.
The first and most important thing to note about Wittgenstein’s
later Philosophy of Mathematics is that RFM, first published
in 1956, consists of selections taken from a number of
manuscripts (1937–1944), most of one large typescript (1938),
and three short typescripts (1938), each of which constitutes an
Appendix to (RFM I). For this reason and because some
manuscripts containing much material on mathematics (e.g., MS 123)
were not used at all for
RFM, philosophers have not been able to read
Wittgenstein’s later remarks on mathematics as they were written
in the manscripts used for RFM and they have not had access
(until the 2000–2001 release of the Nachlass on CD-ROM)
to much of Wittgenstein’s later work on mathematics. It must be
emphasized, therefore, that this Encyclopedia article is
being written during a transitional period. Until philosophers have
used the Nachlass to build a comprehensive picture of
Wittgenstein’s complete and evolving Philosophy of Mathematics,
we will not be able to say definitively which views the later
Wittgenstein retained, which he changed, and which he dropped. In the
interim, this article will outline Wittgenstein’s later
Philosophy of Mathematics, drawing primarily on RFM, to a
much lesser extent LFM (1939 Cambridge lectures), and, where
possible, previously unpublished material in Wittgenstein’s
Nachlass.
It should also be noted at the outset that commentators disagree about
the continuity of Wittgenstein’s middle and later Philosophies
of Mathematics. Some argue that the later views are significantly
different from the intermediate views (Frascolla 1994; Gerrard 1991:
127, 131–32; Floyd 2005: 105–106), while others argue
that, for the most part, Wittgenstein’s Philosophy of
Mathematics evolves from the middle to the later period without
significant changes or renunciations (Wrigley 1993; Marion 1998). The remainder of this article adopts the
second interpretation, explicating Wittgenstein’s later
Philosophy of Mathematics as largely continuous with his intermediate
views, except for the important introduction of an extra-mathematical
application criterion.
Perhaps the most important constant in Wittgenstein’s Philosophy
of Mathematics, middle and late, is that he consistently maintains
that mathematics is our, human invention, and that, indeed, everything
in mathematics is invented. Just as the middle Wittgenstein says that
“[w]e make mathematics”, the later Wittgenstein
says that we ‘invent’ mathematics (RFM I,
§168; II, §38; V, §§5, 9 and 11; PG
469–70) and that “the mathematician is not a discoverer:
he is an inventor” (RFM, Appendix II, §2;
(LFM 22, 82). Nothing exists mathematically unless
and until we have invented it.
In arguing against mathematical discovery, Wittgenstein is not just
rejecting Platonism, he is also rejecting a rather standard
philosophical view according to which human beings invent mathematical
calculi, but once a calculus has been invented, we thereafter discover
finitely many of its infinitely many provable and true theorems. As
Wittgenstein himself asks (RFM IV, §48), “might it
not be said that the rules lead this way, even if no one went
it?” If “someone produced a proof [of
‘Goldbach’s theorem’]”,
“[c]ouldn’t one say”, Wittgenstein asks
(LFM 144), “that the possibility of this proof
was a fact in the realms of mathematical reality”—that
“[i]n order [to] find it, it must in some sense be
there”—“[i]t must be a possible
structure”?
Unlike many or most philosophers of mathematics, Wittgenstein resists
the ‘Yes’ answer that we discover truths about a
mathematical calculus that come into existence the moment we
invent the calculus (PR §141; PG 283, 466;
LFM 139). Wittgenstein rejects the modal reification of
possibility as actuality—that provability and constructibility
are (actual) facts—by arguing that it is at the very least
wrong-headed to say with the Platonist that because “a straight
line can be drawn between any two points,… the line
already exists even if no one has drawn it”—to say
“[w]hat in the ordinary world we call a possibility is in the
geometrical world a reality” (LFM 144; RFM I,
§21). One might as well say, Wittgenstein suggests (PG
374), that “chess only had to be discovered, it was
always there!”
At MS 122 (3v; Oct. 18, 1939), Wittgenstein once again emphasizes the
difference between illusory mathematical discovery and genuine
mathematical invention.
I want to get away from the formulation: “I now know more about
the calculus”, and replace it with “I now have a different
calculus”. The sense of this is always to keep before
one’s eyes the full scale of the gulf between a mathematical
knowing and non-mathematical
 knowing.[3]
And as with the middle period, the later Wittgenstein similarly says
(MS 121, 27r; May 27, 1938) that “[i]t helps if one says: the
proof of the Fermat proposition is not to be discovered, but to be
invented”.
The difference between the ‘anthropological’ and the
mathematical account is that in the first we are not tempted to speak
of ‘mathematical facts’, but rather that in this account
the facts are never mathematical ones, never make
mathematical propositions true or false. (MS 117, 263; March
15, 1940)
There are no mathematical facts just as there are no (genuine)
mathematical propositions. Repeating his intermediate view, the later
Wittgenstein says (MS 121, 71v; 27 Dec., 1938): “Mathematics
consists of [calculi | calculations], not of propositions”. This
radical constructivist conception of mathematics prompts Wittgenstein
to make notorious remarks—remarks that virtually no one else
would make—such as the infamous (RFM V, §9):
“However queer it sounds, the further expansion of an irrational
number is a further expansion of mathematics”.
As in the middle period, the later Wittgenstein maintains that
mathematics is essentially syntactical and non-referential, which, in
and of itself, makes Wittgenstein’s philosophy of mathematics
anti-Platonist insofar as Platonism is the view that mathematical
terms and propositions refer to objects and/or facts and that
mathematical propositions are true by virtue of agreeing with
mathematical facts.
The later Wittgenstein, however, wishes to ‘warn’ us that
our thinking is saturated with the idea of “[a]rithmetic as the
natural history (mineralogy) of numbers” (RFM IV,
§11). When, for instance, Wittgenstein discusses the claim that
fractions cannot be ordered by magnitude, he says that this sounds
‘remarkable’ in a way that a mundane proposition of the
differential calculus does not, for the latter proposition is
associated with an application in physics, 
whereas this proposition … seems to
[solely] concern… the natural history of
mathematical objects themselves. (RFM II, §40) 
Wittgenstein stresses that he is trying to ‘warn’ us
against this ‘aspect’—the idea that the foregoing
proposition about fractions “introduces us to the mysteries of
the mathematical world”, which exists somewhere as a completed
totality, awaiting our prodding and our discoveries. The fact that we
regard mathematical propositions as being about mathematical objects
and mathematical investigation “as the exploration of these
objects” is “already mathematical alchemy”, claims
Wittgenstein (RFM V, §16), since 
it is not possible to appeal to the meaning
[Bedeutung] of the signs in
mathematics,… because it is only mathematics that gives them
their meaning [Bedeutung]. 
Platonism is dangerously misleading, according to
Wittgenstein, because it suggests a picture of pre-existence,
predetermination and discovery that is completely at odds
with what we find if we actually examine and describe mathematics and
mathematical activity. “I should like to be able to
describe”, says Wittgenstein (RFM IV, §13),
“how it comes about that mathematics appears to us now as the
natural history of the domain of numbers, now again as a collection of
rules”.
Wittgenstein, however, does not endeavour to refute
Platonism. His aim, instead, is to clarify what Platonism is and what
it says, implicitly and explicitly (including variants of Platonism
that claim, e.g., that if a proposition is provable in an
axiom system, then there already exists a path [i.e., a proof] from
the axioms to that proposition (RFM I, §21; Marion 1998:
13–14, 226; Steiner 2000:
334). Platonism is either “a mere truism” (LFM
239), Wittgenstein says, or it is a ‘picture’ consisting
of “an infinity of shadowy worlds” (LFM 145),
which, as such, lacks ‘utility’ (cf. PI
§254) because it explains nothing and it misleads at every
turn.
Though commentators and critics do not agree as to whether the later
Wittgenstein is still a finitist and whether, if he is, his finitism
is as radical as his intermediate rejection of unbounded mathematical
quantification (Maddy 1986: 300–301, 310), the overwhelming
evidence indicates that the later Wittgenstein still rejects the
actual infinite (RFM V, §21; Zettel §274,
1947) and infinite mathematical extensions.
The first, and perhaps most definitive, indication that the later
Wittgenstein maintains his finitism is his continued and consistent
insistence that irrational numbers are rules for constructing finite
expansions, not infinite mathematical extensions. “The
concepts of infinite decimals in mathematical propositions are not
concepts of series”, says Wittgenstein (RFM V,
§19), “but of the unlimited technique of expansion of
series”. We are misled by “[t]he extensional definitions
of functions, of real numbers etc”. (RFM V, §35),
but once we recognize the Dedekind cut as “an extensional
image”, we see that we are not “led to
\(\sqrt{2}\) by way of the concept of a cut” (RFM V,
§34). On the later Wittgenstein’s account, there simply is
no property, no rule, no systematic means
of defining each and every irrational number intensionally,
which means there is no criterion “for the irrational
numbers being complete” (PR §181).
As in his intermediate position, the later Wittgenstein claims that
‘\(\aleph_0\)’ and “infinite series” get their
mathematical uses from the use of ‘infinity’ in ordinary
language (RFM II, §60). Although, in ordinary language,
we often use ‘infinite’ and “infinitely many”
as answers to the question “how many?”, and though we
associate infinity with the enormously large, the principal
use we make of ‘infinite’ and
‘infinity’ is to speak of the unlimited
(RFM V, §14) and unlimited techniques
(RFM II, §45; PI §218). This fact is
brought out by the fact “that the technique of learning
\(\aleph_0\) numerals is different from the technique of learning
100,000 numerals” (LFM 31). When we say, e.g., that
“there are an infinite number of even numbers” we mean
that we have a mathematical technique or rule for generating even
numbers which is limitless, which is markedly different from
a limited technique or rule for generating a finite number of numbers,
such as 1–100,000,000. “We learn an endless
technique”, says Wittgenstein (RFM V, §19),
“but what is in question here is not some gigantic
extension”.
An infinite sequence, for example, is not a gigantic extension because
it is not an extension, and ‘\(\aleph_0\)’ is not a
cardinal number, for “how is this picture connected with the
calculus”, given that “its connexion is not that
of the picture | | | | with 4” (i.e., given that
‘\(\aleph_0\)’ is not connected to a (finite) extension)?
This shows, says Wittgenstein (RFM II, §58), that we
ought to avoid the word ‘infinite’ in mathematics wherever
it seems to give a meaning to the calculus, rather than acquiring its
meaning from the calculus and its use in the calculus. Once we see
that the calculus contains nothing infinite, we should not be
‘disappointed’ (RFM II, §60), but simply
note (RFM II, §59) that it is not “really
necessary… to conjure up the picture of the infinite (of the
enormously big)”.
A second strong indication that the later Wittgenstein maintains his
finitism is his continued and consistent treatment of
‘propositions’ of the type “There are three
consecutive 7s in the decimal expansion of \(\pi\)” (hereafter
 ‘PIC’).[4]
 In the middle period, PIC (and its putative negation, \(\neg\)PIC,
namely, “It is not the case that there are three consecutive 7s
in the decimal expansion of \(\pi\)”) is not a
meaningful mathematical “statement at all” (WVC
81–82: note 1). On Wittgenstein’s intermediate view,
PIC—like FLT, GC, and the Fundamental Theorem of
Algebra—is not a mathematical proposition because we do
not have in hand an applicable decision procedure by which we can
decide it in a particular calculus. For this reason, we can only
meaningfully state finitistic propositions regarding the
expansion of \(\pi\), such as “There exist three consecutive 7s
in the first 10,000 places of the expansion of \(\pi\)”
(WVC 71; 81–82, note 1).
The later Wittgenstein maintains this position in various passages in
RFM (Bernays 1959: 11–12). For example, to someone who says that since “the
rule of expansion determine[\(s\)] the series
completely”, “it must implicitly determine all
questions about the structure of the series”, Wittgenstein
replies: “Here you are thinking of finite series”
(RFM V, §11). If PIC were a mathematical
question (or problem)—if it were finitistically
restricted—it would be algorithmically decidable, which it is
not (RFM V, §21; LFM 31–32, 111, 170;
WVC 102–03). As Wittgenstein says at (RFM V,
§9): “The question… changes its status, when it
becomes decidable”, “[f]or a connexion is made then, which
formerly was not there”. And if, moreover, one invokes
the Law of the Excluded Middle to establish that PIC is a mathematical
proposition—i.e., by saying that one of these “two
pictures… must correspond to the fact” (RFM V,
§10)—one simply begs the question (RFM V,
§12), for if we have doubts about the mathematical status of PIC,
we will not be swayed by a person who asserts “PIC \(\vee
\neg\)PIC” (RFM VII, §41; V, §13).
Wittgenstein’s finitism, constructivism, and conception of
mathematical decidability are interestingly connected at (RFM
VII, §41, par. 2–5).
What harm is done e.g. by saying that God knows all
irrational numbers? Or: that they are already there, even though we
only know certain of them? Why are these pictures not harmless?
For one thing, they hide certain problems.— (MS 124: 139; March
16, 1944)
Suppose that people go on and on calculating the expansion of \(\pi\).
So God, who knows everything, knows whether they will have reached
‘777’ by the end of the world. But can his
omniscience decide whether they would have reached
it after the end of the world? It cannot. I want to say: Even God can
determine something mathematical only by mathematics. Even for him the
mere rule of expansion cannot decide anything that it does not decide
for us.
We might put it like this: if the rule for the expansion has been
given us, a calculation can tell us that there is a
‘2’ at the fifth place. Could God have known this, without
the calculation, purely from the rule of expansion? I want to say: No.
(MS 124, pp. 175–176; March 23–24, 1944)
What Wittgenstein means here is that God’s omniscience
might, by calculation, find that ‘777’ occurs at
the interval [\(n,n+2\)], but, on the other hand, God might go on
calculating forever without ‘777’ ever turning up. Since
\(\pi\) is not a completed infinite extension that can be
completely surveyed by an omniscient being (i.e., it is not a fact
that can be known by an omniscient mind), even God has only the rule,
and so God’s omniscience is no advantage in this case
(LFM 103–04; cf. Weyl 1921 [1998: 97]). Like us, with
our modest minds, an omniscient mind (i.e., God) can only calculate
the expansion of \(\pi\) to some \(n\)th decimal
place—where our \(n\) is minute and God’s \(n\) is
(relatively) enormous—and at no \(n\)th decimal place
could any mind rightly conclude that because
‘777’ has not turned up, it, therefore, will never turn
up.
On one fairly standard interpretation, the later Wittgenstein says
that “true in calculus \(\Gamma\)” is identical to
“provable in calculus \(\Gamma\)” and, therefore, that a
mathematical proposition of calculus \(\Gamma\) is a concatenation of
signs that is either provable (in principle) or refutable (in
principle) in calculus \(\Gamma\) (Goodstein 1972: 279, 282; Anderson
1958: 487; Klenk 1976: 13; Frascolla 1994: 59). On this
interpretation, the later Wittgenstein precludes undecidable
mathematical propositions, but he allows that some undecided
expressions are propositions of a calculus because they are
decidable in principle (i.e., in the absence of a known, applicable
decision procedure).
There is considerable evidence, however, that the later Wittgenstein
maintains his intermediate position that an expression is a meaningful
mathematical proposition only within a given calculus and
iff we knowingly have in hand an applicable and effective
decision procedure by means of which we can decide it. For example,
though Wittgenstein vacillates between “provable in PM”
and “proved in PM” at (RFM App. III, §6,
§8), he does so in order to use the former to consider the
alleged conclusion of Gödel’s proof (i.e., that there exist
true but unprovable mathematical propositions), which he then rebuts
with his own identification of “true in calculus
\(\Gamma\)” with “proved in calculus
\(\Gamma\)” (i.e., not with “provable in
calculus \(\Gamma\)”) (Wang 1991: 253; Rodych 1999a: 177). This
construal is corroborated by numerous passages in which Wittgenstein
rejects the received view that a provable but unproved
proposition is true, as he does when he asserts that (RFM
III, §31, 1939) a proof “makes new connexions”,
“[i]t does not establish that they are there” because
“they do not exist until it makes them”, and when he says
(RFM VII, §10, 1941) that “[a] new proof gives the
proposition a place in a new system”. Furthermore, as we have
just seen, Wittgenstein rejects PIC as a non-proposition on the
grounds that it is not algorithmically decidable, while admitting
finitistic versions of PIC because they are algorithmically
decidable.
Perhaps the most compelling evidence that the later Wittgenstein
maintains algorithmic decidability as his criterion for a mathematical
proposition lies in the fact that, at (RFM V, §9, 1942),
he says in two distinct ways that a mathematical
‘question’ can become decidable and that when
this happens, a new connexion is ‘made’
which previously did not exist. Indeed, Wittgenstein cautions us
against appearances by saying that “it looks as if a
ground for the decision were already there”, when, in fact,
“it has yet to be invented”. These passages strongly
militate against the claim that the later Wittgenstein grants that
proposition \(\phi\) is decidable in calculus \(\Gamma\) iff it is
provable or refutable in principle. Moreover, if Wittgenstein
held this position, he would claim, contra (RFM V,
§9), that a question or proposition does not become
decidable since it simply (always) is decidable. If it is
provable, and we simply don’t yet know this to be the case,
there already is a connection between, say, our axioms and
rules and the proposition in question. What Wittgenstein says,
however, is that the modalities provable and
refutable are shadowy forms of reality—that possibility
is not actuality in mathematics (PR §§141, 144,
172; PG 281, 283, 299, 371, 466, 469; LFM 139).
Thus, the later Wittgenstein agrees with the intermediate Wittgenstein
that the only sense in which an undecided mathematical
proposition (RFM VII, §40, 1944) can be
decidable is in the sense that we know how to decide
it by means of an applicable decision procedure.
Largely a product of his anti-foundationalism and his
criticism of the extension-intension conflation, Wittgenstein’s
later critique of set theory is highly consonant with his intermediate
critique (PR §§109, 168; PG 334, 369, 469;
LFM 172, 224, 229; and RFM III, §43, 46, 85,
90; VII, §16). Given that mathematics is a “MOTLEY of
techniques of proof” (RFM III, §46), it does not
require a foundation (RFM VII, §16) and it cannot be
given a self-evident foundation (PR §160;
WVC 34 & 62; RFM IV, §3). Since set theory
was invented to provide mathematics with a foundation, it is,
minimally, unnecessary.
Even if set theory is unnecessary, it still might constitute a solid
foundation for mathematics. In his core criticism of set theory,
however, the later Wittgenstein denies this, saying that the diagonal
proof does not prove non-denumerability, for “[i]t means nothing
to say: ‘Therefore the X numbers are not
denumerable’” (RFM II, §10). When the diagonal is
construed as a proof of greater and lesser infinite sets it
is a “puffed-up proof”, which, as Poincaré argued
(1913: 61–62), purports to prove or show more than “its
means allow it” (RFM II, §21).
If it were said: Consideration of the diagonal procedure shews you that the
concept ‘real number’ has much less analogy with
the concept ‘cardinal number’ than we, being misled by
certain analogies, are inclined to believe, that would have a good and honest sense. But just the
opposite happens: one pretends to compare the
‘set’ of real numbers in magnitude with that of cardinal
numbers. The difference in kind between the two conceptions is
represented, by a skew form of expression, as difference of extension.
I believe, and hope, that a future generation will laugh at this hocus
pocus. (RFM II, §22)
The sickness of a time is cured by an alteration in the mode of life
of human beings… (RFM II, §23)
The “hocus pocus” of the diagonal proof rests, as always
for Wittgenstein, on a conflation of extension and intension, on the
failure to properly distinguish sets as rules for generating
extensions and (finite) extensions. By way of this confusion “a
difference in kind” (i.e., unlimited rule vs. finite extension)
“is represented by a skew form of expression”, namely as a
difference in the cardinality of two infinite
extensions. Not only can the diagonal not prove that one
infinite set is greater in cardinality than another infinite set,
according to Wittgenstein, nothing could prove this, simply
because “infinite sets” are not extensions, and
hence not infinite extensions. But instead of interpreting
Cantor’s diagonal proof honestly, we take the proof to
“show there are numbers bigger than the infinite”, which
“sets the whole mind in a whirl, and gives the pleasant feeling
of paradox” (LFM 16–17)—a “giddiness
attacks us when we think of certain theorems in set
theory”—“when we are performing a piece of logical
sleight-of-hand” (PI §412; §426; 1945). This
giddiness and pleasant feeling of paradox, says Wittgenstein
(LFM 16), “may be the chief reason [set theory] was
invented”.
Though Cantor’s diagonal is not a proof of
non-denumerability, when it is expressed in a constructive
manner, as Wittgenstein himself expresses it at (RFM II,
§1), “it gives sense to the mathematical proposition that
the number so-and-so is different from all those of the system”
(RFM II, §29). That is, the proof proves
non-enumerability: it proves that for any given
definite real number concept (e.g., recursive real), one
cannot enumerate ‘all’ such numbers because one can always
construct a diagonal number, which falls under the same concept and is
not in the enumeration. “One might say”, Wittgenstein
says, 
I call number-concept X non-denumerable if it has been stipulated
that, whatever numbers falling under this concept you arrange in a
series, the diagonal number of this series is also to fall under that
concept. (RFM II, §10; cf. II, §§30, 31,
13)
One lesson to be learned from this, according to Wittgenstein
(RFM II, §33), is that “there are diverse
systems of irrational points to be found in the number
line”, each of which can be given by a recursive rule, but
“no system of irrational numbers”, and “also no
super-system, no ‘set of irrational numbers’ of
higher-order infinity”. Cantor has shown that we can construct
“infinitely many” diverse systems of irrational numbers,
but we cannot construct an exhaustive system of all
the irrational numbers (RFM II, §29). As Wittgenstein
says at (MS 121, 71r; Dec. 27, 1938), three pages after the passage
used for (RFM II, §57): 
If you now call the Cantorian procedure one for producing a new real
number, you will now no longer be inclined to speak of a system of
all real numbers. (italics added) 
From Cantor’s proof, however, set theorists erroneously conclude
that “the set of irrational numbers” is greater in
multiplicity than any enumeration of irrationals (or the set of
rationals), when the only conclusion to draw is that there is no such
thing as the set of all the irrational numbers. The
truly dangerous aspect to ‘propositions’ such as
“The real numbers cannot be arranged in a series” and
“The set… is not denumerable” is that they make
concept formation [i.e., our invention] “look like a
fact of nature” (i.e., something we discover)
(RFM II §§16, 37). At best, we have a vague idea of
the concept of “real number”, but only if we restrict this
idea to “recursive real number” and only if we recognize
that having the concept does not mean having a set
of all recursive real numbers.
The principal and most significant change from the middle to later
writings on mathematics is Wittgenstein’s (re-)introduction of
an extra-mathematical application criterion, which is used to
distinguish mere “sign-games” from mathematical
language-games. “[I]t is essential to mathematics that its signs
are also employed in mufti”, Wittgenstein states, for
[i]t is the use outside mathematics, and so the meaning
[Bedeutung] of the signs, that makes the
sign-game into mathematics. (i.e., a mathematical
“language-game”; RFM V, §2, 1942;
LFM 140–141, 169–70) 
As Wittgenstein says at (RFM V, §41, 1943), 
[c]oncepts which occur in ‘necessary’ propositions
must also occur and have a meaning
[Bedeutung] in non-necessary ones. (italics
added) 
If two proofs prove the same proposition, says Wittgenstein, this
means that “both demonstrate it as a suitable instrument for the
same purpose”, which “is an allusion to something
outside mathematics” (RFM VII, §10, 1941;
italics added).
As we have seen, this criterion was present in the Tractatus
(6.211), but noticeably absent in the middle period. The reason for
this absence is probably that the intermediate Wittgenstein wanted to
stress that in mathematics everything is syntax and nothing is
meaning. Hence, in his criticisms of Hilbert’s
‘contentual’ mathematics (Hilbert 1925) and
Brouwer’s reliance upon intuition to determine the meaningful
content of (especially undecidable) mathematical propositions,
Wittgenstein couched his finitistic constructivism in strong
formalism, emphasizing that a mathematical calculus does not need an
extra-mathematical application (PR §109; WVC
105).
There seem to be two reasons why the later Wittgenstein reintroduces
extra-mathematical application as a necessary condition of a
mathematical language-game. First, the later Wittgenstein has
an even greater interest in the use of natural and formal
languages in diverse “forms of life” (PI
§23), which prompts him to emphasize that, in many cases, a
mathematical ‘proposition’ functions as if it were an
empirical proposition “hardened into a rule” (RFM
VI, §23) and that mathematics plays diverse applied roles in many
forms of human activity (e.g., science, technology, predictions).
Second, the extra-mathematical application criterion relieves the
tension between Wittgenstein’s intermediate critique of set
theory and his strong formalism according to which “one calculus
is as good as another” (PG 334). By demarcating
mathematical language-games from non-mathematical sign-games,
Wittgenstein can now claim that, “for the time being”, set
theory is merely a formal sign-game. 
These considerations may lead us to say that \(2^{\aleph_0} \gt
\aleph_0\).
That is to say: we can make the considerations lead us to
that.
Or: we can say this and give this as our reason.
But if we do say it—what are we to do next? In what practice is
this proposition anchored? It is for the time being a piece of
mathematical architecture which hangs in the air, and looks as if it
were, let us say, an architrave, but not supported by anything and
supporting nothing. (RFM II, §35)
It is not that Wittgenstein’s later criticisms of set theory
change, it is, rather, that once we see that set theory has no
extra-mathematical application, we will focus on its calculations,
proofs, and prose and “subject the interest of the
calculations to a test” (RFM II, §62). By
means of Wittgenstein’s “immensely
important” ‘investigation’ (LFM 103), we
will find, Wittgenstein expects, that set theory is uninteresting
(e.g., that the non-enumerability of “the reals” is
uninteresting and useless) and that our entire interest in it lies in
the ‘charm’ of the mistaken prose interpretation of its
proofs (LFM 16). More importantly, though there is “a
solid core to all [its] glistening concept-formations”
(RFM V, §16), once we see it as “as a mistake of
ideas”, we will see that propositions such as
“\(2^{\aleph_0} \gt \aleph_0\)” are not anchored in an
extra-mathematical practice, that “Cantor’s
paradise” “is not a paradise”, and we will
then leave “of [our] own accord” (LFM
103).
It must be emphasized, however, that the later Wittgenstein still
maintains that the operations within a mathematical calculus are
purely formal, syntactical operations governed by rules of syntax
(i.e., the solid core of formalism).
It is of course clear that the mathematician, in so far as he really
is ‘playing a game’…[is] acting in
accordance with certain rules. (RFM V, §1)
To say mathematics is a game is supposed to mean: in proving, we need
never appeal to the meaning [Bedeutung] of the
signs, that is to their extra-mathematical application. (RFM
V, §4)
Where, during the middle period, Wittgenstein speaks of
“arithmetic [as] a kind of geometry” at (PR
§109 & §111), the later Wittgenstein similarly speaks of
“the geometry of proofs” (RFM I, App. III,
§14), the “geometrical cogency” of proofs
(RFM III, §43), and a “geometrical
application” according to which the “transformation of
signs” in accordance with “transformation-rules”
(RFM VI, §2, 1941) shows that “when mathematics is
divested of all content, it would remain that certain signs can be
constructed from others according to certain rules”
(RFM III, §38). Hence, the question whether a
concatenation of signs is a proposition of a given
mathematical calculus (i.e., a calculus with an
extra-mathematical application) is still an internal, syntactical
question, which we can answer with knowledge of the proofs and
decision procedures of the calculus.
RFM is perhaps most (in)famous for Wittgenstein’s
(RFM App. III) treatment of “true but unprovable”
mathematical propositions. Early reviewers said that “[t]he
arguments are wild” (Kreisel 1958: 153), that the passages
“on Gödel’s theorem… are of poor quality or
contain definite errors” (Dummett 1959: 324), and that
(RFM App. III) “throws no light on Gödel’s
work” (Goodstein 1957: 551). “Wittgenstein seems to want
to legislate [[q]uestions about completeness] out of
existence”, Anderson said, (1958: 486–87) when, in fact,
he certainly cannot dispose of Gödel’s demonstrations
“by confusing truth with provability”. Additionally,
Bernays, Anderson (1958: 486), and Kreisel (1958: 153–54)
claimed that Wittgenstein failed to appreciate
“Gödel’s quite explicit premiss of the consistency of
the considered formal system” (Bernays 1959: 15), thereby
failing to appreciate the conditional nature of Gödel’s
First Incompleteness Theorem. On the reading of these four early
expert reviewers, Wittgenstein failed to understand Gödel’s
Theorem because he failed to understand the mechanics of
Gödel’s proof and he erroneously thought he could refute or
undermine Gödel’s proof simply by identifying “true
in PM” (i.e., Principia Mathematica) with
“proved/provable in PM”.
Interestingly, we now have two pieces of evidence (Kreisel 1998: 119;
Rodych 2003: 282, 307) that Wittgenstein wrote (RFM App. III)
in 1937–38 after reading only the informal,
‘casual’ (MS 126, 126–127; Dec. 13, 1942)
introduction of (Gödel 1931) and that, therefore, his use of a
self-referential proposition as the “true but unprovable
proposition” may be based on Gödel’s introductory,
informal statements, namely that “the undecidable proposition
[\(R(q);q\)] states… that [\(R(q);q\)] is not provable”
(1931: 598) and that “[\(R(q);q\)] says about itself that it is
not provable” (1931: 599). Perplexingly, only two of the four
famous reviewers even mentioned Wittgenstein’s (RFM
VII, §§19, 21–22, 1941)) explicit remarks on
‘Gödel’s’ First Incompleteness Theorem (Bernays
1959: 2; Anderson 1958: 487), which, though flawed, capture the
number-theoretic nature of the Gödelian proposition and
the functioning of Gödel-numbering, probably because Wittgenstein
had by then read or skimmed the body of Gödel’s 1931 paper.
The first thing to note, therefore, about (RFM App. III) is
that Wittgenstein mistakenly thinks—again, perhaps because
Wittgenstein had read only Gödel’s Introduction—(a)
that Gödel proves that there are true but unprovable propositions
of PM (when, in fact, Gödel syntactically proves that if
PM is \(\omega\)-consistent, the Gödelian proposition is
undecidable in PM) and (b) that Gödel’s proof uses
a self-referential proposition to semantically show that there are
true but unprovable propositions of PM.
For this reason, Wittgenstein has two main aims in (RFM App.
III): (1) to refute or undermine, on its own terms, the
alleged Gödel proof of true but unprovable propositions of
PM, and (2) to show that, on his own terms, where “true
in calculus \(\Gamma\)” is identified with
“proved in calculus \(\Gamma\)”, the very idea of
a true but unprovable proposition of calculus \(\Gamma\) is
meaningless.
Thus, at (RFM App. III, §8) (hereafter simply
‘§8’), Wittgenstein begins his presentation of what
he takes to be Gödel’s proof by having someone say: 
I have constructed a proposition (I will use ‘P’ to
designate it) in Russell’s symbolism, and by means of certain
definitions and transformations it can be so interpreted that it says:
‘P is not provable in Russell’s system’. 
That is, Wittgenstein’s Gödelian constructs a proposition
that is semantically self-referential and which specifically
says of itself that it is not provable in PM. With this
erroneous, self-referential proposition P [used also at
(§10), (§11), (§17), (§18)], Wittgenstein presents
a proof-sketch very similar to Gödel’s own
informal semantic proof ‘sketch’ in the
Introduction of his famous paper (1931: 598).
Must I not say that this proposition on the one hand is true, and on
the other hand is unprovable? For suppose it were false; then it is
true that it is provable. And that surely cannot be! And if it is
proved, then it is proved that it is not provable. Thus it can only be
true, but unprovable. (§8)
The reasoning here is a double reductio. Assume (a) that
P must either be true or false in Russell’s system, and (b)
that P must either be provable or unprovable in Russell’s
system. If (a), P must be true, for if we suppose that
P is false, since P says of itself that it is unprovable,
“it is true that it is provable”, and if it is provable,
it must be true (which is a contradiction), and hence, given what
P means or says, it is true that P is unprovable (which is a
contradiction). Second, if (b), P must be unprovable, for if P
“is proved, then it is proved that it is not provable”,
which is a contradiction (i.e., P is provable and not
provable in PM). It follows that P “can only be
true, but unprovable”.
To refute or undermine this ‘proof’, Wittgenstein says
that if you have proved \(\neg P\), you have proved that P is
provable (i.e., since you have proved that it is not the case
that P is not provable in Russell’s system), and “you
will now presumably give up the interpretation that it is
unprovable” (i.e., ‘P is not provable in
Russell’s system’), since the contradiction is only proved
if we use or retain this self-referential interpretation (§8). On
the other hand, Wittgenstein argues (§8), ‘[i]f you assume
that the proposition is provable in Russell’s system, that means
it is true in the Russell sense, and the interpretation
“P is not provable” again has to be given up’,
because, once again, it is only the self-referential interpretation
that engenders a contradiction. Thus, Wittgenstein’s
‘refutation’ of “Gödel’s proof”
consists in showing that no contradiction arises if we do not
interpret ‘P’ as ‘P is not provable in
Russell’s system’—indeed, without this
interpretation, a proof of P does not yield a proof of \(\neg P\)
and a proof of \(\neg P\) does not yield a proof of P. In other
words, the mistake in the proof is the mistaken assumption that a
mathematical proposition ‘P’ “can be so
interpreted that it says: ‘P is not provable in
Russell’s system’”. As Wittgenstein says at
(§11), “[t]hat is what comes of making up such
sentences”.
This ‘refutation’ of “Gödel’s
proof” is perfectly consistent with Wittgenstein’s
syntactical conception of mathematics (i.e., wherein mathematical
propositions have no meaning and hence cannot have the
‘requisite’ self-referential meaning) and with what he
says before and after (§8), where his main aim is to show (2)
that, on his own terms, since “true in calculus
\(\Gamma\)” is identical with “proved in calculus
\(\Gamma\)”, the very idea of a true but unprovable proposition
of calculus \(\Gamma\) is a contradiction-in-terms.
To show (2), Wittgenstein begins by asking (§5), what he takes to
be, the central question, namely, “Are there true propositions
in Russell’s system, which cannot be proved in his
system?”. To address this question, he asks “What is
called a true proposition in Russell’s system…?”,
which he succinctly answers (§6): “‘p’
is true = p”. Wittgenstein then clarifies this answer
by reformulating the second question of (§5) as “Under what
circumstances is a proposition asserted in Russell’s game [i.e.,
system]?”, which he then answers by saying: “the answer
is: at the end of one of his proofs, or as a ‘fundamental
law’ (Pp.)” (§6). This, in a nutshell, is
Wittgenstein’s conception of “mathematical truth”: a
true proposition of PM is an axiom or a proved proposition,
which means that “true in PM” is identical with,
and therefore can be supplanted by, “proved in
PM”.
Having explicated, to his satisfaction at least, the only real,
non-illusory notion of “true in PM”, Wittgenstein
answers the (§8) question “Must I not say that this
proposition… is true, and… unprovable?”
negatively by (re)stating his own (§§5–6)
conception of “true in PM” as
“proved/provable in PM”: 
‘True in Russell’s system’ means, as was said:
proved in Russell’s system; and ‘false in Russell’s
system’ means: the opposite has been proved in Russell’s
system. 
This answer is given in a slightly different way at (§7) where
Wittgenstein asks “may there not be true propositions which are
written in this [Russell’s] symbolism, but are not provable in
Russell’s system?”, and then answers “‘True
propositions’, hence propositions which are true in
another system, i.e. can rightly be asserted in another
game”. In light of what he says in (§§5, 6, and 8),
Wittgenstein’s (§7) point is that if a proposition is
‘written’ in “Russell’s symbolism” and
it is true, it must be proved/provable in another system,
since that is what “mathematical truth” is. Analogously
(§8), “if the proposition is supposed to be false in some
other than the Russell sense, then it does not contradict this for it
to be proved in Russell’s sense”, for “[w]hat is
called ‘losing’ in chess may constitute winning in another
game”. This textual evidence certainly suggests, as Anderson
almost said, that Wittgenstein rejects a true but unprovable
mathematical proposition as a contradiction-in-terms on the grounds
that “true in calculus \(\Gamma\)” means nothing more (and
nothing less) than “proved in calculus \(\Gamma\)”.
On this (natural) interpretation of (RFM App. III), the early
reviewers’ conclusion that Wittgenstein fails to understand the
mechanics of Gödel’s argument seems reasonable. First,
Wittgenstein erroneously thinks that Gödel’s proof is
essentially semantical and that it uses and requires a
self-referential proposition. Second, Wittgenstein says (§14)
that “[a] contradiction is unusable” for “a
prediction” that “that such-and-such construction is
impossible” (i.e., that P is unprovable in PM),
which, superficially at least, seems to
indicate that Wittgenstein fails to appreciate the “consistency
assumption” of Gödel’s proof (Kreisel, Bernays,
Anderson).
If, in fact, Wittgenstein did not read and/or failed to understand
Gödel’s proof through at least 1941, how would he have
responded if and when he understood it as (at least) a proof of the
undecidability of P in PM on the assumption of
PM’s consistency? Given his syntactical conception of
mathematics, even with the extra-mathematical application criterion,
he would simply say that P, qua expression syntactically
independent of PM, is not a proposition of PM, and
if it is syntactically independent of all existent mathematical
language-games, it is not a mathematical proposition. Moreover, there
seem to be no compelling non-semantical reasons—either
intra-systemic or extra-mathematical—for Wittgenstein to
accommodate P by including it in PM or by adopting a
non-syntactical conception of mathematical truth (such as Tarski-truth
(Steiner 2000)). Indeed, Wittgenstein questions the intra-systemic and
extra-mathematical usability of P in various discussions
of Gödel in the Nachlass and, at
(§19), he emphatically says that one cannot “make the truth
of the assertion [‘P’ or ‘Therefore
P’] plausible to me, since you can make no use of it except
to do these bits of legerdemain”.
After the initial, scathing reviews of RFM, very little
attention was paid to Wittgenstein’s (RFM App. III and
RFM VII, §§21–22) discussions of
Gödel’s First Incompleteness Theorem (Klenk 1976: 13) until
Shanker’s sympathetic (1988b). In the last 22 years, however,
commentators and critics have offered various interpretations of
Wittgenstein’s remarks on Gödel, some being largely
sympathetic (Floyd 1995, 2001) and others offering a more mixed
appraisal (Rodych 1999a, 2002, 2003; Steiner 2001; Priest 2004; Berto
2009a). Recently, and perhaps most interestingly, Floyd & Putnam
(2000) and Steiner (2001) have evoked new and interesting discussions
of Wittgenstein’s ruminations on undecidability, mathematical
truth, and Gödel’s First Incompleteness Theorem (Rodych
2003, 2006; Bays 2004; Sayward 2005; and Floyd & Putnam 2006).
Though it is doubtful that all commentators will agree (Wrigley 1977:
51; Baker & Hacker 1985: 345; Floyd 1991: 145, 143; 1995: 376;
2005: 80; Maddy 1993: 55; Steiner 1996: 202–204), the following
passage seems to capture Wittgenstein’s attitude to the
Philosophy of Mathematics and, in large part, the way in which he
viewed his own work on mathematics.
What will distinguish the mathematicians of the future from those of
today will really be a greater sensitivity, and that
will—as it were—prune mathematics; since people will then
be more intent on absolute clarity than on the discovery of new
games.
Philosophical clarity will have the same effect on the growth of
mathematics as sunlight has on the growth of potato shoots. (In a dark
cellar they grow yards long.)
A mathematician is bound to be horrified by my mathematical comments,
since he has always been trained to avoid indulging in thoughts and
doubts of the kind I develop. He has learned to regard them as
something contemptible and… he has acquired a revulsion from
them as infantile. That is to say, I trot out all the problems that a
child learning arithmetic, etc., finds difficult, the problems that
education represses without solving. I say to those repressed doubts:
you are quite correct, go on asking, demand clarification!
(PG 381, 1932)
In his middle and later periods, Wittgenstein believes he is providing
philosophical clarity on aspects and parts of mathematics, on
mathematical conceptions, and on philosophical conceptions of
mathematics. Lacking such clarity and not aiming for absolute clarity,
mathematicians construct new games, sometimes because of a
misconception of the meaning of their mathematical
propositions and mathematical terms. Education and especially advanced
education in mathematics does not encourage clarity but rather
represses it—questions that deserve answers are either not asked
or are dismissed. Mathematicians of the future, however, will be more
sensitive and this will (repeatedly) prune mathematical extensions and
inventions, since mathematicians will come to recognize that new
extensions and creations (e.g., propositions of transfinite cardinal
arithmetic) are not well-connected with the solid core of mathematics
or with real-world applications. Philosophical clarity will,
eventually, enable mathematicians and philosophers to “get down
to brass tacks” (PG 467).