Descartes held that non-human animals are automata: their behavior is
wholly explicable in terms of physical mechanisms. But human behavior
(he argued) could not be explained in that way. Exploring the idea of
a machine that would look and behave like a human being, he thought
two things would unmask it: it could not use language creatively, and
it could not produce appropriate non-verbal behavior in arbitrarily
various situations (Discourse V). For him, therefore, no
machine could behave like a human being. Knowing only seventeenth
century technology, he concluded that to explain distinctively human
behavior required something beyond the physical: an immaterial mind,
interacting with processes in the brain and the rest of the body. (He
had a priori arguments for the same conclusion, one of which
anticipates the ‘conceivability argument’ discussed in
Section 3 below.) If he is right, there could not be a world
physically like the actual world but lacking such minds: human bodies
would not work properly. If we suddenly lost our minds our bodies
might continue to run on for a while: our hearts might continue to
beat, we might breathe while asleep and digest food; we might even
walk or sing in a mindless sort of way (so he implies in his Reply
to Objections IV). But without the contribution made by minds,
behavior could not show characteristically human features. So although
Descartes did everything short of spelling out the idea of zombies,
the question of their possibility did not arise for him. The nearest
thing was automata whose behavior was easily recognizable as not fully
human.
In the nineteenth century scientists began to think that physics was
capable of explaining all physical events that were explicable at all.
It seemed that every physical effect has a physical cause: that the
physical world is ‘closed under causation’. The developing
science of neurophysiology was set to extend such explanations to
human behavior. But if human behavior is explicable physically, how
does consciousness fit into the story? One response —
physicalism (or materialism) — is to insist that consciousness
too involves only physical processes. However, the phenomena of
consciousness are hard to account for in those terms, and some
thinkers concluded that something nonphysical must be involved. Given
the causal closure of the physical, they were forced to conclude that
consciousness has no effects on the physical world. On this view human
beings are ‘conscious automata’, as T. H. Huxley put it:
all physical events, human behavior included, are explicable in terms
of physical processes; and the phenomena of consciousness are causally
inert by-products — epiphenomena (see James 1890, Chapter 5). It
eventually became clear that this view entailed that there could be
purely physical organisms exactly like us except for lacking
consciousness. G. F. Stout (1931) argued that if epiphenomenalism (the
more familiar name for the ‘conscious automaton’ theory)
is true,
What Stout describes here and finds prima facie incredible is
a zombie world: an entire world whose physical processes are closed
under causation (as the epiphenomenalists he was attacking held) and
exactly duplicate those in the actual world, but where there are no
conscious experiences.
Similar ideas were current in discussions of physicalism in the 1970s.
As a counterexample to the psychophysical identity theory there was an
‘imitation man’, whose ‘brain-states exactly
paralleled ours in their physico-chemical properties’ but who
felt no pains and saw no colors (Campbell 1970). It was claimed that
zombies are a counterexample to physicalism in general, and arguments
were devised to back up the intuition that they are possible (Kirk
1974a, 1974b: he argued that physicalism commits one to the
‘Entailment Thesis’, by which the purely physical truths
about the world entail mental truths by logical or conceptual
necessity). Other kinds of systems were envisaged which behaved like
normal human beings, or were even functionally like human beings, but
lacked the ‘qualia’ we have (Block 1980a, 1980b, 1981;
Shoemaker 1975, 1981). (See the entry on
 qualia.
 Roughly, qualia are the properties by which we classify experiences
according to ‘what they are like’: what it is like to
smell roasting coffee beans, for example. Even physicalists can
consistently use this expression, although unlike dualists they take
qualia to be physical.) The most systematic use of the zombie idea
against physicalism is by David Chalmers (1996), whose contributions
to the debate will be considered shortly.
If zombies are to be counterexamples to physicalism, it is not enough
for them to be behaviorally and functionally like normal human beings:
plenty of physicalists accept that merely behavioral or functional
duplicates of ourselves might lack qualia. Zombies must be like normal
human beings in all physical respects, and they must have the
physical properties that physicalists suppose we have. (For the use of
a different kind of zombies in epistemology, see Lyons 2009; for an
interesting other kind, which however does not threaten physicalism,
see Olson 2018.) This requires them to be subject to the causal
closure of the physical, which is why their supposed lack of
consciousness is a challenge to physicalism. If, instead, they were to
be conceived of as creatures whose behavior could not be explained
physically, physicalists would have no reason to bother with the idea:
there is plenty of evidence that, as epiphenomenalists hold, our
movements actually are explicable in physical terms (see e.g. Papineau
2002).
The usual assumption is that none of us is actually a zombie, and that
zombies cannot exist in our world. The central question, however, is
not whether zombies can exist in our world, but whether they, or a
whole zombie world (which is sometimes a more appropriate idea to work
with), are possible in some broader sense.
A metaphor of Saul Kripke’s helps to show how the zombie idea
threatens physicalism (Kripke 1972/80, 153f.). Imagine God creating
the world and deciding to bring into existence the whole of the
physical universe. Having created this purely physical universe, did
he have to do any more work to provide for consciousness? Answering
yes to this question implies there is more to consciousness than the
purely physical facts alone can supply. If nothing else, it implies
that consciousness depends at least partly on nonphysical properties,
ones that would not exist in a purely physical world; it would be a
zombie world. Physicalists, on the other hand, are committed to
answering no. They have to say that by fixing the purely physical
facts, God did everything that was needed to fix the mental facts
about the organisms thereby created, including their thoughts,
feelings, emotions, and experiences. And if fixing the physical facts
is alone enough to fix the mental facts, then it seems that a zombie
world is impossible.
However, not everyone agrees that physicalism entails the
impossibility of zombies. One suggestion is that physicalists can
concede there are possible worlds which are exact duplicates of our
world in all purely physical respects, but where the physical
properties which give rise to consciousness in our world are prevented
from doing so by nonphysical items which block consciousness. That
would let physicalists consistently allow the possibility of zombie
worlds (Leuenberger 2008. On such ‘blockers’ see Hawthorne
2002b; Chalmers 2010, 163–165). This approach, however, is
obviously inconsistent with maintaining that conscious states are
either identical with or constituted by physical or functional states.
So it is not clear that physicalists can consistently allow the
possibility of consciousness-blockers.
In any case, what kind of impossibility is relevant here? Physicalists
cannot just say zombies are ruled out by the laws of nature, since
even dualists can agree they are impossible in that sense: that it is
by nomological necessity that the physical facts about us
bring consciousness with them. Physicalism therefore needs something
stronger. 
Two further kinds of necessity are available: metaphysical and
logical. Now, many philosophers (largely influenced by the zombie
idea) believe the connection from physical facts to consciousness
cannot be logical even in a broad sense. And certainly the conceptual
scheme of physics does not appear to enable logical links
from the physical to the experiential or phenomenal (see e.g. Kriegel
2011; Stoljar 2006). However, some argue that nevertheless zombies are
not really conceivable at all (Kirk 2005, 2008, 2013; Tye 2006); Kirk
(2013) also maintains that although the physical facts do not entail
the truth about conscious experience a priori, they
nevertheless entail it by logical necessity. 
Still, many physicalists hold that what guarantees the impossibility
of zombies is ‘metaphysical’ necessity. Typically they
maintain that states of phenomenal consciousness are identical with
physical states, and that these identities are necessary a posteriori
as argued by Kripke (see e.g. McLaughlin 2005, and for criticism,
Stoljar 2000). But the vocabulary of possibility and necessity is
slippery. For example there is disagreement over whether logical and
metaphysical possibility are different (see supervenience,
Section 3.1); when Kripke (1972/80) writes of ‘logical’
and ‘metaphysical’ possibility he seems to use those words
interchangeably (Yablo 1999: 457n.), and some use ‘logical’
where others prefer ‘conceptual’ (Chalmers 1999: 477);
compare Latham 2000, 72f.).
Many think that if the physical facts entail consciousness by
metaphysical necessity, then physicalists can maintain that even
though zombies are metaphysically impossible, they are still
conceivable (Balog 2012; Loar 1990/97; McLaughlin 2005;
Sections 5.1, 5.2 below). To the contrary, Chalmers argues that
conceivability actually entails metaphysical possibility. If he is
right, then that popular brand of physicalism is mistaken. The
so-called ‘conceivability argument’ for the possibility of
zombies will provide a focus for discussing some of the main problems
raised by the zombie idea.
The simplest version of this argument goes:
(Kripke used a similar argument in his 1972/80. For versions of it see
Chalmers 1996, 93–171; 2010, 141–205; Levine 2001; Nagel
1974; Stoljar 2001.) Clearly the conceivability argument is valid. However, both its
premisses are problematic. They are unclear as stated, and
controversial even when clarified. A key question is how we should
understand ‘conceivable’ in this context.
Many philosophers are willing to concede that zombies are conceivable
in some sense (e.g. Hill 1997; Hill and McLaughlin 1999; Loar 1999;
Yablo 1999). However, that sense is sometimes quite broad. For
example, a claim that ‘there are no substantive a priori ties
between the concept of pain and the concept of C-fiber
stimulation’ has been backed up by the point that ‘it is
in principle possible to master either of these concepts fully without
having mastered the other’ (Hill 1997, 76). By that standard,
though, it would be conceivable that the ratio of a circle’s
circumference to its diameter is a rational number, when it
isn’t. If conceivability in that sense entailed possibility, it
would be both possible and impossible for the ratio to be rational;
which would make such conceivability useless for the purposes of the
conceivability argument. So understood, premiss (1) of the argument
would be easy to swallow; but (2) would have to be rejected.
Evidently, the lower the threshold for conceivability, the easier it
is to accept (1) — but the harder it is to accept (2). So the
kind of conceivability invoked in premisses (1) and (2) needs to be
strongly constrained. A common and useful definition, which will be
followed here, is: cannot be known a priori to be false; so A
is conceivable if and only if not-A cannot be ruled out a priori. (For
sophistication of these and related ideas see Chalmers 1999, 477;
2002; 2007; 2010; 5.1 below.) 
Joseph Levine discusses a version of the conceivability argument in
his 2001. He views the conceivability of zombies as ‘the
principal manifestation of the explanatory gap’ (79). What
creates this gap, in his view, is the epistemological problem
of explaining how the phenomenal is related to the physical. He sees
no way to solve this problem, and thinks it remains even if zombies
are impossible.
Campbell, Copeland and Deng 2017 argue that, quite generally, for any conceivability argument there is a corresponding ‘mirror argument’ which can be rejected only at the cost of undermining the main argument, and conclude that all conceivability arguments are ‘logically bankrupt’.
We now face two key questions: Are zombies conceivable in the sense
explained? If they are conceivable, does it follow that they are
possible? Only if the answer to both questions is yes will the
conceivability argument succeed. We can take them in that order.
Those who exploited the zombie idea in the 1970s typically assumed
without argument that zombies are not just conceivable but possible
(e. g. Campbell 1970, Nagel 1970). When Chalmers reactivated the idea,
he found the conceivability of zombies ‘obvious’,
remarking that ‘it certainly seems that a coherent situation is
described; I can discern no contradiction in the description’
(1996, p. 96). However, he also recognized that this intuition cannot
be relied on. The nature of conscious experience is after all hard to
understand: what strikes some people as obviously possible could still
turn out to harbour hidden contradictions (Nagel 1998; Stoljar 2001).
Clearly, those who maintain that zombies are conceivable must provide
justification, recognizing that, being an epistemic claim dependent on
our cognitive abilities, it is defeasible.
Kirk (1974a, 1974b) attempted to provide such justification, in the
form of arguments intended to show that zombies are possible (hence
conceivable). However, they fall well short of their target, depending
on much the same cluster of intuitions as the original idea. Chalmers
(1996) presented a series of five arguments against the view that
there is an a priori entailment from physical facts to mental
facts. Each argument would directly or indirectly reinforce the
intuitive appeal of the zombie idea. The first will be considered
shortly; the other four appeal respectively to the alleged possibility
of ‘inverted spectrum’ without physical difference (see
inverted qualia); the alleged impossibility of learning about
conscious experience on the basis of purely physical information;
Jackson’s (1982) ‘knowledge argument’ (related to
the last); and what Chalmers calls ‘the absence of
analysis’: the point being that his opponents ‘will have
to give us some idea of how the existence of consciousness
might be entailed by the physical facts’, when ‘any
attempt to demonstrate such an entailment is doomed to failure’
(1996, p. 104). 
His first argument goes roughly as follows. Suppose a population of
tiny people disable your brain and replicate its functions themselves,
while keeping the rest of your body in working order (see Block
1980a); each homunculus uses a cell phone to perform the
signal-receiving and -transmitting functions of an individual neuron.
Would such a system be conscious? Intuitively one may be inclined to
say not. Some, notably functionalists, bite the bullet and answer yes.
However, the argument does not depend on assuming that the
homunculus-head would not be conscious. It depends only on the
assumption that its not being conscious is conceivable
— which many people find reasonable. In Chalmers’s words,
all that matters here is that when we say the system might lack
consciousness, ‘a meaningful possibility is being expressed, and
it is an open question whether consciousness arises or not’
(1996, p. 97). If he is right, then conceivably the system is not
conscious. In that case it is already very much like a zombie, the
only difference being that it has little people where a zombie has
neurons. And why should that make a difference to whether the
situation is conceivable? Why should switching from homunculi to
neurons necessarily switch on the light of consciousness? (For doubts
about the assumption that it is conceivable that the homunculus-head
lacks consciousness, see e.g. Loar 1990/1997, pp. 613f.)
Other considerations favoring the conceivability of zombies can be
found in Block (1995, 2002); Levine (2001); Searle (1992). Chalmers
(2010) develops his defense further; see 5.1 below.
Although in the past it was quite widely accepted that zombies are
conceivable, skepticism has been growing. Before considering some
direct attacks on the idea, let us briefly recall three views which
once seemed to support the claim that we can know a priori
that dualism is false — hence, on reasonable assumptions, that
zombies are inconceivable. 
The first is verificationism, according to which a
(declarative) sentence is meaningful just in case its truth or falsity
can be verified. This entails that unverifiable sentences are
literally meaningless, so that no metaphysical claim according to
which unobservable nonphysical items exist can be true. However, since
our ability to think and talk about our experiences is itself a
problem for verificationism, to presuppose this view when attacking
the zombie idea would beg the question. The second view appeals to
Wittgenstein’s private language argument. Although not crudely
verificationistic, it depends on the assumption that in order for
words to be meaningful, their use must be open to public checking. But
since this checkability assumption, if sound, would prove that we
cannot talk about qualia in the ways defenders of the zombie
possibility think we can, it too seems question-begging in the present
context. According to the third view, behaviorism, there is
no more to having mental states than being disposed to behave in
certain ways. As a possible basis for attacking the zombie idea,
behaviorism is in a similar situation to verificationism and the
private language argument. Zombies would satisfy all behavioral
conditions for full consciousness, so that if we could know a priori
that behaviorism was correct, zombie worlds would be inconceivable for
that reason. It seems unlikely, though, that behaviorism can be shown
to be correct. (Dennett 1991 defends a position with strong affinities
to behaviorism, though it might be better classified as a variety of
functionalism). 
Functionalism is a much more widely supported approach to the mental.
According to it, mental states are not just a matter of behavior and
dispositions, but of causal or other functional relations among
sensory inputs, internal states, and behavioral outputs. Note that
unless the nature of the internal processing is taken into account as
well, functionalism falls to most of the usual objections to
behaviorism, for example the ‘homunculus-head’ described
in the last section; it therefore seems that any plausible
functionalism must take account of internal functions not necessarily
reflected in behavioral dispositions. Now, since zombies would satisfy
all the functional conditions for full consciousness, functionalism
entails that zombies are impossible, although it would obviously be
question-begging simply to presuppose functionalism when attacking the
zombie idea. However, increasingly sophisticated versions of
functionalism are being developed, and any arguments for functionalism
are a fortiori arguments against the possibility of zombies. (For some
defenses of functionalism against zombies see Dennett 1991; 1995;
1999; Kirk 2017; Shoemaker 1999; Tye 2006; 2008; for doubts about
functionalism’s capacity to deal with zombies see for example
Harnad 1995.)
Apart from broad-front functionalist theories of the mental, there are
more narrowly focused attacks on the conceivability of zombies, some
of which are noted below. 
Can we really imagine zombies? Daniel Dennett thinks those
who accept the conceivability of zombies have failed to imagine them
thoroughly enough: ‘they invariably underestimate the task of
conception (or imagination), and end up imagining something that
violates their own definition’ (1995, p. 322. Marcus 2004 makes
a related point; see also Woodling 2014). Given his broadly
functionalist model of consciousness, he argues, we can see why the
‘putative contrast between zombies and conscious beings is
illusory’ (325. See also his 1991; 1999). Consciousness is
‘not a single wonderful separable thing … but a huge
complex of many different informational capacities’ (1995, 324.
Cottrell 1999 supports this approach).
Zombies’ utterances. Suppose I smell roasting coffee
beans and say, ‘Mm! I love that smell!’. Everyone would
rightly assume I was talking about my experience. But now suppose my
zombie twin produces the same utterance. He too seems to be talking
about an experience, but in fact he isn’t because he’s
just a zombie. Is he mistaken? Is he lying? Could his utterance
somehow be interpreted as true, or is it totally without truth value?
Nigel Thomas (1996) argues that ‘any line that zombiphiles take
on these questions will get them into serious trouble’.
Knowing about and referring to qualia. Recall that by
definition a zombie world is just like our world as physicalists
suppose it to be, but without consciousness. Since this implies that
consciousness depends on something nonphysical, it follows that
zombies (assuming they are possible in the first place) could be made
conscious by the addition of something nonphysical, which might as
well be qualia. And given that a zombie world would be causally
closed, these qualia would have to be causally inert: either
epiphenomenal or parallel to the correlated physical processes. It
therefore seems that if a zombie world is conceivable then so is
epiphenomenalism. (Note that this does not require epiphenomenalism to
be actually true as well as conceivable.) If that is correct,
objections to the conceivability of epiphenomenalism are also
objections to the conceivability of zombies. The most obvious is the
familiar and powerful claim that experiences have effects on behavior
(Perry 2001). A less obvious objection to epiphenomenalism starts from
the fact that we refer to and know about our conscious
experiences — which can hardly be denied, since otherwise we
could not be discussing these ideas in the first place. The objection
appeals to the widely held view that whatever we can know or refer to
must have effects on us, even if only indirectly (Kripke 1972/80). On
that basis, our counterparts in epiphenomenalistic worlds could not
know about or refer to their qualia. If that is right,
epiphenomenalistic worlds are not conceivable, in which case neither
are zombies.
To this attack Chalmers replies that the crucial consideration is that
we are ‘acquainted’ with our experiences. This
‘intimate epistemic relation’ both ensures that we can
refer to experiences and also justifies our claims to know about them.
Since, in contrast, our zombie twins have no experiences, what appear
to be their judgments about experience are unjustified. Chalmers
suggests that even if qualia have no causal influence on our
judgments, their mere presence in the appropriate physical context
ensures that our thoughts are about those qualia. He thinks it also
constitutes justification for our knowledge claims even if experiences
are not explanatorily relevant to making the judgments in question
(Chalmers 1996, 172—209; 1999, 493f; see also his 2003,
2010).
The problem of epistemic contact. Just now it seemed that if
zombies are conceivable, then epiphenomenalist and parallelist worlds
are also conceivable. In that case the friends of zombies must explain
how the epiphenomenal qualia in such worlds could possibly be objects
of acquaintance, or indeed make any sort of intimate contribution to
people’s lives; and here Kirk (2005; 2008) suggests the zombie
idea faces a further difficulty. This emerges when we consider such
things as attending to, thinking about, remembering, and comparing our
experiences: activities that bring us into ‘epistemic
contact’ with them. Such activities involve cognitive
processing, which in turn involves changes causing other changes.
Since epiphenomenal qualia are causally inert, they themselves could
not do that processing; so if they actually constitute our experiences
(as epiphenomenalism and parallelism imply) then the necessary
processing must be done by the body. The trouble is that the zombie
story makes it impossible for such processing to put us into epistemic
contact with epiphenomenal qualia. This is because the only resources
it can appeal to for that purpose are the assumed causation of qualia
by neural processes and their isomorphism with them: factors which
(Kirk argues) cannot do the necessary cognitive work. If that is
right, the notions of epiphenomenal qualia and zombies lead to a
contradiction. They imply a conception of consciousness which requires
people to be in epistemic contact with their qualia, while at the same
time ruling out the possibility of such contact.
‘Powerful qualities’. An interesting recent
objection to the zombie idea is based on the (controversial) idea of
‘powerful qualities’: the view that all properties are
both dispositional and qualitative, and indeed that a thing’s
dispositions are identical with its qualities. Alexander Carruth
(2016), for example, argues that the conceivability argument
presupposes that while physical properties are dispositional,
phenomenal ones are qualitative. On that basis a zombie duplicate of
our world would instantiate our world’s dispositional properties
but not its phenomenal ones. The powerful qualities view rules that
out a priori, making it not even conceivable. For if a
thing’s dispositions are identical with its qualities, nothing
can instantiate certain dispositional properties without also
instantiating whatever qualities are supposedly identical with them.
Countering this line of argument, Henry Taylor (2017) claims it
depends on an implausible account of the distinction between the
physical and the phenomenal, arguing in particular that the physical
cannot be confined to the dispositional. 
For other attacks on the conceivability of zombies see Balog 1999;
Cottrell 1999; Harnad 1995; Marcus 2004; Shoemaker 1999; Stoljar 2001;
Tye 2006. 
Premise (2) of the conceivability argument is: whatever is conceivable
is possible. Although this appears to be a defensible claim, it has
been attacked from several angles. 
A number of philosophers argue that Kripke’s ideas about a
posteriori necessary truth facilitate the defense of physicalism. They
urge that even if a zombie world is conceivable, that does not
establish that it is possible in the way that matters. Conceivability
is an epistemic notion, they say, while possibility is a metaphysical
one: ‘It is false that if one can in principle conceive that P,
then it is logically possible that P; … Given psychophysical
identities, it is an ‘a posteriori’ fact that any physical
duplicate of our world is exactly like ours in respect of positive
facts about sensory states’ (Hill and McLaughlin 1999, 446. See
also Hill 1997; Loar 1990/1997; 1999; McLaughlin 2005; Webster 2006).
Some philosophers reject even the assumption that conceivability is a
guide to possibility, challenging the view that the burden of
proof is on those who deny the zombie possibility (Block and Stalnaker
1999; Hill and McLaughlin 1999; Yablo 1993).
Chalmers has responded in several places (1996, 131–134; 1999,
476–7; 2010, 141–205). His most detailed version of the
conceivability argument (2010) uses the framework of two-dimensional
semantics. This enables him to distinguish two kinds of possibility
and two corresponding kinds of conceivability. In the
‘primary’ sense conceivability entails possibility; for
example it is conceivable that water should have been a substance
chemically different from H2O. In the other, ‘secondary’
sense, it is neither conceivable nor possible that water should have
been chemically different. The difficulty for the conceivability
argument can be expressed by saying that even if zombie worlds are
primarily conceivable and therefore primarily possible, it does not
follow that they are also secondarily possible. And a posteriori
physicalists will typically deny that it follows, on the ground that
only the secondary possibility of zombie worlds would entail the
falsity of physicalism. At this point Chalmers in effect presents his
opponents with a dilemma, which is (crudely summarizing his
conclusions) that either the primary conceivability of zombies does
after all entail their secondary possibility, in which case the
conceivability argument works and materialism is false; or else what
he calls ‘Russellian monism’, briefly considered at
Section 5.3 below, is true. (See also Jackson 1998; and for
discussions, Brueckner 2002; Loar 1999; Hill and McLaughlin 1999;
Perry 2001, 169–208; Piccinini 2017; Sebastián 2017; Shoemaker
1999; Soames 2005; Yablo 1999.) 
Many physicalists hold that both the zombie idea and Frank
Jackson’s knowledge argument can be dealt with through a proper
understanding of the nature of phenomenal concepts (roughly, the
concepts we use when conveying the character of our experiences: for
example ‘sweet’, ‘the way I see blue’).
Exponents of the conceivability argument hold that the supposed
‘explanatory gap’ between the physical and the phenomenal
— which is expressed in the idea that zombies are conceivable
— brings with it an ontological gap. According to the
‘phenomenal concept strategy’ (Stoljar 2005) there is
really only a conceptual gap: phenomenal concepts have features which
mislead us into supposing there is an ontological gap in addition to
an epistemic one, when there isn’t.
Thus it is argued that even if a zombie world is indeed conceivable,
it does not follow that there are nonphysical properties in our world.
If that is right, physicalists can concede the conceivability of
zombies while insisting that the properties we pick out in terms of
phenomenal concepts are physical. ‘Given that properties are
constituted by the world and not by our concepts’, Brian Loar
comments, ‘it is fair of the physicalist to request a
justification of the assumption that conceptually distinct concepts
must express metaphysically distinct properties’ (Loar
1999, 467; see also his 1997). He also argues that phenomenal concepts
are ‘recognitional’, in contrast to physical concepts,
which are ‘theoretical’. Phenomenal concepts, Loar says,
‘express the very properties they pick out, as Kripke observed
in the case of ‘pain’’ (1999, 468). He thinks these
points explain the conceivability of a zombie world, while maintaining
that there is no possible world in which the relevant physical
properties are distinct from consciousness. Chalmers objects that
Loar’s account does not justify the view that physical concepts
refer to phenomenal properties (1999, 488). He argues further (2007)
that exponents of this approach face a dilemma. Let C be whichever
psychological ‘key features’ we have but zombies lack.
Then if it is conceivable that the purely physical facts about us
should have held without C, then C is not physicalistically
explicable. On the other hand, if that is not conceivable, then in his
view C cannot explain our epistemic situation as contrasted with that
of zombies. So either C is not physicalistically explicable, or it
cannot explain our epistemic situation. (For discussions see Ball
2009; Balog 2012; Carruthers 2005; Chalmers 1999; 2007; 2010; Crane
2005; Loar 1990/97; Papineau 2002; Pereboom 2011; Stoljar 2000; Tye
2008.) 
Following Russell (1927), some philosophers suggest that physics tells
us only about the ‘structural’ properties of things
— such as their dispositions and nomic relations — rather
than about the ‘intrinsic’ properties which supposedly
underlie and account for their structural properties. Thus Daniel
Stoljar (2001) argues that there are two distinct notions of the
physical and correspondingly of physicalism, depending on whether one
appeals only to what is provided for by physics or also to the
intrinsic properties of physical objects. He suggests that even if one
of the corresponding two versions of the conceivability argument is
sound, the other is not — because (roughly) physicalists can
always object that, since we do not know enough about the physical
world (in particular, about its intrinsic properties), we cannot
‘strongly’ conceive of the possibility of zombies.
These ideas are exploited in what Chalmers calls ‘Russellian
monism’ (a variety of neutral monism). In our world, he
suggests, the underlying intrinsic properties might be
‘phenomenal properties, or they might be protophenomenal
properties: properties that collectively constitute phenomenal
properties when organized in the appropriate way’ (2010: p.
151); while in some other worlds the corresponding intrinsic physical
properties did not provide for consciousness. If the intrinsic
properties which supposedly provide for our consciousness are
nevertheless classified as physical, exponents can deny the
possibility of zombies if these are understood to be our
‘full’ physical duplicates. At the same time they can
concede the possibility of zombies which duplicate us only in their
structural properties. As he points out, this view is ‘a highly
distinctive form of physicalism that has much in common with property
dualism and that many physicalists will want to reject’
(Chalmers 2010, p. 152; see also Pereboom 2011). One obstacle to
counting it as physicalism is that it seems unable to explain why the
special intrinsic properties in our world should provide for
consciousness, while those which perform the same functions in those
other worlds do not: this has to be accepted as a brute fact. 
Philip Goff (2010) suggests that this loophole for Russellian versions
of physicalism weakens the zombie argument. He recommends instead an
argument from ghosts: pure subjects of experience without any physical
nature. He argues that such ghosts are conceivable and possible, and
that they provide an argument against physicalism which leaves no
loophole for Russellian monism. (Physicalists are likely to object
that arguments against the conceivability of zombies can also be
mobilized against ghosts.) 
Special factors. It has been suggested that there are special
factors at work in the psychophysical case which have a strong
tendency to mislead us. For example it is claimed that what enables us
to imagine or conceive of states of consciousness is a different
cognitive faculty from what enables us to conceive of physical facts:
‘there are significant differences between the cognitive factors
responsible for Cartesian intuitions [such as those about zombies] and
those responsible for modal intuitions of a wide variety of other
kinds’ (Hill and McLaughlin 1999, p. 449. See also Hill 1997).
The suggestion is that these differences help to explain the ease with
which we seem able to conceive of zombies, and the difficulty we have
in understanding the claim that they are nevertheless impossible.
Conditional analysis. Another line of objection rests on
conditional analyses of the concept of qualia. Roughly, the idea is
that if there actually are certain nonphysical properties
which fit our conception of qualia, then that is what qualia are, in
which case zombies are conceivable; but if there are no such
nonphysical properties, then qualia are whichever physical properties
perform the appropriate functions, and zombies are not conceivable. It
is argued that this approach enables physicalists to accept that the
possibility of zombies is conceivable, while denying that zombies are
conceivable (Hawthorne 2002a; Braddon-Mitchell 2003. See Stalnaker
2002 for a related point, and for criticism, Alter 2007; Chalmers
2010, pp. 159–59; Crane 2006).
Causal essentialism. According to the theory of causal
essentialism, the causal properties of physical properties are
essential to them. Brian Garrett (2009) exploits this theory to argue
that the zombie argument against physicalism depends on broadly Humean
assumptions about the laws of nature and property identity which
presuppose the falsity of causal essentialism. If we reject those
assumptions and accept that some physical properties have essentially
the capacity to produce consciousness, then ‘we cannot accept
the genuine possibility of zombie worlds’ even if such worlds
are conceivable (see also Aranyosi 2010).
More on zombies’ utterances. Consider a zombie world
that is an exact physical duplicate of our world and contains zombie
twins of all philosophers, including some who appeal to the
conceivability argument. Katalin Balog (1999) argues that while their
utterances would be meaningful, their sentences would not always mean
what they do in our mouths. She further argues — to oversimplify
— that if the conceivability argument were sound in actual
philosophers’ mouths, then it would be sound in the mouths of
zombie philosophers too. But since by hypothesis physicalism is true
in their world, their argument is not sound. Therefore the
conceivability argument used by actual philosophers is not sound
either. If this argument works, it has the piquant feature that
‘the zombies that antiphysicalists think possible in the end
undermine the arguments that allege to establish their
possibility’ (502. Chalmers offers brief replies in his 2003;
2010, pp. 159–60).
The anti-zombie argument for physicalism. The conceivability
argument — which assumes physicalism entails that zombies are
impossible — purports to refute it by showing they are possible.
As we saw, the simplest version of this argument goes: (1) zombies are
conceivable; (2) whatever is conceivable is possible; (3) therefore
zombies are possible. However, ‘anti-zombies’ —
duplicates of ourselves made conscious by the purely physical facts
(Frankish 2007) — also seem conceivable. So we have a parallel
argument: (1*) anti-zombies are conceivable; (2) whatever is
conceivable is possible; (3*) therefore anti-zombies are possible. But
(3) and (3*) cannot both be true, since if the purely physical facts
about anti-zombies make them conscious, then the exactly similar
physical facts about zombies make them conscious too, and they are not
zombies after all (Frankish 2007; Marton 1998; Piccinini 2017;
Sturgeon 2000, pp. 114–116). One moral is that we should reject
the inference from conceivability to possibility. (Brown 2010 argues
that if anti-zombies are conceivable, then zombies are inconceivable.)
The most promising reply for exponents of the conceivability argument
seems to be to deny that anti-zombies are conceivable (Chalmers 2010,
180).
If zombies are genuinely possible, then not only is physicalism
problematic, so are some widely held views on other topics. Here are
three notable examples.
Descartes accepted the common assumption that not only do physical
events have mental effects, but mental events have physical effects
(for example, thinking about the political situation makes me write a
letter). The difficulty for his dualism, it was thought, was to
understand how the nonphysical could have effects on the physical. But
if zombies are possible — requiring the physical world to be
causally closed — there is no work for nonphysical qualia to do.
In that case the difficulty is to understand how, in spite of
appearances, the nonphysical could fail to have effects on
the physical. Still supposing zombies are possible, it then becomes
hard to see any alternative to parallelism or epiphenomenalism, with
the radical revision of common assumptions about mental causation that
those views entail. True, the friends of zombies do not seem compelled
to be epiphenomenalists or parallelists about the actual
world. They may be interactionists, holding that our world is not
physically closed, and that as a matter of actual fact, nonphysical
properties do have physical effects. Or they may favor
‘panprotopsychism’, according to which what is
metaphysically fundamental is not physical properties, but phenomenal
or ‘protophenomenal’ ones (Chalmers 1991, 297—299;
1999, 492) — a view arguably compatible with the causal closure
of the physical. But neither of those options is easy. Abandoning
causal closure conflicts with empirical evidence; while the idea that
phenomenal or quasi-phenomenal properties are fundamental is
obscure.
The apparent possibility of zombies also seems to pose a problem for
evolutionary theory. Why did creatures with qualia survive rather than
those creatures’ zombie counterparts? If zombies could have
survived, what’s the use of consciousness? Owen Flanagan and
Thomas Polger have used the apparent possibility of zombies to support
the claim that ‘There are as yet no credible stories about why
subjects of experience emerged, why they might have won — or
should have been expected to win — an evolutionary battle
against very intelligent zombie-like information-sensitive
organisms’ (1995, 321): a problem not faced by those who reject
the possibility of zombies. One response on behalf of those who do
accept it is to suggest that there might be fundamental laws linking
the phenomenal to the physical. Such laws would not depend on whether
conscious creatures ever happened to evolve, in which case, arguably,
evolution poses no special problem (Chalmers 1996, 171).
If qualia have no physical effects, then nothing will enable anyone to
establish for certain that anyone else actually has qualia.
Philosophers who believe they have a solid response to skepticism
about other minds may therefore conclude that this consequence of the
zombie idea is enough to condemn it. Others, however, may regard the
skeptical consequence as ‘a confirmation’, on the ground
that we really are ignorant of others’ minds (Campbell 1970,
120). Of course not all responses to other minds skepticism imply that
zombies are inconceivable.
The intuitive appeal of the zombie idea can be overwhelming. But that
was true once of the idea that the earth stands still, and is true now
of the idea that science can explain events without appealing to
anything nonphysical. Some anti-physicalists believe their
opponents’ commitment makes them turn a blind eye to the
difficulties:
On the other hand, some physicalists believe the zombie idea exerts an
irrational grip on anti-physicalist thinking, so that
In spite of the fact that the arguments on both sides have become
increasingly sophisticated — or perhaps because of it —
they have not become more persuasive. The pull in each direction
remains strong.